Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geological history 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Kula plate 9 languages Català Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former oceanic tectonic plate Plate distribution 64–74 Ma (Black represents present-day land area) The Kula plate was an oceanic tectonic plate under the northern Pacific Ocean south of the Near Islands segment of the Aleutian Islands . It has been subducted under the North American plate at the Aleutian Trench , being replaced by the Pacific plate .

The name Kula is from a Tlingit language word meaning "all gone".

[ 1 ] As the name suggests, the Kula plate was entirely subducted around 48 Ma and today only a slab in the mantle under the Bering Sea remains.

[ 2 ] There is some evidence of a Resurrection plate broken off from the Kula plate and also subducted.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Geological history [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Kula plate" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Kula plate began subducting under the Pacific Northwest region of North America during the Late Cretaceous period much like the Pacific plate does today, supporting a large volcanic arc system from northern Washington to southwestern Yukon called the Coast Range Arc .

There was a triple junction of three ridges between the Kula plate to the north, the Pacific plate to the west and the Farallon plate to the east. The Kula plate was subducted under the North American plate at a relatively steep angle, so that the Canadian Rockies are primarily composed of thrusted sedimentary sheets with relatively little contribution of continental uplift , while the American Rockies are characterized by significant continental uplift in response to the shallow subduction of the Farallon plate.

About 55 million years ago, the Kula plate began an even more northerly motion. Riding on the Kula plate was the Pacific Rim Terrane consisting of volcanic and sedimentary rock . It was scraped off and plastered against the continental margin , forming what is today Vancouver Island .

By 40 million years ago, the compressional force of the Kula plate ceased. The existence of the Kula plate was inferred from the westward bend in the alternating pattern of magnetic anomalies in the Pacific plate .

See also [ edit ] Farallon plate Kula–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Izanagi plate References [ edit ] ^ p. 145 Archived March 2, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Gorbatov, A.; Widiyantoro, S.; Fukao, Y.; Gordeev, E. (2000).

"Signature of remnant slabs in the North Pacific from P-wave tomography" (PDF) .

Geophysical Journal International .

142 (1): 27– 36.

Bibcode : 2000GeoJI.142...27G .

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-246X.2000.00122.x . Retrieved 30 July 2016 .

^ Haeussler, Peter J.; Bradley, Dwight C.; Wells, Ray E.; Miller, Marti L. (2003-07-01).

"Life and death of the Resurrection plate: Evidence for its existence and subduction in the northeastern Pacific in Paleocene–Eocene time" .

GSA Bulletin .

115 (7): 867– 880.

Bibcode : 2003GSAB..115..867H .

doi : 10.1130/0016-7606(2003)115<0867:LADOTR>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0016-7606 .

^ Nield, David (21 October 2020).

"A Controversial Lost Tectonic Plate May Have Been Discovered by Geologists" .

ScienceAlert . Retrieved 2020-10-23 .

External links [ edit ] Reconstruction of the Kula plate Kula plate in the area of the present Northwestern United States Kula plate when it separates from the Farallon plate v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kula_plate&oldid=1292708169 " Categories : Tectonic plates Natural history of North America Historical geology Mesozoic geology Paleogene geology Geology of the Pacific Ocean Bering Sea Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kula plate 9 languages Add topic

