Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Characteristics 3 Types 4 Issues 5 Etymology 6 Use in fiction 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources Toggle the table of contents Adhocracy 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organization type characterized by minimal structure This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Adhocracy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Politics Outline Index Category Primary topics Outline of political science Index of politics articles Politics by country Politics by subdivision Political economy Political history Political history of the world Political philosophy Political systems Anarchy City-state Collective leadership Confessional system Democracy Dictatorship Directorial Federacy Feudalism Hybrid regime Meritocracy Monarchy Parliamentary Presidential Republic Semi-parliamentary Semi-presidential Theocracy Academic disciplines Political science ( political scientists ) International relations ( theory ) Comparative politics Election science Political analysis Political theory Policy studies Political psychology Political sociology Public administration Bureaucracy ( street-level ) Technocracy Adhocracy Service ( Public / Civil ) Policy Public policy ( doctrine ) Domestic policy Foreign policy Civil society Public interest Government branches Separation of powers Legislature Executive Judiciary Election commission Related topics Sovereignty Polity / State / Country Biology and political orientation Critique of political economy Political censorship Political organisations Theories of political behavior Subseries Electoral systems Elections voting Unitarism Federalism Government ( forms / Governance ) Ideology Culture Political campaigning Political parties Politics portal v t e Not to be confused with autocracy .

Adhocracy is a flexible, adaptable, and informal form of organization defined by a lack of formal structure and employs specialized multidisciplinary teams grouped by function. It operates in a fashion opposite to bureaucracy .

[ 1 ] Warren Bennis coined the term in his 1968 book The Temporary Society.

[ 2 ] Alvin Toffler popularized the term in 1970 with his book, Future Shock , and has since become often used in the management theory of organizations (particularly online organizations [ 3 ] ). The concept has been further developed by academics such as Henry Mintzberg .

Adhocracy is the system of adaptive, creative, and flexible integrative behavior based on non-permanence and spontaneity. These characteristics are believed to allow adhocracy to respond faster than traditional bureaucratic organizations while being more open to new ideas.

[ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] Robert H. Waterman, Jr.

defines adhocracy as "any form of organization that cuts across normal bureaucratic lines to capture opportunities, solve problems, and get results".

[ 5 ] For Henry Mintzberg , an adhocracy is a complex and dynamic organizational form.

[ 6 ] It is different from bureaucracy ; like Toffler, Mintzberg considers bureaucracy a thing of the past, and adhocracy one of the future.

[ 7 ] When done well, adhocracy can be very good at problem solving and innovation [ 7 ] and thrive in diverse environments.

[ 6 ] It requires sophisticated and often automated technical systems to develop and thrive.

[ 7 ] Academics have described Wikipedia as an adhocracy.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Some characteristics of Mintzberg's definition include: highly organic structure [ 6 ] little formalization of behavior [ 6 ] [ 7 ] job specialization not necessarily based on formal training a tendency to group the specialists in functional units for housekeeping purposes but to deploy them in small, market-based project teams to do their work [ 6 ] a reliance on liaison devices to encourage mutual adjustment within and between these teams [ 6 ] [ 7 ] low or no standardization of procedures [ 7 ] roles not clearly defined [ 7 ] selective decentralization [ 7 ] work organization rests on specialized teams [ 7 ] power-shifts to specialized teams horizontal job specialization [ 7 ] high cost of communication [ 7 ] culture based on non-bureaucratic work [ 7 ] All members of an organization have the authority within their areas of specialization, and in coordination with other members, to make decisions and to take actions affecting the future of the organization. There is an absence of hierarchy .

[ citation needed ] According to Robert H. Waterman, Jr.

, "Teams should be big enough to represent all parts of the bureaucracy that will be affected by their work, yet small enough to get the job done efficiently." [ 5 ] Types [ edit ] administrative – "feature an autonomous operating core; usually in an institutionalized bureaucracy like a government department or standing agency" [ 10 ] operational – solves problems on behalf of its clients [ 10 ] Alvin Toffler claimed in his book Future Shock that adhocracies will get more common and are likely to replace bureaucracy. He also wrote that they will most often come in form of a temporary structure, formed to resolve a given problem and dissolved afterwards.

[ citation needed ] An example are cross-department task forces .

[ citation needed ] Issues [ edit ] Downsides of adhocracies can include "half-baked actions", personnel problems stemming from organization's temporary nature, extremism in suggested or undertaken actions, and threats to democracy and legality rising from adhocracy's often low-key profile.

[ 7 ] To address those problems, researchers in adhocracy suggest a model merging adhocracy and bureaucracy, the bureau-adhocracy.

[ 7 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word is a portmanteau of the Latin ad hoc , meaning "for the purpose", and the suffix -cracy , from the ancient Greek kratein (κρατεῖν), meaning "to govern", [ 7 ] and is thus a heteroclite .

[ citation needed ] Use in fiction [ edit ] The term is also used to describe the form of government used in the science fiction novels Voyage from Yesteryear by James P. Hogan and Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom , by Cory Doctorow .

[ citation needed ] In the radio play Das Unternehmen Der Wega (The Mission of the Vega) by Friedrich Dürrenmatt , the human inhabitants of Venus, all banished there from various regions of Earth for civil and political offenses, form and live under a peaceful adhocracy, to the frustration of delegates from an Earth faction who hope to gain their cooperation in a war brewing on Earth.

[ citation needed ] In the Metrozone series of novels by Simon Morden , The novel The Curve of the Earth features "ad-hoc" meetings conducted virtually, by which all decisions governing the Freezone collective are taken. The ad-hocs are administered by an artificial intelligence and polled from suitably qualified individuals who are judged by the AI to have sufficient experience. Failure to arrive at a decision results in the polling of a new ad-hoc, whose members are not told of previous ad-hocs before hearing the decision which must be made.

[ 11 ] The asura in the fictional world of Tyria within the Guild Wars universe present this form of government, although the term is only used in out-of-game lore writings.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Anarchy Affinity group Bureaucracy (considered the opposite of adhocracy) Crowdsourcing Commons-based peer production Free association Here Comes Everybody Holacracy Jugaad – Indian term describing a creative hack or kludge Libertarianism Self-management Social peer-to-peer processes Socialism Sociocracy Spontaneous order The Tyranny of Structurelessness Union of egoists Workplace democracy References [ edit ] ^ Belmonte Martín, Irene (2016).

La modernización de la gestión tributaria local en España : el caso de Suma Gestión Tributaria de la Diputación de Alicante (1st ed.). Madrid: Instituto Nacional de Administración Pública. p. 178.

ISBN 978-84-7351-557-3 .

^ Bennis, Warren (1968).

The Temporary Society . New York: Harper & Row.

ISBN 9780787943318 .

^ Matei, Sorin Adam; Britt, Brian C. (2017). "Specifying a Wikipedia-Centric Explanatory Model for Online Group Evolution and Structural Differentiation".

Structural Differentiation in Social Media . Lecture Notes in Social Networks. pp.

31– 43.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-64425-7_3 .

ISBN 978-3-319-64424-0 .

ISSN 2190-5428 .

^ [1] Archived 2017-08-26 at the Wayback Machine . Business Dictionary ^ a b Waterman Jr., Robert (1990).

Adhocracy: The Power to Change . Knoxville, TN: Whittle Direct Books.

^ a b c d e f Mintzberg, Henry (1989).

Mintzberg on Management:inside our strange world of organizations . New York: Free Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Travica, Bob (1999).

New Organizational Designs: Information Aspects . Stamford, Conn: Ablex Pub. Corp.

ISBN 9781567504033 .

^ Piotr Konieczny (11 October 2010).

"Adhocratic Governance in the Internet Age: A Case of Wikipedia" (PDF) .

Journal of Information Technology & Politics .

7 (4): 263– 283.

doi : 10.1080/19331681.2010.489408 .

ISSN 1933-1681 .

Wikidata Q56787065 .

^ Oberhaus, Daniel (7 November 2017).

"Nearly All of Wikipedia Is Written By Just 1 Percent of Its Editors" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on 6 Mar 2024 . Retrieved 4 Jun 2024 .

^ a b Dolan, Timothy (2010).

"Revisiting Adhocracy: From rhetorical revisionism to smart mobs" (PDF) .

Journal of Future Studies .

2 : 33– 50.

^ "An Extract from The Curve of the Earth: A Samuil Petrovitch novel « Simon Morden" .

www.simonmorden.com . Archived from the original on 2016-03-26 . Retrieved 2016-02-10 .

Sources [ edit ] Adhocracy by Robert H. Waterman, Jr.

( ISBN 0-393-31084-1 ) Future Shock by Alvin Toffler ( ISBN 0-553-27737-5 ) v t e Management Outline of management Index of management articles By type of organization Academic Association Business Restaurant Court Healthcare Intelligence Military Public Reputation By focus, within an organization On scope Strategic (top-level) Capability Capital Change Communication Financial Innovation Legal Performance Risk Systems On component Facility Product Product lifecycle Brand Project Construction Program On activity or department managed Line Marketing Operations / production Process Quality Sales Staff Accounting Office Records On aspect or relationship Customer relationship Engineering Logistics Perception Supply chain Talent On problem Conflict Crisis Stress On resource Environmental resource Field inventory Human resources Information Information technology Knowledge Land Materials Skills Technology Time Positions Interim Middle Senior Methods, approaches Adhocracy Collaborative method Distributed Earned value management Evidence-based management Full range leadership model Management by objectives Management style Macromanagement Micromanagement Scientific management Social entrepreneurship Sustainable management Team building Virtual management Skills, activities Decision-making Forecasting Leadership Pioneers, scholars Peter Drucker Eliyahu M. Goldratt Oliver E. Williamson Education Business school Certified Business Manager Chartered Management Institute Critical management studies Degrees Bachelor of Business Administration Master of Business Administration PhD in management Doctor of Business Administration Other Administration Collaboration Corporate governance Executive compensation Management consulting Management control Management cybernetics Management development Management fad Management system Managerial economics Managerial psychology Managerialism Organization development Organizational behavior management Pointy-haired Boss Systems science portal | Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adhocracy&oldid=1293244704 " Categories : Anarchist terminology Forms of government Organization design Libertarian theory 1970 introductions Types of organization Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adhocracy 20 languages Add topic

