Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Coal, oil and alternative technologies 2 Current schemes 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Carbon leakage 11 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Français Hausa മലയാളം Polski Português Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unintended increase in greenhouse gas emissions Carbon leakage is a concept to quantify an increase in greenhouse gas emissions in one country as a result of an emissions reduction by a second country with stricter climate change mitigation policies.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Carbon leakage is one type of spill-over effect . Spill-over effects can be positive or negative; [ 3 ] for example, emission reductions policy might lead to technological developments that aid reductions outside of the policy area. Carbon leakage is defined as "the increase in CO 2 emissions outside the countries taking domestic mitigation action divided by the reduction in the emissions of these countries." [ 4 ] It is expressed as a percentage, and can be greater or less than 100%. There is no consensus over the magnitude of long-term leakage effects.

[ 5 ] Carbon leakage may occur for a number of reasons: If the emissions policy of a country raises local costs, then another country with a more relaxed policy may have a trading advantage. If demand for these goods remains the same, production may move offshore to the cheaper country with lower standards, and global emissions will not be reduced.

If environmental policies in one country add a premium to certain fuels or commodities, then the demand may decline and their price may fall. Countries that do not place a premium on those items may then take up the demand and use the same supply, negating any benefit.

Coal, oil and alternative technologies [ edit ] The issue of carbon leakage can be interpreted from the perspective of the reliance of society on coal, oil, and alternative  (less polluting) technologies, e.g., biomass . This is based on the theory of nonrenewable resources.

[ 5 ] The potential emissions from coal, oil and gas is limited by the supply of these nonrenewable resources. To a first approximation, the total emissions from oil and gas is fixed, [ clarification needed ] and the total load of carbon in the atmosphere is primarily determined by coal usage.

A policy that sets a carbon tax only in developed countries might lead to leakage of emissions to developing countries. However, a negative leakage (i.e., leakage having the effect of reducing emissions) could also occur due to a lowering in demand and price for oil and gas. One of the negative effects of carbon leakage is the undermining of global emissions reduction efforts. When industries relocate to countries with lower emission standards, it can lead to increased greenhouse gas emissions in those countries.

This might lead coal-rich countries to use less coal and more oil and gas, thus lowering their emissions.

[ 5 ] While this is of short-term benefit, it reduces the insurance provided by limiting the consumption of oil and gas. The insurance is against the possibility of delayed arrival of backstop technologies. If the arrival of alternative technologies is delayed, the replacement of coal by oil and gas might have no long-term benefit. If the alternative  technology arrives earlier, then the issue of substitution becomes unimportant. In terms of climate policy, the issue of substitution means that long-term leakage needs to be considered, and not just short-term leakage.

[ 5 ] By taking into account the potential delays in alternative technologies and wider substitution effects, policymakers can develop strategies that minimize leakage and promote sustainable emissions reduction. Leakage can also be reduced if climate-concerned countries " buy coal ", i.e., the right to extract fossil fuels, in other countries.

Current schemes [ edit ] Estimates of leakage rates for action under the Kyoto Protocol ranged from 5 to 20% as a result of a loss in price competitiveness, but these leakage rates were viewed as being very uncertain.

[ 6 ] For energy-intensive industries, the beneficial effects of Annex I actions through technological development were viewed as possibly being substantial. This beneficial effect, however, had not been reliably quantified. On the empirical evidence they assessed, Barker et al . (2007) concluded that the competitive losses of then-current mitigation actions, e.g., the EU ETS , were not significant.

The European Union hands out free EU ETS certificates (EU allowances) to sectors with high risk of carbon leakage, e.g., aluminium.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] It uses the Carbon Leakage Indicator (CLI) to determine sectors at risk of carbon leakage, with the formula C L I = T r a d e I n t e n s i t y × × E m i s s i o n I n t e n s i t y {\displaystyle CLI=Trade\ Intensity\times Emission\ Intensity} .

C L I = T I × × ( D i r e c t E m i s s i o n I n t e n s i t y + I n d i r e c t E m i s s i o n I n t e n s i t y ) {\displaystyle CLI=TI\times {\bigl (}Direct\ Emission\ Intensity+Indirect\ Emission\ Intensity{\bigr )}} = ( I m p o r t s + E x p o r t s ) ( T u r n o v e r + I m p o r t s ) × × ( D i r e c t E m i s s i o n s G V A D E + I n d i r e c t E m i s s i o n s G V A I E ) {\displaystyle ={(Imports+Exports) \over (Turnover+Imports)}\times {\Biggl (}{Direct\ Emissions \over {GVA}_{DE}}+{Indirect\ Emissions \over {GVA}_{IE}}{\Biggr )}} , where G V A {\displaystyle GVA} is gross value added .

[ 9 ] Recent North American emissions schemes such as the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative and the Western Climate Initiative are looking at ways of measuring and equalising the price of energy 'imports' that enter their trading region [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Energy portal Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism Carbon footprint Carbon shifting Carbon tax Embedded emissions Emissions trading Indirect land use change impacts of biofuels Leakage (economics) References [ edit ] ^ Andrés Cala (18 November 2014), "Emissions Loophole Stays Open in E.U." , The New York Times , retrieved 1 April 2015 ^ Naegele, Helene; Zaklan, Aleksandar (2017).

"Does the EU ETS Cause Carbon Leakage in European Manufacturing?" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3050323 .

hdl : 10419/171309 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ IPCC (2007), B. Metz; et al. (eds.), Glossary A-D. In (section): Annex I. In (book): Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF) , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A., archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-08-20 , retrieved 2010-04-18 ^ Barker, T.; et al. (2007), B. Metz; et al. (eds.), 11.7.2 Carbon leakage. In (book chapter): Mitigation from a cross-sectoral perspective. In (book): Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , Print version: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A.. This version: IPCC website, archived from the original on 2010-05-03 , retrieved 2010-04-05 ^ a b c d Goldemberg, J.; et al. (1996). J.P. Bruce.; et al. (eds.).

Introduction: scope of the assessment. In: Climate Change 1995: Economic and Social Dimensions of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF) . This version: Printed by Cambridge University Press , Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A.. PDF version: IPCC website. pp.

27–28 .

ISBN 978-0-521-56854-8 .

^ Barker, T.; et al. (2007), B. Metz; et al. (eds.), Executive Summary. In (book chapter): Mitigation from a cross-sectoral perspective. In (book): Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , Print version: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A.. This version: IPCC website, archived from the original on 2010-03-31 , retrieved 2010-04-05 ^ "Allocation to industrial installations - European Commission" .

climate.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2024-08-06 .

^ "Implementing regulation - 2021/447 - EN - EUR-Lex" .

eur-lex.europa.eu . Retrieved 2024-08-06 .

^ Bolscher; Graichen (2018).

"Carbon Leakage List – Methodology for the Quantitative Assessment" (PDF) .

^ "RGGI Imports and Emissions Leakage Working Group" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-11-28 . Retrieved 2007-11-20 .

Further reading [ edit ] Markandya, A.; et al. (2001).

"7.4.3 Valuation of Spillover Costs and Benefits. In (book chapter): 7. Costing Methodologies. In: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (B. Metz et al . Eds.)" . Print version: Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K., and New York, N.Y., U.S.A.. This version: GRID-Arendal website. Archived from the original on 2009-08-05 . Retrieved 2010-05-12 .

Reinaud, J. (October 2008).

"Issues behind Competitiveness and Carbon Leakage- Focus on Heavy Industry. IEA information paper" . International Energy Agency (IEA), Head of Communication and Information Office, 9 rue de la Fédération, 75739 Paris Cedex 15, France. p. 122. Archived from the original on 2010-06-15 . Retrieved 2010-05-12 .

Reinaud, J. (October 2008).

"Climate Policy and Carbon Leakage- Impacts of the European Emissions Trading Scheme on Aluminium. IEA information paper" . International Energy Agency (IEA), Head of Communication and Information Office, 9 rue de la Fédération, 75739 Paris Cedex 15, France. p. 45. Archived from the original on 2010-06-15 . Retrieved 2010-05-12 .

v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carbon_leakage&oldid=1300591117 " Categories : Climate change policy Greenhouse gas emissions Offshoring Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2015 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 07:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carbon leakage 11 languages Add topic

