Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Genes and inheritance Toggle Genes and inheritance subsection 1.1 Example of mixing 2 How genes work Toggle How genes work subsection 2.1 Genes make proteins 2.2 Genes are copied 3 Genes and evolution 4 Inherited diseases 5 Genetic engineering 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Introduction to genetics 15 languages Afrikaans العربية Español Français Gaeilge Bahasa Indonesia Malti မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ پښتو Português Română ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-technical introduction to the subject of genetics This article is a non-technical introduction to the subject. For the main encyclopedia article, see Genetics .

Part of a series on Genetics Key components Chromosome DNA RNA Genome Heredity Nucleotide Mutation Genetic variation Allele Amino acid Outline Index History and topics Introduction History Evolution ( molecular ) Population genetics Mendelian inheritance Quantitative genetics Molecular genetics Research Geneticist DNA sequencing Genetic engineering Genomics ( template ) Medical genetics Branches of genetics Fields Classical Conservation Cytogenetics Ecological Immunogenetics Microbial Molecular Population Quantitative Personalized medicine Personalized medicine Category v t e Genetics glossary DNA A long molecule that looks like a twisted ladder. It is made of four types of simple units and the sequence of these units carries information, just as the sequence of letters carries information on a page.

Nucleotide They form the rungs of the DNA ladder and are the repeating units in DNA. There are four types of nucleotides (A, T, G and C) and it is the sequence of these nucleotides that carries information.

Chromosome A package for carrying DNA in the cells. They contain a single long piece of DNA that is wound up and bunched together into a compact structure. Different species of plants and animals have different numbers and sizes of chromosomes.

Gene A segment of DNA . Genes are like sentences made of the "letters" of the nucleotide alphabet, between them genes direct the physical development and behavior of an organism. Genes are like a recipe or instruction book, providing information that an organism needs so it can build or do something - like making an eye or a leg, or repairing a wound.

Allele The different forms of a given gene that an organism may possess. For example, in humans, one allele of the eye-color gene produces green eyes and another allele of the eye-color gene produces brown eyes.

Genome The complete set of genes in a particular organism.

Genetic engineering When people change an organism by adding new genes, or deleting genes from its genome.

Mutation An event that changes the sequence of the DNA in a gene.

v t e Genetics is the study of genes and tries to explain what they are and how they work. Genes are how living organisms inherit features or traits from their ancestors; for example, children usually look like their parents because they have inherited their parents' genes. Genetics tries to identify which traits are inherited and to explain how these traits are passed from generation to generation.

Some traits are part of an organism's physical appearance , such as eye color or height. Other sorts of traits are not easily seen and include blood types or resistance to diseases . Some traits are inherited through genes, which is the reason why tall and thin people tend to have tall and thin children. Other traits come from interactions between genes and the environment, so a child who inherited the tendency of being tall will still be short if poorly nourished . The way our genes and environment interact to produce a trait can be complicated. For example, the chances of somebody dying of cancer or heart disease seems to depend on both their genes and their lifestyle.

Genes are made from a long molecule called DNA , which is copied and inherited across generations. DNA is made of simple units that line up in a particular order within it, carrying genetic information. The language used by DNA is called genetic code , which lets organisms read the information in the genes. This information is the instructions for the construction and operation of a living organism.

The information within a particular gene is not always exactly the same between one organism and another, so different copies of a gene do not always give exactly the same instructions. Each unique form of a single gene is called an allele . As an example, one allele for the gene for hair color could instruct the body to produce much pigment, producing black hair, while a different allele of the same gene might give garbled instructions that fail to produce any pigment, giving white hair.

Mutations are random changes in genes and can create new alleles. Mutations can also produce new traits, such as when mutations to an allele for black hair produce a new allele for white hair. This appearance of new traits is important in evolution .

Genes and inheritance [ edit ] A section of DNA ; the sequence of the plate-like units ( nucleotides ) in the center carries information.

Genes are pieces of DNA that contain information for the synthesis of ribonucleic acids (RNAs) or polypeptides . Genes are inherited as units, with two parents dividing out copies of their genes to their offspring. Humans have two copies of each of their genes, but each egg or sperm cell only gets one of those copies for each gene. An egg and sperm join to form a zygote with a complete set of genes. The resulting offspring has the same number of genes as their parents, but for any gene, one of their two copies comes from their father and one from their mother.

[ 1 ] Example of mixing [ edit ] The effects of mixing depend on the types (the alleles ) of the gene. If the father has two copies of an allele for red hair, and the mother has two copies for brown hair, all their children get the two alleles that give different instructions, one for red hair and one for brown. The hair color of these children depends on how these alleles work together. If one allele dominates the instructions from another, it is called the dominant allele, and the allele that is overridden is called the recessive allele. In the case of a daughter with alleles for both red and brown hair, brown is dominant and she ends up with brown hair.

[ 2 ] A Punnett square showing how two brown haired parents can have red or brown haired children. 'B' is for brown and 'b' is for red.

Red hair is a recessive trait.

Although the red color allele is still there in this brown-haired girl, it doesn't show. This is a difference between what is seen on the surface (the traits of an organism, called its phenotype ) and the genes within the organism (its genotype ). In this example, the allele for brown can be called "B" and the allele for red "b". (It is normal to write dominant alleles with capital letters and recessive ones with lower-case letters.) The brown hair daughter has the "brown hair phenotype" but her genotype is Bb, with one copy of the B allele, and one of the b allele.

Now imagine that this woman grows up and has children with a brown-haired man who also has a Bb genotype. Her eggs will be a mixture of two types, one sort containing the B allele, and one sort the b allele. Similarly, her partner will produce a mix of two types of sperm containing one or the other of these two alleles. When the transmitted genes are joined up in their offspring, these children have a chance of getting either brown or red hair, since they could get a genotype of BB = brown hair, Bb = brown hair or bb = red hair. In this generation, there is, therefore, a chance of the recessive allele showing itself in the phenotype of the children—some of them may have red hair like their grandfather.

[ 2 ] Many traits are inherited in a more complicated way than the example above. This can happen when there are several genes involved, each contributing a small part to the result. Tall people tend to have tall children because their children get a package of many alleles that each contribute a bit to how much they grow. However, there are not clear groups of "short people" and "tall people", like there are groups of people with brown or red hair. This is because of the large number of genes involved; this makes the trait very variable and people are of many different heights.

[ 3 ] Despite a common misconception, the green/blue eye traits are also inherited in this complex inheritance model.

[ 4 ] Inheritance can also be complicated when the trait depends on the interaction between genetics and environment. For example, malnutrition does not change traits like eye color, but can stunt growth.

[ 5 ] How genes work [ edit ] Genes make proteins [ edit ] Main article: Genetic code The function of genes is to provide the information needed to make molecules called proteins in cells.

[ 1 ] Cells are the smallest independent parts of organisms: the human body contains about 100 trillion cells, while very small organisms like bacteria are just a single cell. A cell is like a miniature and very complex factory that can make all the parts needed to produce a copy of itself, which happens when cells divide . There is a simple division of labor in cells—genes give instructions and proteins carry out these instructions, tasks  like building a new copy of a cell, or repairing the damage.

[ 6 ] Each type of protein is a specialist that only does one job, so if a cell needs to do something new, it must make a new protein to do this job. Similarly, if a cell needs to do something faster or slower than before, it makes more or less of the protein responsible. Genes tell cells what to do by telling them which proteins to make and in what amounts.

Genes are expressed by being transcribed into RNA, and this RNA then translated into protein.

A protein consists of a chain of amino acid molecules, of which there are 20 types. This chain folds up into a compact shape, rather like an untidy ball of string. The shape of the protein is determined by the sequence of amino acids along its chain, and it is this shape that determines what the protein does.

[ 6 ] For example, some proteins have parts of their surface that perfectly match the shape of another molecule, allowing the protein to bind to this molecule very tightly. Other proteins are enzymes , which are like tiny machines that alter other molecules.

[ 7 ] The information in DNA is held in the sequence of the repeating units along the DNA chain.

[ 8 ] These units are four types of nucleotides (A, T, G and C) and the sequence of nucleotides stores information in an alphabet called the genetic code . When a gene is read by a cell the DNA sequence is copied into a very similar molecule called RNA (this process is called transcription ). Transcription is controlled by other DNA sequences (such as promoters ), which show a cell where genes are, and control how often they are copied. The RNA copy made from a gene is then fed through a structure called a ribosome , which translates the sequence of nucleotides in the RNA into the correct sequence of amino acids and joins these amino acids together to make a complete protein chain. The new protein then folds up into its active form. The process of moving information from the language of RNA into the language of amino acids is called translation .

[ 9 ] DNA replication . DNA is unwound and nucleotides are matched to make two new strands.

If the sequence of the nucleotides in a gene changes, the sequence of the amino acids in the protein it produces may also change—if part of a gene is deleted, the protein produced is shorter and may not work anymore.

[ 6 ] This is the reason why different alleles of a gene can have different effects on an organism. As an example, hair color depends on how much of a dark substance called melanin is put into the hair as it grows. If a person has a normal set of the genes involved in making melanin, they make all the proteins needed and they grow dark hair. However, if the alleles for a particular protein have different sequences and produce proteins that can't do their jobs, no melanin is produced and the person has white skin and hair ( albinism ).

[ 10 ] Genes are copied [ edit ] Main article: DNA replication Genes are copied each time a cell divides into two new cells. The process that copies DNA is called DNA replication .

[ 8 ] It is through a similar process that a child inherits genes from its parents when a copy from the mother is mixed with a copy from the father.

DNA can be copied very easily and accurately because each piece of DNA can direct the assembly of a new copy of its information. This is because DNA is made of two strands that pair together like the two sides of a zipper. The nucleotides are in the center, like the teeth in the zipper, and pair up to hold the two strands together. Importantly, the four different sorts of nucleotides are different shapes, so for the strands to close up properly, an A nucleotide must go opposite a T nucleotide, and a G opposite a C . This exact pairing is called base pairing .

[ 8 ] When DNA is copied, the two strands of the old DNA are pulled apart by enzymes; then they pair up with new nucleotides and then close. This produces two new pieces of DNA, each containing one strand from the old DNA and one newly made strand. This process is not predictably perfect as proteins attach to a nucleotide while they are building and cause a change in the sequence of that gene. These changes in the DNA sequence are called mutations .

[ 11 ] Mutations produce new alleles of genes. Sometimes these changes stop the functioning of that gene or make it serve another advantageous function, such as the melanin genes discussed above. These mutations and their effects on the traits of organisms are one of the causes of evolution .

[ 12 ] Genes and evolution [ edit ] Further information: Introduction to evolution , History of evolutionary thought , and Evolutionary developmental biology Mice with different coat colors A population of organisms evolves when an inherited trait becomes more common or less common over time.

[ 12 ] For instance, all the mice living on an island would be a single population of mice: some with white fur, some gray. If over generations, white mice became more frequent and gray mice less frequent, then the color of the fur in this population of mice would be evolving . In terms of genetics, this is called an increase in allele frequency .

Alleles become more or less common either by chance in a process called genetic drift or by natural selection .

[ 13 ] In natural selection, if an allele makes it more likely for an organism to survive and reproduce, then over time this allele becomes more common. But if an allele is harmful, natural selection makes it less common. In the above example, if the island were getting colder each year and snow became present for much of the time, then the allele for white fur would favor survival since predators would be less likely to see them against the snow, and more likely to see the gray mice. Over time white mice would become more and more frequent, while gray mice less and less.

Mutations create new alleles. These alleles have new DNA sequences and can produce proteins with new properties.

[ 14 ] So if an island was populated entirely by black mice, mutations could happen creating alleles for white fur. The combination of mutations creating new alleles at random, and natural selection picking out those that are useful, causes an adaptation . This is when organisms change in ways that help them to survive and reproduce. Many such changes, studied in evolutionary developmental biology , affect the way the embryo develops into an adult body.

Inherited diseases [ edit ] Some diseases are hereditary and run in families; others, such as infectious diseases , are caused by the environment. Other diseases come from a combination of genes and the environment.

[ 15 ] Genetic disorders are diseases that are caused by a single allele of a gene and are inherited in families. These include Huntington's disease , cystic fibrosis or Duchenne muscular dystrophy . Cystic fibrosis, for example, is caused by mutations in a single gene called CFTR and is inherited as a recessive trait.

[ 16 ] Other diseases are influenced by genetics, but the genes a person gets from their parents only change their risk of getting a disease. Most of these diseases are inherited in a complex way, with either multiple genes involved, or coming from both genes and the environment. As an example, the risk of breast cancer is 50 times higher in the families most at risk, compared to the families least at risk. This variation is probably due to a large number of alleles, each changing the risk a little bit.

[ 17 ] Several of the genes have been identified, such as BRCA1 and BRCA2 , but not all of them. However, although some of the risks are genetic, the risk of this cancer is also increased by being overweight, heavy alcohol consumption and not exercising.

[ 18 ] A woman's risk of breast cancer, therefore, comes from a large number of alleles interacting with her environment, so it is very hard to predict.

Genetic engineering [ edit ] Main article: Genetic engineering Since traits come from the genes in a cell, putting a new piece of DNA into a cell can produce a new trait. This is how genetic engineering works. For example, rice can be given genes from a maize and a soil bacteria so the rice produces beta-carotene , which the body converts to vitamin A.

[ 19 ] This can help children with Vitamin A deficiency. Another gene being put into some crops comes from the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis ; the gene makes a protein that is an insecticide . The insecticide kills insects that eat the plants but is harmless to people.

[ 20 ] In these plants, the new genes are put into the plant before it is grown, so the genes are in every part of the plant, including its seeds.

[ 21 ] The plant's offspring inherit the new genes, which has led to concern about the spread of new traits into wild plants.

[ 22 ] The kind of technology used in genetic engineering is also being developed to treat people with genetic disorders in an experimental medical technique called gene therapy .

[ 23 ] However, here the new, properly working gene is put in targeted cells, not altering the chance of future children inheriting the disease causing alleles.

See also [ edit ] Common misunderstandings of genetics Epigenetics Whole genome sequencing History of genetics Genetics in simple English Outline of genetics Molecular genetics Predictive medicine References [ edit ] ^ a b University of Utah Genetics Learning Center animated tour of the basics of genetics . Howstuffworks.com. Archived from the original on 10 February 2008 . Retrieved 24 January 2008 .

^ a b Melanocortin 1 Receptor , Accessed 27 November 2010 ^ Multifactorial Inheritance Health Library, Morgan Stanley Children's Hospital, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ Eye color is more complex than two genes , Athro Limited, Accessed 27 November 2010 ^ "Low income kids' height doesn't measure up by age 1" . University of Michigan Health System. Archived from the original on 26 May 2008 . Retrieved 20 May 2008 .

^ a b c The Structures of Life Archived 7 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine National Institute of General Medical Sciences, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ Enzymes HowStuffWorks, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ a b c What is DNA?

Genetics Home Reference, Accessed 16 May 2008 ^ DNA-RNA-Protein Nobelprize.org, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ What is Albinism?

Archived 14 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine The National Organization for Albinism and Hypopigmentation, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ Mutations Archived 15 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine The University of Utah, Genetic Science Learning Center, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ a b Brain, Marshall.

"How Evolution Works" .

How Stuff Works: Evolution Library . Howstuffworks.com . Retrieved 24 January 2008 .

^ Mechanisms: The Processes of Evolution Archived 27 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Understanding Evolution, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ Genetic Variation Archived 27 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine Understanding Evolution, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ requently Asked Questions About Genetic Disorders NIH, Accessed 20 May 2008 ^ Cystic fibrosis Genetics Home Reference, NIH, Accessed 16 May 2008 ^ Peto J (June 2002).

"Breast cancer susceptibility – A new look at an old model" .

Cancer Cell .

1 (5): 411– 2.

doi : 10.1016/S1535-6108(02)00079-X .

ISSN 1535-6108 .

PMID 12124169 .

^ What Are the Risk Factors for Breast Cancer?

Archived 29 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine American Cancer Society, Accessed 16 May 2008 ^ Staff Golden Rice Project Retrieved 5 November 2012 ^ Tifton, Georgia: A Peanut Pest Showdown USDA, accessed 16 May 2008 ^ Genetic engineering: Bacterial arsenal to combat chewing insects Archived 15 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine GMO Safety, Jul 2010 ^ Genetically engineered organisms public issues education Cornell University, Accessed 16 May 2008 ^ Staff (18 November 2005).

"Gene Therapy" (FAQ) .

Human Genome Project Information .

Oak Ridge National Laboratory . Retrieved 28 May 2006 .

External links [ edit ] Introduction to Genetics , University of Utah Introduction to Genes and Disease , NCBI open book Genetics glossary , A talking glossary of genetic terms.

Khan Academy on YouTube What Color Eyes Would Your Children Have?

Genetics of human eye color: An interactive introduction Transcribe and translate a gene , University of Utah StarGenetics software simulates mating experiments between organisms that are genetically different across a range of traits v t e Genetics Introduction Outline History Timeline Index Glossary Key components Chromosome DNA RNA Genome Heredity Nucleotide Mutation Genetic variation Allele Amino acid Fields Classical Conservation Cytogenetics Ecological Immunogenetics Microbial Molecular Population Quantitative Archaeogenetics of Africa the Americas the British Isles Europe Italy the Middle East South Asia Related topics Behavioural genetics Epigenetics Geneticist Genome editing Genomics Genetic code Genetic engineering Genetic diversity Genetic monitoring Genetic genealogy Heredity He Jiankui genome editing incident Medical genetics Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Plant genetics Population genomics Reverse genetics Lists List of genetic codes List of genetics research organizations Category v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Introductory science articles Biology evolution genetics viruses Physics electromagnetism entropy gauge theory general relativity mathematical formalism M-theory quantum mechanics Mathematics systolic geometry v t e Gene expression Introduction to genetics Genetic code Central dogma DNA → RNA → Protein Special transfers RNA→RNA RNA→DNA Protein→Protein Transcription Types Bacterial Archaeal Eukaryotic Key elements Transcription factor RNA polymerase Promoter Post-transcription Precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA / hnRNA) 5' capping Splicing Polyadenylation Histone acetylation and deacetylation Translation Types Bacterial Archaeal Eukaryotic Key elements Ribosome Transfer RNA (tRNA) Ribosome-nascent chain complex (RNC) Post-translational modification Regulation Epigenetic imprinting Transcriptional Gene regulatory network cis-regulatory element lac operon Post-transcriptional sequestration (P-bodies) alternative splicing microRNA Translational Post-translational reversible irreversible Influential people François Jacob Jacques Monod NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lrzrf
Cached time: 20250812005256
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.454 seconds
Real time usage: 0.563 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1879/1000000
Revision size: 23582/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 128505/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1386/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85341/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.271/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6522175/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  424.496      1 -total
 31.35%  133.065      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 31.04%  131.770      1 Template:Genetics_sidebar
 26.01%  110.427      1 Template:Reflist
 18.65%   79.180      3 Template:Excerpt
 17.20%   73.025      5 Template:Navbox
 15.23%   64.669      2 Template:Cite_book
 11.46%   48.627      1 Template:Short_description
 10.00%   42.446      1 Template:Biology_nav
  6.86%   29.111      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8406655:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812005256 and revision id 1301014896. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Introduction_to_genetics&oldid=1301014896 " Category : Genetics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Introductory articles Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 17:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Introduction to genetics 15 languages Add topic

