Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 National sections Toggle National sections subsection 2.1 England 2.2 Scotland 2.3 Wales 2.4 Northern Ireland 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents BBC Bitesize 2 languages Français Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British educational website from the BBC BBC Bitesize A screenshot of BBC Bitesize homepage Type of site Free online study resource Available in English Welsh Gaelic Predecessor(s) BBC Schools Created by BBC URL bbc .co .uk /bitesize Launched 1998 Current status Active BBC Bitesize , [ 1 ] also abbreviated to Bitesize , is the BBC 's free online study support resource for school-age people in the United Kingdom . It is designed to aid people in both schoolwork and, for older people, exams .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] GCSE Bitesize was launched in January 1998, covering seven subjects.  For each subject, a one- or two-hour long TV programme would be broadcast overnight in the BBC Learning Zone block, and supporting material was available in books and on the BBC website.  At the time, only around 9% of UK households had access to the internet at home.

[ 3 ] In 2023, videos from Bitesize were adapted and dubbed over in Dari and Pashto in order to be broadcast in Afghanistan, where education for girls has been stopped by the Taliban government. The show was called Dars , which means "lessons" in both languages.

[ 4 ] National sections [ edit ] England [ edit ] The Key Stage 1, 2 and 3 along with GCSE section covers a range of subjects. In Key Stage 1 , 17 subjects are available, including Art and Design , Computing , Design and Technology , English , Geography , History , Maths , Music , Physical Education , PSHE , Citizenship , Religious Education , Science , and Modern Foreign Languages .

[ 5 ] The Key Stage 2 site covers 23 subjects, [ 6 ] Key Stage 3 section contains 33 subjects, [ 7 ] and the GCSE section contains 49 subjects across several exam boards .

[ 8 ] Scotland [ edit ] Until 2014, the Standard Grade section of the site had 12 subjects: Biology , History, Chemistry , Computing Studies, Maths, English, Modern Studies (a course exclusive to Scotland), French , Physical Education, Geography, and Physics .

[ 9 ] The site was updated in 2014 to replace the Standard Grade section with National 4 and National 5 sections.

Gaelic versions of these were also made available.

Until 2014, in the Higher section, Biology, English, Geography, Maths, Chemistry, History, Modern Studies, Physics and the Scotland-only subject Scottish Gaelic were available. The Higher section was also updated to the new Curriculum for Excellence qualification. Early and 1st level, 2nd level, 3rd level, and 4th level resources were added to bring the site in line with the Curriculum for Excellence.

Wales [ edit ] The CS3 and TGAU sections are in Welsh. Links to the English language sections are included.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Northern Ireland [ edit ] In 2014, a Northern Ireland section was added to the site. It solely contains links to the English language KS1/KS2/KS3/GCSE sections.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] E-learning Study skills for exam preparation References [ edit ] ^ "Home" .

BBC Bitesize .

^ Williams, Peter John (October 2007).

"Valid Knowledge: The Economy and the Academy" (PDF) .

Higher Education .

54 (4): 511– 23.

doi : 10.1007/s10734-007-9051-y .

JSTOR 29735128 .

S2CID 143358230 .

^ "The good ship Bitesize is launched" . BBC . Retrieved 13 July 2023 .

^ "Dars: BBC education show in Afghanistan helps children banned from school" . 31 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "KS1" . BBC . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ "KS2" . BBC . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ "KS3" . BBC. 1 January 1970 . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

^ "GCSE" . BBC . Retrieved 13 March 2019 .

^ "Standard Grade Bitesize" . BBC. Archived from the original on 4 June 2009 . Retrieved 28 June 2012 .

^ "CA3" . BBC. 1 January 1970 . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

^ "TGAU" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

^ "BBC Bitesize - Home" .

BBC . Retrieved 16 July 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Bitesize v t e BBC Services Television stations programmes Radio stations local BBC Online BBC Red Button Ceefax iPlayer BBC Sounds Management Chair Samir Shah Director-General Tim Davie BBC Board BBC Charter BBC independence Departments BBC Academy Archives BBC Film BBC World Service ( Timeline ) Television Design & Engineering Monitoring News Pronunciation Unit Radio Sport Weather Nations and regions England Birmingham Bristol East East Midlands London Manchester North East & Cumbria North West South South East South West West West Midlands Yorkshire Yorkshire & Lincolnshire Rest of UK Northern Ireland Scotland Gàidhlig Wales Commercial subsidiaries BBC Studios Productions Natural History Unit Home Entertainment Demon Music Group BBC Studioworks BBC Worldwide History Archives Sound Archive BBC Trust Board of Governors British Broadcasting Company Coat of arms Controversies Criticism First day of TV Logo Radio Times Genome Timeline Key properties ( full list ) London Broadcasting House Lime Grove (former) Maida Vale Studios Television Centre (former) White City & Media Village Birmingham Drama Village Mailbox Birmingham Pebble Mill Studios (former) Cardiff New Broadcasting House, Cardiff Broadcasting House (former) Drama Village (Roath Lock) BBC Hoddinott Hall Other locations Broadcasting House, Belfast BBC Elstree Centre MediaCityUK, Salford Pacific Quay, Glasgow Finance Television licence history Projects Backstage BBC Micro BBC UK regional TV on satellite The Box Bitesize BritBox Dirac Domesday Freely Freesat h2g2 Local Democracy Reporting Service Redux YouView Technical Programme Catalogue Programme Identifier Other List of songs banned by the BBC Live at the BBC Category Portal Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=BBC_Bitesize&oldid=1278257816 " Categories : BBC New Media British educational websites Educational broadcasting in the United Kingdom Internet properties established in 1998 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 1 March 2025, at 11:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents BBC Bitesize 2 languages Add topic

