Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Quotes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External  links Toggle the table of contents Charles Comte 5 languages Español Français مصرى Polski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French lawyer, journalist and political writer (1782–1837) François-Charles-Louis Comte (August 25, 1782–April 13, 1837) was a French lawyer, journalist and political writer.

Biography [ edit ] In 1814, Comte, along with Charles Dunoyer , founded with Le Censeur , a liberal journal. In 1820, he was found guilty of attacks against the King and went into exile in Switzerland, where as professor of natural law he taught at the University of Lausanne in Switzerland.

[ 1 ] Following comments made by Fredric Jean Witt, a revolutionary, to the Bavarian police and an intervention by the French police, Comte was forced to leave Switzerland.

[ 1 ] Comte took refuge in England for eighteen months where he became acquainted with Jeremy Bentham , but returned to France in 1825 and began contributing to the Revue Americaine .

[ 1 ] In 1827, he published Traité de législation ( A Treatise on Law ; 4 volumes, in-8) which outlined laws governing the development of companies and the reasons why development might be held back. The book established his reputation and earned him a Montyon Prize .

[ citation needed ] As an economist, he followed the doctrines of Jean-Baptiste Say whose daughter he married. Comte was active in the opposition which led to the July Revolution of 1830 as he refused to pay taxes until Charles X revoked a series anti-liberal decrees and was elected a deputy in the Sarthe in 1831 and again in 1834.

[ 1 ] In 1832, he was elected to the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques .

[ citation needed ] Quotes [ edit ] Some quotes which give a good feel for his work: [ 2 ] Newspapers could be of great utility, but the great importance which they attach to simple literary discussions, the indifference they have for anything which smacks of legislation, and the habit they have acquired of adulation (of the government), prevents one from hoping that they will busy themselves in enlightening citizens of their true interests. What they do not do, I propose to undertake.

[ 3 ] The revolution which brought about in France the fall of the Imperial government, without changing at all the direction of my ideas, forced me to choose a means of publication different from that which I had at first proposed. It seemed to me that in treating in succession questions of politics or legislation which circumstances threw up I would achieve my aim most surely and promptly. Observations applied to those events which one witnesses have greater impact than those observations made from a distance. The freedom to publicly present one's opinions, which the previous government had completely destroyed, was eventually proclaimed and it was imperative to take advantage of it. Because it is the same of liberty and power, one runs the great risk of losing it if one does not seize it the very instant when it appears.

[ 4 ] An opponent of monarchy, Comte nevertheless saw how even a democratic government retained certain things in common with the old order, saying: What must never be lost sight of is that a public functionary, in his capacity as functionary, produces absolutely nothing; that, on the contrary, he exists only on the products of the industrious class; and that he can consume nothing that has not been taken from the producers.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Liggio, Leonard, P.

Charlles Dunoyer and French Classical Liberalism (1977) Journal of Libertarian Studies, Vol. 1. No. 3. Pergamon Press, p. 163 . Retrieved 14 September 2010.

^ "The Independent Institute | C Quotes" . On Power . Retrieved 8 October 2010 .

^ Journal des économistes , June 1846, vol. XIV, p. 271.

^ Traité de législation , 3rd ed, p. xiii.

Further reading [ edit ] Hart, David (2008).

"Comte, Charles (1782–1837)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

86– 87.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n56 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

External  links [ edit ] Charles Comte Bio and Biblio Portals : Economics France Liberalism Libertarianism Politics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Greece Argentina Poland Israel Belgium People Sycomore Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_Comte&oldid=1292669177 " Categories : French economists French tax resisters Members of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques 1782 births 1837 deaths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 05:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles Comte 5 languages Add topic

