Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Rocket stages 2 Solid chemical propellants Toggle Solid chemical propellants subsection 2.1 Advantages 2.2 Disadvantages 2.3 History 3 Liquid chemical propellants Toggle Liquid chemical propellants subsection 3.1 Advantages 3.2 Disadvantages 3.3 Current cryogenic types 3.4 Current storable types 3.5 Mixture ratio 3.6 Propellant density 4 Other chemical propellants Toggle Other chemical propellants subsection 4.1 Hybrid propellants 4.2 Gaseous propellants 5 Inert propellants Toggle Inert propellants subsection 5.1 Ion thruster 5.2 Thermal rockets 5.3 Compressed gas 6 Nuclear plasma 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Rocket propellant 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Latviešu Magyar Minangkabau 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rocket fuel ) Chemical or mixture used in a rocket engine "Rocket fuel" redirects here; not to be confused with Rocket Fuel (company) , Rocket fuel (drug regimen) , or Rocket Fuel (song) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rocket propellant" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Delta IV Heavy during liftoff. The rocket is launched using liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen cryogenic propellants.

Rocket propellant is used as reaction mass ejected from a rocket engine to produce thrust . The energy required can either come from the propellants themselves, as with a chemical rocket , or from an external source, as with ion engines .

Overview [ edit ] Rockets create thrust by expelling mass rear-ward, at high velocity. The thrust produced can be calculated by multiplying the mass flow rate of the propellants by their exhaust velocity relative to the rocket ( specific impulse ). A rocket can be thought of as being accelerated by the pressure of the combusting gases against the combustion chamber and nozzle , not by "pushing" against the air behind or below it. Rocket engines perform best in outer space because of the lack of air pressure on the outside of the engine. In space it is also possible to fit a longer nozzle without suffering from flow separation .

Most chemical propellants release energy through redox chemistry , more specifically combustion . As such, both an oxidizing agent and a reducing agent (fuel) must be present in the mixture. Decomposition, such as that of highly unstable peroxide bonds in monopropellant rockets, can also be the source of energy.

In the case of bipropellant liquid rockets, a mixture of reducing fuel and oxidizing oxidizer is introduced into a combustion chamber , typically using a turbopump to overcome the pressure. As combustion takes place, the liquid propellant mass is converted into a huge volume of gas at high temperature and pressure. This exhaust stream is ejected from the engine nozzle at high velocity, creating an opposing force that propels the rocket forward in accordance with Newton's laws of motion .

Chemical rockets can be grouped by phase. Solid rockets use propellant in the solid phase , liquid fuel rockets use propellant in the liquid phase , gas fuel rockets use propellant in the gas phase , and hybrid rockets use a combination of solid and liquid or gaseous propellants.

In the case of solid rocket motors, the fuel and oxidizer are combined when the motor is cast. Propellant combustion occurs inside the motor casing, which must contain the pressures developed. Solid rockets typically have higher thrust, less specific impulse , shorter burn times, and a higher mass than liquid rockets, and additionally cannot be stopped once lit.

Rocket stages [ edit ] In space, the maximum change in velocity that a rocket stage can impart on its payload is primarily a function of its mass ratio and its exhaust velocity. This relationship is described by the rocket equation . Exhaust velocity is dependent on the propellant and engine used and closely related to specific impulse , the total energy delivered to the rocket vehicle per unit of propellant mass consumed. The mass ratio can also be affected by the choice of a given propellant.

Rocket stages that fly through the atmosphere usually use lower-performing, high-molecular-mass, high-density propellants due to the smaller and lighter tankage required. Upper stages, which mostly or only operate in the vacuum of space, tend to use the high-energy, high-performance, low-density liquid hydrogen fuel. For future planetary missions the use of local resources and solar energy for in situ propellant production is considered.

[ 1 ] Solid chemical propellants [ edit ] Solid propellants come in two main types. "Composites" are mostly a mixture of granules of solid oxidizer, such as ammonium nitrate , ammonium dinitramide , ammonium perchlorate , or potassium nitrate in a polymer binding agent, with flakes or powders of energetic fuel compounds such as RDX , HMX , aluminium, beryllium. Plasticizers, stabilizers, and burn rate modifiers (iron oxide, copper oxide) can be added.

Single-, double-, or triple-bases are homogeneous mixtures of one to three primary ingredients, which must include fuel and oxidizer, and often include binders and plasticizers. All components are macroscopically indistinguishable and often blended as liquids and cured in a single batch. Ingredients can have multiple roles: RDX is both fuel and oxidizer, while nitrocellulose is fuel, oxidizer, and structural polymer.

Many propellants contain elements of double-base and composite propellants, and often contain energetic additives homogeneously mixed into the binder. In the case of gunpowder (a pressed composite without a polymeric binder), the fuel is charcoal, the oxidizer is potassium nitrate, and sulphur serves as a reaction catalyst while also being consumed to form reaction products such as potassium sulfide .

The newest nitramine solid propellants based on CL-20 (HNIW) can match the performance of NTO / UDMH storable liquid propellants, but cannot be throttled or restarted.

Extraterrestrial on-site production is being explored by combining aluminum and ice ( ALICE ).

Advantages [ edit ] Solid-propellant rockets are much easier to store and handle than liquid-propellant rockets. High propellant density makes for compact size as well. These features plus simplicity and low cost make solid-propellant rockets ideal for military applications.

Their simplicity also makes solid rockets a good choice whenever large amounts of thrust are needed and cost is an issue.  The Space Shuttle and many other orbital launch vehicles use solid-fueled rockets in their boost stages ( solid rocket boosters ) for this reason.

Disadvantages [ edit ] Solid-fuel rockets have lower specific impulse , a measure of propellant efficiency, than liquid-fuel rockets. As a result, the overall performance of solid upper stages is less than liquid stages even though the solid mass ratios are usually in the .91 to .93 range, as good as or better than most liquid-propellant upper stages. The high mass ratios possible with these unsegmented solid upper stages is a result of high propellant density and very high strength-to-weight ratio filament-wound motor casings.

[ citation needed ] A drawback to solid rockets is that they cannot be throttled in real time, although a programmed thrust schedule can be created by adjusting the interior propellant geometry. Solid rockets can be vented to extinguish combustion or reverse thrust as a means of controlling range or accommodating stage separation. Casting large amounts of propellant requires consistency and repeatability to avoid cracks and voids in the completed motor. The blending and casting take place under computer control in a vacuum, and the propellant blend is spread thin and scanned to ensure that no large gas bubbles are introduced into the motor.

Solid-fuel rockets are intolerant to cracks and voids and require post-processing such as X-ray scans to identify faults. The combustion process is dependent on the surface area of the fuel. Voids and cracks represent local increases in burning surface area, increasing the local temperature, which increases the local rate of combustion. This positive feedback loop can easily lead to catastrophic failure of the case or nozzle.

History [ edit ] Solid rocket propellant was first developed during the 7th century under the Chinese Song dynasty . The Song Chinese first used gunpowder in 732 during the military siege of Kaifeng .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] During the 1950s and 60s, researchers in the United States developed ammonium perchlorate composite propellant (APCP).  This mixture is typically 69-70% finely ground ammonium perchlorate (an oxidizer), combined with 16-20% fine aluminium powder (a fuel), held together in a base of 11-14% polybutadiene acrylonitrile (PBAN) or hydroxyl-terminated polybutadiene (polybutadiene rubber fuel).  The mixture is formed as a thickened liquid and then cast into the correct shape and cured into a firm but flexible load-bearing solid. Historically, the tally of APCP solid propellants is relatively small. The military, however, uses a wide variety of different types of solid propellants, some of which exceed the performance of APCP. A comparison of the highest specific impulses achieved with the various solid and liquid propellant combinations used in current launch vehicles is given in the article on solid-fuel rockets .

[ 7 ] In the 1970s and 1980s, the U.S. switched entirely to solid-fueled ICBMs: the LGM-30 Minuteman and LG-118A Peacekeeper (MX).  In the 1980s and 1990s, the USSR/Russia also deployed solid-fueled ICBMs ( RT-23 , RT-2PM , and RT-2UTTH ), but retains two liquid-fueled ICBMs ( R-36 and UR-100N ).  All solid-fueled ICBMs on both sides had three initial solid stages, and those with multiple independently targeted warheads had a precision maneuverable bus used to fine-tune the trajectory of the re-entry vehicles.

Liquid chemical propellants [ edit ] Main article: Liquid-propellant rocket Advantages [ edit ] Liquid-fueled rockets have higher specific impulse than solid rockets and are capable of being throttled, shut down, and restarted.  Only the combustion chamber of a liquid-fueled rocket needs to withstand high combustion pressures and temperatures. Cooling can be done regeneratively with the liquid propellant.  On vehicles employing turbopumps , the propellant tanks are at a lower pressure than the combustion chamber, decreasing tank mass.  For these reasons, most orbital launch vehicles use liquid propellants.

The primary specific impulse advantage of liquid propellants is due to the availability of high-performance oxidizers.  Several practical liquid oxidizers ( liquid oxygen , dinitrogen tetroxide , and hydrogen peroxide ) are available which have better specific impulse than the ammonium perchlorate used in most solid rockets when paired with suitable fuels.

Some gases, notably oxygen and nitrogen, may be able to be collected from the upper atmosphere , and transferred up to low Earth orbit for use in propellant depots at substantially reduced cost.

[ 8 ] Disadvantages [ edit ] The main difficulties with liquid propellants are also with the oxidizers. Storable oxidizers, such as nitric acid and nitrogen tetroxide , tend to be extremely toxic and highly reactive, while cryogenic propellants by definition must be stored at low temperature and can also have reactivity/toxicity issues.

Liquid oxygen (LOX) is the only flown cryogenic oxidizer. Others such as FLOX, a fluorine /LOX mix, have never been flown due to instability, toxicity, and explosivity.

[ 9 ] Several other unstable, energetic, and toxic oxidizers have been proposed: liquid ozone (O 3 ), ClF 3 , and ClF 5 .

Liquid-fueled rockets require potentially troublesome valves, seals, and turbopumps, which increase the cost of the launch vehicle. Turbopumps are particularly troublesome due to high performance requirements.

Current cryogenic types [ edit ] Liquid oxygen (LOX) and highly refined kerosene ( RP-1 ).  Used for the first stages of the Atlas V , Falcon 9 , Falcon Heavy , Soyuz , Zenit , Angara , and Long March 6 , among others. This combination is widely regarded as the most practical for boosters that lift off at ground level and therefore must operate at full atmospheric pressure.

LOX and liquid hydrogen . Used on the Centaur upper stage , the Delta IV rocket, the H-IIA rocket, most stages of the European Ariane 5 , and the Space Launch System core and upper stages.

LOX and liquid methane (from liquefied natural gas ). Used on Zhuque-2 , Vulcan , and also planned for use on several rockets in development, including New Glenn , Soyuz-7 , SpaceX Starship , and Rocket Lab Neutron .

Current storable types [ edit ] Dinitrogen tetroxide (N 2 O 4 ) and hydrazine (N 2 H 4 ), MMH , or UDMH .  Used in military, orbital, and deep-space rockets because both liquids are storable for long periods at reasonable temperatures and pressures. N 2 O 4 /UDMH is the main fuel for the Proton rocket , older Long March rockets (LM 1-4), PSLV , Fregat , and Briz-M upper stages. This combination is hypergolic , making for attractively simple ignition sequences. The major inconvenience is that these propellants are highly toxic and require careful handling.

Monopropellants such as hydrogen peroxide , hydrazine , and nitrous oxide are primarily used for attitude control and spacecraft station-keeping where their long-term storability, simplicity of use, and ability to provide the tiny impulses needed outweighs their lower specific impulse as compared to bipropellants. Hydrogen peroxide is also used to drive the turbopumps on the first stage of the Soyuz launch vehicle.

[ citation needed ] Mixture ratio [ edit ] The theoretical exhaust velocity of a given propellant chemistry is proportional to the energy released per unit of propellant mass (specific energy).  In chemical rockets, unburned fuel or oxidizer represents the loss of chemical potential energy , which reduces the specific energy . However, most rockets run fuel-rich mixtures, which result in lower theoretical exhaust velocities.

[ 10 ] However, fuel-rich mixtures also have lower molecular weight exhaust species. The nozzle of the rocket converts the thermal energy of the propellants into directed kinetic energy . This conversion happens in the time it takes for the propellants to flow from the combustion chamber through the engine throat and out the nozzle, usually on the order of one millisecond. Molecules store thermal energy in rotation, vibration, and translation, of which only the latter can easily be used to add energy to the rocket stage. Molecules with fewer atoms (like CO and H 2 ) have fewer available vibrational and rotational modes than molecules with more atoms (like CO 2 and H 2 O). Consequently, smaller molecules store less vibrational and rotational energy for a given amount of heat input, resulting in more translation energy being available to be converted to kinetic energy. The resulting improvement in nozzle efficiency is large enough that real rocket engines improve their actual exhaust velocity by running rich mixtures with somewhat lower theoretical exhaust velocities.

[ 10 ] The effect of exhaust molecular weight on nozzle efficiency is most important for nozzles operating near sea level. High-expansion rockets operating in a vacuum see a much smaller effect, and so are run less rich.

LOX/hydrocarbon rockets are run slightly rich (O/F mass ratio of 3 rather than stoichiometric of 3.4 to 4) because the energy release per unit mass drops off quickly as the mixture ratio deviates from stoichiometric.  LOX/LH 2 rockets are run very rich (O/F mass ratio of 4 rather than stoichiometric 8) because hydrogen is so light that the energy release per unit mass of propellant drops very slowly with extra hydrogen.  In fact, LOX/LH 2 rockets are generally limited in how rich they run by the performance penalty of the mass of the extra hydrogen tankage instead of the underlying chemistry.

[ 10 ] Another reason for running rich is that off-stoichiometric mixtures burn cooler than stoichiometric mixtures, which makes engine cooling easier. Because fuel-rich combustion products are less chemically reactive ( corrosive ) than oxidizer-rich combustion products, a vast majority of rocket engines are designed to run fuel-rich. At least one exception exists: the Russian RD-180 preburner, which burns LOX and RP-1 at a ratio of 2.72.

Additionally, mixture ratios can be dynamic during launch. This can be exploited with designs that adjust the oxidizer-to-fuel ratio (along with overall thrust) throughout a flight to maximize overall system performance. For instance, during lift-off, thrust is more valuable than specific impulse, and careful adjustment of the O/F ratio may allow higher thrust levels. Once the rocket is away from the launchpad, the engine O/F ratio can be tuned for higher efficiency.

Propellant density [ edit ] Although liquid hydrogen gives a high I sp , its low density is a disadvantage: hydrogen occupies about 7 times more volume per kilogram than dense fuels such as kerosene. The fuel tankage, plumbing, and pump must be correspondingly larger. This increases the vehicle's dry mass, reducing performance. Liquid hydrogen is also relatively expensive to produce and store, and causes difficulties with design, manufacture, and operation of the vehicle. However, liquid hydrogen is extremely well-suited to upper stage use where I sp is at a premium and thrust-to-weight ratios are less relevant.

Dense-propellant launch vehicles have a higher takeoff mass due to lower I sp , but can more easily develop high takeoff thrusts due to the reduced volume of engine components. This means that vehicles with dense-fueled booster stages reach orbit earlier, minimizing losses due to gravity drag and reducing the effective delta-v requirement.

The proposed tripropellant rocket uses mainly dense fuel while at low altitude and switches across to hydrogen at higher altitude. Studies in the 1960s proposed single-stage-to-orbit vehicles using this technique.

[ 11 ] The Space Shuttle approximated this by using dense solid rocket boosters for the majority of the thrust during the first 120 seconds. The main engines burned a fuel-rich hydrogen and oxygen mixture, operating continuously throughout the launch but providing the majority of thrust at higher altitudes after SRB burnout.

Other chemical propellants [ edit ] Hybrid propellants [ edit ] Main article: Hybrid rocket Hybrid propellants consist of a storable liquid oxidizer used with a solid fuel, which retains most virtues of both liquids (high I SP ) and solids (simplicity).

A hybrid-propellant rocket usually has a solid fuel and a liquid or NEMA oxidizer.

[ clarification needed ] The fluid oxidizer can make it possible to throttle and restart the motor just like a liquid-fueled rocket.  Hybrid rockets can also be environmentally safer than solid rockets since some high-performance solid-phase oxidizers contain chlorine (specifically composites with ammonium perchlorate ), versus the more benign liquid oxygen or nitrous oxide often used in hybrids. This is only true for specific hybrid systems.  There have been hybrids which have used chlorine or fluorine compounds as oxidizers and hazardous materials such as beryllium compounds mixed into the solid fuel grain. Because just one constituent is a fluid, hybrids can be simpler than liquid rockets that depend on the rocket's acceleration to transport the fluid into the combustion chamber. Fewer fluids typically mean fewer and smaller piping systems, valves, and pumps.

Hybrid motors suffer two major drawbacks.  The first, shared with solid rocket motors, is that the casing around the fuel grain must be built to withstand the full combustion pressure and often extreme temperatures as well.  However, modern composite structures handle this problem well, and when used with nitrous oxide and a solid rubber propellant (HTPB), a relatively small percentage of fuel is needed anyway, so the combustion chamber is not especially large.

[ citation needed ] The primary remaining difficulty with hybrids is with mixing the propellants during the combustion process. In solid propellants, the oxidizer and fuel are mixed in a factory in carefully controlled conditions. Liquid propellants are generally mixed by the injector at the top of the combustion chamber, which directs many small swift-moving streams of fuel and oxidizer into one another.  Liquid-fueled rocket injector design has been studied at great length and still resists reliable performance prediction. In a hybrid motor, the mixing happens at the melting or evaporating surface of the fuel. The mixing is not a well-controlled process and generally, quite a lot of propellant is left unburned, [ 12 ] which limits the efficiency of the motor. The combustion rate of the fuel is largely determined by the oxidizer flux and exposed fuel surface area.  This combustion rate is not usually sufficient for high-power operations such as boost stages unless the surface area or oxidizer flux is high. Too-high oxidizer flux can lead to flooding and loss of flame-holding, which locally extinguishes the combustion. Surface area can be increased, typically by longer grains or multiple ports, but this can increase combustion chamber size, reduce grain strength, and reduce volumetric loading. Additionally, as the burn continues, the hole down the center of the grain (the "port") widens, and the mixture ratio tends to become more oxidizer-rich.

There has been much less development of hybrid motors than of solid and liquid motors.  For military use, ease of handling and maintenance have driven the use of solid rockets.  For orbital work, liquid fuels are more efficient than hybrids, and most development has concentrated there.  There has recently [ when?

] been an increase in hybrid motor development for nonmilitary suborbital work: Several universities have recently [ when?

] experimented with hybrid rockets.

Brigham Young University , the University of Utah , and Utah State University launched a student-designed rocket called Unity IV in 1995 which burned the solid fuel hydroxy-terminated polybutadiene (HTPB) with an oxidizer of gaseous oxygen, and in 2003 launched a larger version which burned HTPB with nitrous oxide.

Stanford University researches nitrous-oxide/ paraffin wax hybrid motors.

UCLA has launched hybrid rockets through an undergraduate student group since 2009 using HTPB.

[ 13 ] The Rochester Institute of Technology was building an HTPB hybrid rocket to launch small payloads into space and to several near-Earth objects.  Its first launch was in the Summer of 2007.

Scaled Composites SpaceShipOne , the first private crewed spacecraft, was powered by a hybrid rocket burning HTPB with nitrous oxide: RocketMotorOne . The hybrid rocket engine was manufactured by SpaceDev . SpaceDev partially based its motors on experimental data collected from the testing of AMROC's (American Rocket Company) motors at NASA's Stennis Space Center 's E1 test stand.

Gaseous propellants [ edit ] GOX (gaseous oxygen) was used as the oxidizer for the Buran program 's orbital maneuvering system.

Inert propellants [ edit ] Some rocket designs impart energy to their propellants with external energy sources. For example, water rockets use a compressed gas, typically air, to force the water reaction mass out of the rocket.

Ion thruster [ edit ] See also: Ion thruster Ion thrusters ionize a neutral gas and create thrust by accelerating the ions (or the plasma) by electric or magnetic fields.

Thermal rockets [ edit ] Main article: Thermal rocket Thermal rockets use inert propellants of low molecular weight that are chemically compatible with the heating mechanism at high temperatures.

Solar thermal rockets and nuclear thermal rockets typically propose to use liquid hydrogen for a specific impulse of around 600–900 seconds, or in some cases water that is exhausted as steam for a specific impulse of about 190 seconds. Nuclear thermal rockets use the heat of nuclear fission to add energy to the propellant. Some designs separate the nuclear fuel and working fluid, minimizing the potential for radioactive contamination, but nuclear fuel loss was a persistent problem during real-world testing programs. Solar thermal rockets use concentrated sunlight to heat a propellant, rather than using a nuclear reactor.

Compressed gas [ edit ] Main article: Cold gas thruster For low-performance applications, such as attitude control jets, compressed gases such as nitrogen have been employed.

[ 14 ] Energy is stored in the pressure of the inert gas. However, due to the low density of all practical gases and high mass of the pressure vessel required to contain it, compressed gases see little current use.

Nuclear plasma [ edit ] Main article: Nuclear pulse propulsion In Project Orion and other nuclear pulse propulsion proposals, the propellant would be plasma debris from a series of nuclear explosions .

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] ALICE (propellant) Trinitramide Timeline of hydrogen technologies Category:Rocket fuels Comparison: Aviation fuel Nuclear propulsion Ion thruster Crawford burner References [ edit ] ^ Pajares, Arturo; Govea-Alvarez, Paulina; Chen, Zhiyuan; Conti, Melchiorre; Michielsen, Bart (June 2025).

"From local resources to in situ propellant and chemical production on Mars. A possible pathway" .

Chemical Engineering Journal .

513 .

Bibcode : 2025ChEnJ.51362490P .

doi : 10.1016/j.cej.2025.162490 .

^ McGowen, Tom (2008).

Space Race: The Mission, the Men, the Moon . Enslow Pub Inc. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0766029101 .

^ Games, Alex (2007).

Balderdash & Piffle . BBC Books. pp.

199 .

ISBN 978-0563493365 .

^ Gref, Lynn G. (2010).

The Rise and Fall of American Technology . Algora. p. 95.

ISBN 978-0875867533 .

^ Greatrix, David R. (2012).

Powered Flight: The Engineering of Aerospace Propulsion . Springer. pp.

1 .

ISBN 978-1447124849 .

^ Mahaffey, James (2017).

Atomic Adventures: Secret Islands, Forgotten N-Rays, and Isotopic Murder - A Journey Through The Wild World of Nuclear Science . Pegasus Books.

ISBN 978-1681774213 .

^ M. D. Black, The Evolution of ROCKET TECHNOLOGY , 3rd Ed., 2012, payloadz.com ebook/History pp. 109-112 and pp. 114-119 ^ Jones, C.,  Masse, D.,  Glass, C.,  Wilhite, A., and  Walker, M. (2010), "PHARO: Propellant harvesting of atmospheric resources in orbit," IEEE Aerospace Conference.

^ "Toxic Propellant Hazards" on YouTube ^ a b c Rocket Propulsion , Robert A. Braeunig, Rocket and Space Technology , 2012.

^ "Robert Salkeld'S" . Pmview.com . Retrieved 2014-01-18 .

^ Ignition! An Informal History of Liquid Rocket Propellants , John D. Clark (Rutgers University Press, 1972), Chapter 12 ^ "Rocket Project at UCLA" .

^ Steyn, Willem H; Hashida, Yoshi (1999).

"An Attitude Control System for a Low-Cost Earth Observation Satellite with Orbit Maintenance Capability" .

Small Satellite Conference .

USU Small Satellite Conference Surrey Space Centre . Retrieved 18 October 2016 .

^ G.R. Schmidt; J.A. Bunornetti; P.J. Morton.

Nuclear Pulse Propulsion – Orion and Beyond (PDF) . 36th AIAA / ASME / SAE / ASEE Joint Propulsion Conference & Exhibit, Huntsville, Alabama, 16–19 July 2000. AlAA 2000-3856.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aircraft fuels .

Rocket Propellants (from Rocket & Space Technology ) Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐xwdw8
Cached time: 20250812015957
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.448 seconds
Real time usage: 0.564 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2621/1000000
Revision size: 29730/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50196/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4354/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 49073/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.294/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7336429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  492.095      1 -total
 30.82%  151.665      1 Template:Reflist
 16.60%   81.688      2 Template:Cite_journal
 15.39%   75.734      1 Template:Authority_control
 12.73%   62.628      1 Template:Short_description
 10.76%   52.959      1 Template:Refimprove
  9.98%   49.093      1 Template:Commonscat
  9.70%   47.730      1 Template:Ambox
  9.46%   46.550      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.16%   45.100      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30873089:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015957 and revision id 1298794700. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rocket_propellant&oldid=1298794700 " Categories : Chinese inventions Pyrotechnics Rocket propellants Rocket propulsion Rocket fuels Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2025 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 19:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rocket propellant 42 languages Add topic

