Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 INTA and other agencies 1.2 Recent times 2 Organization 3 Directors Toggle Directors subsection 3.1 List 4 Headquarters 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Agencia Espacial Española 5 languages Aragonés Català Español Français Galego Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish agency for Space affairs Spanish Space Agency Agencia Espacial Española Space agency overview Formed April 20, 2023 ; 2 years ago ( 2023-04-20 ) Jurisdiction Government of Spain Headquarters CREA Building José Galán Merino Street 6, 41015 Seville , Spain [ 1 ] Annual budget €700 million [ 2 ] Space agency executives Diana Morant , President Juan Carlos Cortés Pulido, Director Parent department Ministry of Science Ministry of Defence Website www .aee .gob .es The Agencia Espacial Española ( AEE ; [ 3 ] Spanish Space Agency ) is an agency of the Spanish government responsible for the Spanish space program. The agency was officially announced on 27 May 2021 [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and it became operational in 20 April 2023.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] This new agency aims to group in a single body all the space powers of the General State Administration , mainly those of the National Institute for Aerospace Technology (INTA, created in 1942) [ 8 ] and the Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology (CDTI, created in 1977).

History [ edit ] INTA and other agencies [ edit ] The concern of the Spanish government in relation to space issues appears in the 1940s, when the National Institute for Aerospace Technology (INTA) was created. However, this body focused its efforts on satellite and rocket programs, but has never been configured as a true space agency that would coordinate public and private efforts around a defined space program.

For this reason, in 1963 the National Space Research Commission (CONIE) was created, [ 9 ] initially attached to the Ministry of the Air and later to the Ministry of Defence .

This organization had three objectives: [ 9 ] To advise and propose to the Government the national programs of tests, achievements and research of the very high atmosphere and outer space, together with the necessary budgets for the development of such programs.

To distribute the programs among the various national Research Services or Institutes that specifically must participate in them, as well as promote, stimulate, direct and coordinate the activities of such Services and Institutes in what refers to the investigation of the very high atmosphere and from outer space.

To promote collaboration with international space organizations.

In 1986, the Promotion and General Coordination of Scientific and Technical Research Act dismissed the commission and it transferred its powers to two bodies: first, to the Interministerial Committee for Science and Technology (CICYT, a collective government body to coordinate this affairs) and, secondly, to the Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology (CDTI), which acts as a space project funding agency and coordinate the European Space Agency 's programs in Spain.

[ 10 ] Recent times [ edit ] In 2014, the Interministerial Committee for Space Industrial and Technological Policy was created to coordinate the interest of the several ministries that at that time had space responsibilities. This committee was made up of representatives from the Ministry of Defense, the Ministry of Finance and Public Administrations , the Ministry of Development , the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Tourism , the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness , the National Institute of Aerospace Technology, the Centre for the Development of Industrial Technology and the State Meteorological Agency (AEMET).

[ 11 ] In 2015, the government announced the creation of the agency to unify all space research activities, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] but this was not carried out.

With the arrival at the Ministry of Science of former astronaut Pedro Duque , the industry recovered the idea of creating a space agency , but the government discarded the idea again since they considered that creating more structures was not going to solve the problem and that the most logical was to continue betting on the European Space Agency (ESA).

[ 8 ] [ 14 ] Despite this, in 27 May 2021, the new Science Minister, Diana Morant , announced that the draft Science Act included the possibility of creating said body, and that, indeed, they would do so.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The new Science, Technology and Innovation Act was passed on 26 August 2022 [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and entered into force on 7 September 2022.

[ 17 ] Between 2021 and 2022 the government has been implementing measures in this regard, establishing a new National Security Strategy that considered vital to have a space agency, presenting the Science bill to Parliament and the creation in June 2022 of the Space Council, an interministerial working group in charge of drawing up the internal regulations and the initial action plan of the future Spanish Space Agency.

[ 18 ] The Space Council is chaired by a Special Commissioner, a position established in 2022 to coordinate all the public and private efforts to promote the space industry. The government also announced in June 2022 that the Spanish Air Force , the Army of the Air, would be renamed as Army of the Air and Space.

[ 19 ] As initially expected, the agency became operational in 2023.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] On 7 March 2023, the Council of Ministers approved the internal regulations of the Agency [ 22 ] and in 20 April 2023 the Agency's Governing Council held its constitutive session.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Organization [ edit ] The Spanish Space Agency is organized into three main bodies and several subordinated directorates: [ 23 ] The President. The presidency is exercised by the minister of Science and Innovation . The president represents the Agency, convenes and directs the meetings of the Governing Council, and proposes to it, after consulting with the minister of Defense, the appointment director of the Agency.

The Governing Council. It is the collective governing body of the Agency, made up of the president, the vice-presidents (there are four of them, one for each representative of the Ministries of Defence , Transport , Industry and Economy ), the director of the Agency, and other representatives of the General State Administration . There are members, with voice but no vote, representatives of the scientific field, the space industry sector and workers.

As a permanent working body, it has a Permanent Commission, headed by the director of the Agency.

The Director of the Agency, with the rank of undersecretary. It is the executive office of the Agency, on which the rest of the administrative bodies depend.

The General Secretariat . It is responsible for the management and administrative direction of human, economic, financial, technological, logistical and material resources. Likewise, it acts as the Secretary of the Governing Council.

The Directorate for Security and Planning . Its office holder is the first in the line of succession to the director of the Agency and this department is in charge of supporting the achievement of the goals of the different national strategies of which the Agency is a part, coordinating and supervising everything related to support to Aerospace Security, assists in the certification of space infrastructures, and it is responsible for everything related to the safe operation of Space Traffic and the monitoring of activities related to "Space Surveillance and Tracking" (SST) and " Space Situational Awareness " (SSA). Likewise, it is in charge of ensuring the environmental sustainability of space operations and cybersecurity , the protection of information, the accreditation of companies, premises and people who participate in classified projects, as well as protection against threats and risks, in Coordination with other bodies with competencies in this matter.

The Directorate for Programs and Industry , which is responsible for promoting, managing and coordinating the National Space Program, the technical and economic monitoring of existing programs, supervising the correct use of funds for the development of these programs and the national participation in all space programs. Also, it promote the space industry, analyzing the possible public investment in private initiatives of start-up companies.

The Directorate for Science, Technology and Innovation , which is responsible for identifying, promoting and developing space technologies in all areas, whether by carrying out its own programmes, financing others or helping to create and consolidate space technology-based companies.

The Directorate for Users, Services and Applications . This department is responsible for the promotion and development of space applications for public and private users and for the development of the downstream sector of the space industry.

The Space and Society Office , responsible for the promotion, through the appropriate communication and dissemination actions, of social interest in space and in projects, science, research, actions and others that derive from the Agency's powers.

Likewise, to ensure the proper functioning of the Agency, there is a Control Commission that collects information and transmits it to the Governing Council.

Finally, there are several advisory and support bodies to assist the different departments of the Agency.

Directors [ edit ] From March 2023 to December 2023, Miguel Belló Mora, the government commissioner for aerospace projects of the Ministry of Science served as acting director. After leaving both offices, the director for Security and Planning of the agency, brigadier general Juan Carlos Sánchez Delgado, assumed as acting director.

[ 24 ] Finally, in May 2024 the aerospace engineer Juan Carlos Cortés Pulido, then director for Programs and Industry of the agency, was appointed as the first director.

[ 25 ] List [ edit ] Denotes an Acting Director N.º Picture Name Start End Prime Minister Monarch - Miguel Belló Mora (1961–) 8 March 2023 28 December 2023 Pedro Sánchez (2018-present) Felipe VI (2014-present) - Brigadier general Juan Carlos Sánchez Delgado 28 December 2023 15 May 2024 1.ª Juan Carlos Cortés Pulido 15 May 2024 Incumbent Headquarters [ edit ] The Spanish prime minister disclosed the newly created state agency to be headquartered outside of the capital, Madrid, pursuant to the wider administrative decentralization plan devised by the government.

[ 26 ] The Government of Spain however announced that it would positively assess places located less than an hour away from an international airport, with connections to Brussels and Paris, and preferably to Amsterdam , Rome, Frankfurt , Prague, and Toulouse too, cited as the most frequent destinations for work trips among agency staff members.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The following municipalities submitted bids to host the headquarters: Huelva , Seville , Teruel , Elche , Las Palmas de Gran Canaria , Cabanillas del Campo , Yebes , Puertollano , Ciudad Real , León , Palencia , Cebreros , San Javier , Tres Cantos , Robledo de Chavela , and L'Hospitalet de Llobregat .

[ 29 ] On 5 December 2022, the Government of Spain, via its spokesperson Isabel Rodríguez, disclosed the city of Seville as the location for the headquarters of the agency, [ 1 ] tentatively intended to be operational in early 2023.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "La sede de la Agencia Espacial Española estará en Sevilla y la de Inteligencia Artificial, en A Coruña" .

La Vanguardia (in Spanish). 5 December 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 .

^ InfoEspacial.

"La Agencia Espacial Española tendrá un presupuesto de 500 millones y su sede se elegirá en noviembre" .

Infoespacial (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ a b "Sevilla será la sede de la Agencia Espacial Española y A Coruña albergará la de Inteligencia Artificial" .

rtve.es . 5 December 2022.

^ a b Limón, Raúl (27 May 2021).

"El Gobierno anuncia la creación de una agencia espacial española" .

El País (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ a b "El Gobierno anuncia por sorpresa la creación de una Agencia Espacial Española que Duque había descartado" .

ELMUNDO (in Spanish). 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ a b Perales, Natalia (20 April 2023).

"La Agencia Espacial Española "despega" en Sevilla con el reto de impulsar la primera ley del espacio" .

cadena SER (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ a b "La Agencia Espacial Española arranca en Sevilla con la primera reunión del consejo rector" .

sevilla (in Spanish). 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ a b Andreu, Abraham.

"Why Spain doesn't have its own space agency" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ a b "Ley 47/1963, de 8 de julio, por la que se crea la Comisión Nacional de Investigación del Espacio" .

www.boe.es (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ Jefatura del Estado (18 April 1986), Ley 13/1986, de 14 de abril, de Fomento y Coordinación General de la Investigación Científica y Técnica , pp.

13767– 13771 , retrieved 27 June 2022 ^ InfoEspacial.

"La Agencia Espacial Española: No hay tiempo que perder" .

Infoespacial (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ InfoEspacial.

"España tendrá su propia agencia espacial" .

Infoespacial (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ Teknautas (12 June 2015).

"España tendrá su propia agencia espacial" .

elconfidencial.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ Peris, Guillermo Peris.

"Duque: "Cuento con la complicidad del presidente porque la ciencia es una de las prioridades de este Gobierno" " .

Diario Siglo XXI (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ "Spain votes through overhaul of research careers" .

Science|Business . Retrieved 11 September 2022 .

^ Ansede, Manuel (25 August 2022).

"Aprobada la Ley de la Ciencia sin los contratos temporales exigidos por centros de excelencia" .

El País (in Spanish) . Retrieved 11 September 2022 .

^ infoLibre (7 September 2022).

"La Ley de la Ciencia entra en vigor este miércoles con el objetivo de reducir la temporalidad" .

infoLibre (in Spanish) . Retrieved 11 September 2022 .

^ InfoEspacial.

"Sánchez presenta el Perte aeroespacial y anuncia la creación de un Consejo que acelere la Agencia Española" .

Infoespacial (in Spanish) . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ "El Ejército del Aire cambia de nombre tras 83 años y pasa a llamarse Ejército del Aire y del Espacio" .

El Español (in Spanish). 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ "Sánchez confirma que la Agencia Espacial Española estará operativa en 2023 y su sede fuera de Madrid" . Europa Press. 9 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ "La Agencia Espacial Española será el primer organismo nuevo que el Gobierno ubicará fuera de Madrid dentro del plan de desconcentración" .

La Vanguardia (in Spanish). 14 June 2022 . Retrieved 27 June 2022 .

^ SER, Cadena (7 March 2023).

"La Agencia Espacial Española ya es una realidad" .

cadena SER (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 7 March 2023 .

^ Ministry of the Presidency (8 March 2023), Real Decreto 158/2023, de 7 de marzo, por el que se aprueba el Estatuto de la Agencia Estatal "Agencia Espacial Española" (in Spanish), pp.

34514– 34549 , retrieved 8 March 2023 ^ Cueto, Cristina (29 December 2023).

"Un general del Aire dirigirá de forma provisional la Agencia Espacial Española" .

Diario de Sevilla (in Spanish) . Retrieved 25 June 2024 .

^ "La Agencia Espacial Española nombra director a Juan Carlos Cortés, vicepresidente del ente europeo" . Europa Press. 15 May 2024 . Retrieved 25 June 2024 .

^ "Sánchez confirma que la Agencia Espacial Española estará operativa en 2023 y su sede fuera de Madrid" .

Europa Press . 9 June 2022.

^ "Veinte localidades aspiran a albergar la Agencia Espacial Española, entre ellas, Teruel" .

Heraldo de Aragón . 6 November 2022.

^ "El Gobierno valorará que la futura sede de la Agencia Espacial esté a menos de una hora de un aeropuerto internacional" .

Europa Press . 5 October 2022.

^ "¿Cuáles son los 20 municipios que aspiran a albergar la Agencia Espacial Española?" .

Diario de Sevilla . 6 November 2022.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Space program of Spain Satellites Communications Spainsat / XTAR-LANT XTAR-EUR Spainsat NG Amazonas 1 2 3 4A 4B (cancelled) 5 Hispasat 1A 1B 1C 1D AG1 1F Lume-1 Earth observation Deimos 1 2 Paz Ingenio Science & technology Intasat Minisat 01 Nanosat 1 1B UPM-Sat 1 2 Xatcobeo OPTOS Rockets Suborbital Argo INTA 100 255 300 Miura 1 Orbital Capricornio Bloostar Miura 5 Miura Next Meso Tracking and launch sites El Arenosillo Gando Air Base El Hierro (proposed) Madrid Deep Space Communications Complex Maspalomas Station Cebreros Station Villafranca Station Other facilities PLD Space Propulsion Test Facilities Institutions Agencia Espacial Española Instituto Nacional de Técnica Aeroespacial Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Commercial space industry PLD Space Pangea Aerospace Zero 2 Infinity Alén Space Hispasat Hisdesat Astronauts Pedro Duque Pablo Álvarez Fernández v t e Departments and agencies of the Government of Spain Cabinet President of the Government of Spain First Vice President of the Government of Spain Second Vice President of the Government of Spain Third Vice President of the Government of Spain Office of the Prime Minister Minister of Foreign Affairs, European Union and Cooperation Ministry of the Presidency, Justice and Relations with the Cortes Ministry of Defence Minister of Finance Ministry of the Interior Minister of Transport and Sustainable Mobility Minister of Education, Vocational Training and Sports Minister of Labour and Social Economy Minister of Industry and Tourism Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Minister of Territorial Policy and Democratic Memory Minister for the Ecological Transition and the Demographic Challenge Minister of Housing and Urban Agenda Ministry of Culture Minister of Economy, Trade and Business Ministry of Health Minister of Social Rights, Consumer Affairs and 2030 Agenda Minister of Science, Innovation and Universities Ministry of Equality Ministry of Inclusion, Social Security and Migration Ministry for the Digital Transformation and of the Civil Service Ministry of Youth and Children Spokesperson of the Government Inactive Fourth Vice President of the Government of Spain Ministry of Supply Ministry of Communications Ministry of Overseas Ministry of Information and Tourism Ministry of Consumer Affairs Ministry of Economy and Finance Ministry of Energy, Tourism and Digital Agenda Ministry of Justice Ministry of the Presidency Ministry of Trade Ministry of Transport Ministry of Universities Agencies Bank of Spain National Intelligence Centre National Cryptologic Center Spanish National Research Council National Statistics Institute National Securities Market Commission National Transplant Organization State Meteorological Agency State Vehicle Fleet Spanish Data Protection Agency Spanish Agency for International Development Cooperation Spanish Tax Agency National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation Boletín Oficial del Estado Railway Safety Agency Spanish Aviation Safety and Security Agency Evaluation and Quality Agency State Research Agency Spanish Anti-Doping Agency Department of Homeland Security Intelligence Center for Counter-Terrorism and Organized Crime Maritime Safety and Rescue Society National Sports Council Spanish Agency of Medicines and Medical Devices Spanish Agency for Food Safety and Nutrition Food Information and Control Agency Tourism Institute of Spain National Institute for Aerospace Technology Directorate-General for Traffic Labour and Social Security Inspectorate National Institute for Safety and Health at Work Spanish Patent and Trademark Office Spanish Agricultural Guarantee Fund Centre for Political and Constitutional Studies Centre for Sociological Research Patrimonio Nacional Instituto Cervantes National Parks Autonomous Agency Institute for the Elderly and Social Services Institute of Youth Carlos III Health Institute Centre for Energy, Environmental and Technological Research Institute of Women Independent Authority for Fiscal Responsibility Nuclear Safety Council Institute of Cinematography and Audiovisual Arts Spanish Space Agency National Commission on Markets and Competition Spanish Executive Resolution Authority Council for Transparency and Good Governance Spanish Agency for the Supervision of Artificial Intelligence National Institute of Public Administration Commission for the Tobacco Market v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agencia_Espacial_Española&oldid=1260071348 " Categories : Science and technology in Spain Space agencies Government agencies of Spain Space program of Spain Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2023 This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 17:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agencia Espacial Española 5 languages Add topic

