Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Constructivism and sciences Toggle Constructivism and sciences subsection 1.1 Social constructivism in sociology 1.2 Constructivism in philosophy of science 1.3 Constructivism and psychology 1.4 Constructivism and education 2 Constructivist approaches Toggle Constructivist approaches subsection 2.1 Critical constructivism 2.2 Cultural constructivism 2.3 Genetic epistemology 2.4 Radical constructivism 2.5 Relational constructivism 2.6 Social constructivism 3 Criticisms 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Constructivism (philosophy of science) 17 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português Русский Svenska Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch in philosophy of science This article is about the view in the philosophy of science. For other uses of the term, see Constructivism .

This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( July 2020 ) Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Constructivism is a view in the philosophy of science that maintains that scientific knowledge is constructed by the scientific community , which seeks to measure and construct models of the natural world. According to constructivists, natural science consists of mental constructs that aim to explain sensory experiences and measurements, and that there is no single valid methodology in science but rather a diversity of useful methods.

[ 1 ] They also hold that the world is independent of human minds, but knowledge of the world is always a human and social construction .

[ 2 ] Constructivism opposes the philosophy of objectivism , embracing the belief that human beings can come to know the truth about the natural world not mediated by scientific approximations with different degrees of validity and accuracy .

Constructivism and sciences [ edit ] Social constructivism in sociology [ edit ] Main article: Social constructivism One version of social constructivism contends that categories of knowledge and reality are actively created by social relationships and interactions. These interactions also alter the way in which scientific episteme is organized.

Social activity presupposes human interaction, and in the case of social construction, utilizing semiotic resources ( meaning-making and signifying) with reference to social structures and institutions. Several traditions use the term Social Constructivism : psychology (after Lev Vygotsky ), sociology (after Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann , themselves influenced by Alfred Schütz ), sociology of knowledge ( David Bloor ), sociology of mathematics ( Sal Restivo ), philosophy of mathematics ( Paul Ernest ).

Ludwig Wittgenstein 's later philosophy can be seen as a foundation for social constructivism , with its key theoretical concepts of language games embedded in forms of life .

Constructivism in philosophy of science [ edit ] Thomas Kuhn argued that changes in scientists' views of reality not only contain subjective elements but result from group dynamics, "revolutions" in scientific practice, and changes in "paradigms" .

[ 3 ] As an example, Kuhn suggested that the Sun-centric Copernican "revolution" replaced the Earth-centric views of Ptolemy not because of empirical failures but because of a new "paradigm" that exerted control over what scientists felt to be the more fruitful way to pursue their goals.

But paradigm debates are not really about relative problem-solving ability, though for good reasons they are usually couched in those terms. Instead, the issue is which paradigm should in future guide research on problems many of which neither competitor can yet claim to resolve completely. A decision between alternate ways of practicing science is called for, and in the circumstances that decision must be based less on past achievement than on future promise. ... A decision of that kind can only be made on faith.

— Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , pp 157–8 The view of reality as accessible only through models was called model-dependent realism by Stephen Hawking and Leonard Mlodinow .

[ 4 ] While not rejecting an independent reality, model-dependent realism says that we can know only an approximation of it provided by the intermediary of models.

[ 5 ] These models evolve over time as guided by scientific inspiration and experiments.

In the field of the social sciences, constructivism as an epistemology urges that researchers reflect upon the paradigms that may be underpinning their research, and in the light of this that they become more open to considering other ways of interpreting any results of the research. Furthermore, the focus is on presenting results as negotiable constructs rather than as models that aim to "represent" social realities more or less accurately. Norma Romm, in her book Accountability in Social Research (2001), argues that social researchers can earn trust from participants and wider audiences insofar as they adopt this orientation and invite inputs from others regarding their inquiry practices and the results thereof.

Constructivism and psychology [ edit ] Main article: Constructivism (psychological school) In psychology , constructivism refers to many schools of thought that, though extraordinarily different in their techniques (applied in fields such as education and psychotherapy ), are all connected by a common critique of previous standard objectivist approaches. Constructivist psychology schools share assumptions about the active constructive nature of human knowledge. In particular, the critique is aimed at the "associationist" postulate of empiricism, "by which the mind is conceived as a passive system that gathers its contents from its environment and, through the act of knowing, produces a copy of the order of reality." [ 6 ] : 16 In contrast, "constructivism is an epistemological premise grounded on the assertion that, in the act of knowing, it is the human mind that actively gives meaning and order to that reality to which it is responding".

[ 6 ] : 16 The constructivist psychologies theorize about and investigate how human beings create systems for meaningfully understanding their worlds and experiences.

[ 7 ] Constructivism and education [ edit ] Main article: Constructivism (philosophy of education) Joe L. Kincheloe has published numerous social and educational books on critical constructivism (2001, 2005, 2008), a version of constructivist epistemology that places emphasis on the exaggerated influence of political and cultural power in the construction of knowledge, consciousness, and views of reality. In the contemporary mediated electronic era, Kincheloe argues, dominant modes of power have never exerted such influence on human affairs. Coming from a critical pedagogical perspective, Kincheloe argues that understanding a critical constructivist epistemology is central to becoming an educated person and to the institution of just social change.

Kincheloe's characteristics of critical constructivism: Knowledge is socially constructed: World and information co-construct one another Consciousness is a social construction Political struggles: Power plays an exaggerated role in the production of knowledge and consciousness The necessity of understanding consciousness—even though it does not lend itself to traditional reductionistic modes of measurability The importance of uniting logic and emotion in the process of knowledge and producing knowledge The inseparability of the knower and the known The centrality of the perspectives of oppressed peoples—the value of the insights of those who have suffered as the result of existing social arrangements The existence of multiple realities: Making sense of a world far more complex than we originally imagined Becoming humble knowledge workers: Understanding our location in the tangled web of reality Standpoint epistemology: Locating ourselves in the web of reality, we are better equipped to produce our own knowledge Constructing practical knowledge for critical social action Complexity: Overcoming reductionism Knowledge is always entrenched in a larger process The centrality of interpretation: Critical hermeneutics The new frontier of classroom knowledge: Personal experiences intersecting with pluriversal information Constructing new ways of being human: Critical ontology Constructivist approaches [ edit ] Critical constructivism [ edit ] A series of articles published in the journal Critical Inquiry (1991) served as a manifesto for the movement of critical constructivism in various disciplines, including the natural sciences .   Not only truth and reality, but also " evidence ", " document ", " experience ", " fact ", "proof", and other central categories of empirical research (in physics , biology , statistics , history , law , etc.) reveal their contingent character as a social and ideological construction. Thus, a "realist" or "rationalist" interpretation is subjected to criticism.  Kincheloe's political and pedagogical notion (above) has emerged as a central articulation of the concept.

Cultural constructivism [ edit ] Cultural constructivism asserts that knowledge and reality are a product of their cultural context, meaning that two independent cultures will likely form different observational methodologies.

Genetic epistemology [ edit ] Main article: Genetic epistemology James Mark Baldwin invented this expression, which was later popularized by Jean Piaget . From 1955 to 1980, Piaget was Director of the International Centre for Genetic Epistemology in Geneva.

Radical constructivism [ edit ] Main article: Radical constructivism Ernst von Glasersfeld was a prominent proponent of radical constructivism. This claims that knowledge is not a commodity that is transported from one mind into another. Rather, it is up to the individual to "link up" specific interpretations of experiences and ideas with their own reference of what is possible and viable. That is, the process of constructing knowledge, of understanding, is dependent on the individual's subjective interpretation of their active experience, not what "actually" occurs. Understanding and acting are seen by radical constructivists not as dualistic processes but "circularly conjoined".

[ 8 ] Radical constructivism is closely related to second-order cybernetics .

[ 9 ] Constructivist Foundations is a free online journal publishing peer-reviewed articles on radical constructivism by researchers from multiple domains.

Relational constructivism [ edit ] Main article: Relational constructivism Relational constructivism can be perceived as a relational consequence of radical constructivism. In contrary to social constructivism, it picks up the epistemological threads. It maintains the radical constructivist idea that humans cannot overcome their limited conditions of reception (i.e., self-referentially operating cognition ). Therefore, humans are not able to come to objective conclusions about the world.

In spite of the subjectivity of human constructions of reality, relational constructivism focuses on the relational conditions applying to human perceptional processes.

Björn Kraus puts it in a nutshell: It is substantial for relational constructivism that it basically originates from an epistemological point of view, thus from the subject and its construction processes. Coming from this perspective it then focusses on the (not only social, but also material) relations under which these cognitive construction processes are performed. Consequently, it's not only about social construction processes, but about cognitive construction processes performed under certain relational conditions.

[ 10 ] Social constructivism [ edit ] Main article: Social constructivism Criticisms [ edit ] Numerous criticisms have been levelled at Constructivism. The most common one is that it either explicitly advocates or implicitly reduces to relativism .

Another criticism of constructivism is that it holds that the concepts of two different social formations be entirely different and incommensurate. This being the case, it is impossible to make comparative judgments about statements made according to each worldview. This is because the criteria of judgment will themselves have to be based on some worldview or other. If this is the case, then it brings into question how communication between them about the truth or falsity of any given statement could be established.

The Wittgensteinian philosopher Gavin Kitching [ 11 ] argues that constructivists usually implicitly presuppose a deterministic view of language, which severely constrains the minds and use of words by members of societies: they are not just "constructed" by language on this view but are literally "determined" by it. Kitching notes the contradiction here: somehow, the advocate of constructivism is not similarly constrained. While other individuals are controlled by the dominant concepts of society, the advocate of constructivism can transcend these concepts and see through them.

See also [ edit ] Autopoiesis Consensus reality Constructivism in international relations Cultural pluralism Epistemological pluralism Tinkerbell effect Map–territory relation Meaning making Metacognition Ontological pluralism Personal construct psychology Perspectivism Pragmatism References [ edit ] ^ (Schofield, n.d.) Critical Theory and Constructivism Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Crotty, M. 1998.

The Foundations of Social Research: Meaning and Perspective in the Research Process , Sage.

^ Thomas S Kuhn (1970).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (PDF) (2nd ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0226458121 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-03-28.

A paradigm governs, in the first instance, not a subject matter but rather a group of practitioners. Any study ... must begin by locating the responsible group or groups.

^ Eugene V. Koonin (2011).

The Logic of Chance: The Nature and Origin of Biological Evolution . FT Press Science, a division of Pearson Education, Inc. p. 427.

ISBN 978-0132623179 .

^ Stephen Hawking; Leonard Mlodinow (2011).

The Grand Design . Random House Digital, Inc. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0553907070 .

We shall adopt an approach that we call model-dependent realism. It is based on the idea that our brains interpret the input from our sensory organs by making a model of the world. When such a model is successful at explaining events, we tend to attribute to it, and to the elements and concepts that constitute it, the quality of reality or absolute truth. But there may be different ways in which one could model the same physical situation, with each employing different fundamental elements and concepts. If two such ...theories or models accurately predict the same events, one cannot be said to be more real than the other; rather we are free to use whichever model is the most convenient.

^ a b Balbi, Juan (2008).

"Epistemological and theoretical foundations of constructivist cognitive therapies: post-rationalist developments" (PDF) .

Dialogues in Philosophy, Mental and Neuro Sciences .

1 (1): 15– 27.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-07-08 . Retrieved 2010-10-19 .

^ Raskin, Jonathan D. (Spring 2002).

"Constructivism in psychology: personal construct psychology, radical constructivism, and social constructionism" (PDF) .

American Communication Journal .

5 (3).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-02-09 . Retrieved 2009-02-07 .

^ "Radical Constructivism" .

www.radicalconstructivism.com .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2018 . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ Glanville, R. (2013). Radical constructivism = second order cybernetics. Cybernetics and Human Knowing, 19(4), 27-42.

^ Björn Kraus: Plädoyer für den Relationalen Konstruktivismus und eine Relationale Soziale Arbeit. in Forum Sozial (2017) 1 pp. 29-35, "Plädoyer für den Relationalen Konstruktivismus und eine Relationale Soziale Arbeit" .

Archived from the original on 2017-10-15 . Retrieved 2017-06-07 .

^ Kitching, G. 2008.

The Trouble with Theory: The Educational Costs of Postmodernism . Penn State University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Devitt, M. 1997.

Realism and Truth , Princeton University Press.

Gillett, E. 1998. "Relativism and the Social-constructivist Paradigm", Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology , Vol.5, No.1, pp. 37–48 Ernst von Glasersfeld 1987.

The construction of knowledge, Contributions to conceptual semantics .

Ernst von Glasersfeld 1995.

Radical constructivism: A way of knowing and learning .

Joe L. Kincheloe 2001.

Getting beyond the Facts: Teaching Social Studies/Social Science in the Twenty-First Century , NY: Peter Lang.

Joe L. Kincheloe 2005.

Critical Constructivism Primer , NY: Peter Lang.

Joe L. Kincheloe 2008.

Knowledge and Critical Pedagogy , Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.

Kitching, G. 2008.

The Trouble with Theory: The Educational Costs of Postmodernism , Penn State University Press.

Björn Kraus 2014: Introducing a model for analyzing the possibilities of power, help and control. In: Social Work and Society. International Online Journal. Retrieved 3 April 2019.( http://www.socwork.net/sws/article/view/393 ) Björn Kraus 2015: The Life We Live and the Life We Experience: Introducing the Epistemological Difference between "Lifeworld" (Lebenswelt) and "Life Conditions" (Lebenslage). In: Social Work and Society. International Online Journal. Retrieved 27 August 2018.( http://www.socwork.net/sws/article/view/438 ).

Björn Kraus 2019: Relational constructivism and relational social work. In: Webb, Stephen, A. (edt.) The Routledge Handbook of Critical Social Work. Routledge international Handbooks. London and New York: Taylor & Francis Ltd.

Friedrich Kratochwil : Constructivism: what it is (not) and how it matters, in Donatella della Porta & Michael Keating (eds.) 2008, Approaches and Methodologies in the Social Sciences: A Pluralist Perspective , Cambridge University Press, 80–98.

Mariyani-Squire, E. 1999. "Social Constructivism: A flawed Debate over Conceptual Foundations", Capitalism, Nature, Socialism , vol.10, no.4, pp. 97–125 Matthews, M.R. (ed.) 1998.

Constructivism in Science Education: A Philosophical Examination , Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Edgar Morin 1986, La Méthode,  Tome 3, La Connaissance de la connaissance .

Nola, R. 1997. "Constructivism in Science and in Science Education: A Philosophical Critique", Science & Education , Vol.6, no.1-2, pp. 55–83.

Jean Piaget (ed.) 1967.

Logique et connaissance scientifique , Encyclopédie de la Pléiade, vol. 22. Editions Gallimard.

Herbert A. Simon 1969.

The Sciences of the Artificial (3rd Edition MIT Press 1996).

Slezak, P. 2000. "A Critique of Radical Social Constructivism", in D.C. Philips, (ed.) 2000, Constructivism in Education: Opinions and Second Opinions on Controversial Issues , The University of Chicago Press.

Suchting, W.A. 1992. "Constructivism Deconstructed", Science & Education , vol.1, no.3, pp. 223–254 Paul Watzlawick 1984.

The Invented Reality: How Do We Know What We Believe We Know? (Contributions to Constructivism) , W W. Norton.

Tom Rockmore 2008.

On Constructivist Epistemology .

Romm, N.R.A. 2001.

Accountability in Social Research , Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.

https://www.springer.com/social+sciences/book/978-0-306-46564-2 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Constructivist epistemology .

Journal of Constructivist Psychology Radical Constructivism Constructivist Foundations v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Truth General Statement Propositions Truth-bearer Truth-maker Theories Coherence Consensus Constructivist Correspondence Deflationary Epistemic Pluralist Pragmatic Redundancy Semantic v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐27pc9
Cached time: 20250812015508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.545 seconds
Real time usage: 0.703 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2659/1000000
Revision size: 21824/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 113432/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3034/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84872/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.325/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7333600/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  550.610      1 -total
 24.30%  133.786      1 Template:Reflist
 15.68%   86.332      3 Template:Cite_book
 15.10%   83.168      1 Template:Research
 14.55%   80.088      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.37%   68.093      5 Template:Navbox
 11.03%   60.724      1 Template:Short_description
  8.33%   45.863      1 Template:Cleanup_rewrite
  7.55%   41.569      1 Template:Ambox
  7.45%   41.045      1 Template:Epistemology Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:357796:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015508 and revision id 1282467084. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Constructivism_(philosophy_of_science)&oldid=1282467084 " Categories : Epistemological theories Epistemology of science Metatheory of science Philosophical analogies Social constructionism Social epistemology Systems theory Theories of truth Constructivism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from July 2020 All articles needing rewrite This page was last edited on 26 March 2025, at 16:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Constructivism (philosophy of science) 17 languages Add topic

