Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable individuals 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Maltese Australians 1 language Malti Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian citizens who are fully or partially of Maltese descent Ethnic group Maltese Australians Awstraljani Maltin Total population 198,989 (by ancestry, 2021 ) [ 1 ] ( 0.78% of the Australian population ) 35,413 (by birth, 2021 ) Languages English · Maltralian · Italian Religion Roman Catholicism Related ethnic groups Maltese diaspora Maltese Australians are Australian citizens who are fully or partially of Maltese descent or Malta -born persons who reside in Australia. According to the 2021 Census, there were 198,989	 people of Maltese descent in Australia and 35,413 Malta-born people residing in the country at the moment of the census.

[ 2 ] While most of them emigrated to Australia from Malta , a number emigrated from the United Kingdom where they had settled after having been expelled from Egypt , as holders of British passports, during the Suez Crisis .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Migrants from Malta and Gozo working in sugar -cane farms in Mackay, Queensland , 1910s Maltese immigrants land in Sydney from the SS Partizanka , 1940s The first Maltese to arrive in Australia was possibly transportee John Pace in June 1790, though it is not clear if he was transported from Malta or if he was Maltese at all.

[ 4 ] The first certain Maltese to arrive in Australia were convicts around 1810.

[ 5 ] The first Maltese immigrant (as opposed to convict or bonded servant ) is thought to have been Antonio Azzopardi who arrived in 1838.

[ 6 ] Many attempts were made at organised mass migration throughout the 19th century but it was only in 1883 the first group of 70 labourers (and nine stowaways) arrived.

Historically, Maltese immigrants were subject to the White Australia policy . In 1916, a group of 214 Maltese agricultural labourers left for Melbourne aboard a French ship, due to arrive on the date of the conscription referendum . When this became known in Australia, supporters of the "No" vote claimed that the government was importing cheap "coloured labour" to replace Australian workers conscripted for overseas service. The Maltese were called "coloured job jumpers" and the Australian Workers' Union described them as a "black menace". Realising the political danger of allowing the Maltese to land, Prime Minister Billy Hughes – who supported the "Yes" vote – refused them entry under the Immigration Restriction Act 1901 , and they were forced to land in Nouméa , New Caledonia . This decision was controversial, as the Maltese were popular among ex-servicemen due to their support for the war effort. After three months, they were allowed to re-enter Australia, but only after being detained upon arrival for another two weeks. The migrants became known in Malta as "il-tfal ta Billy Hughes" ("the children of Billy Hughes").

[ 7 ] Group and mass migration gradually picked up, first, to Queensland and, after World War I , to Sydney whose automobile industry drew many. Immigration was not without difficulty as Maltese workers tended to be looked down upon and restrictions and quotas were applied. A significant percentage of the Maltese immigrants had intended to stay only temporarily for work but many settled in Australia permanently. Maltese immigration to Australia reached its peak during the 1960s.

[ 8 ] The majority of Maltese immigrants reside in Melbourne's western suburbs, firstly in the older suburbs of Sunshine and St Albans , before moving to newer neighbouring suburbs such as Caroline Springs , Taylors Lakes and Hillside , the latter having the largest rate of Maltese ancestry in Melbourne.

[ 9 ] Maltese are numerous as well in Sydney's western suburbs of Greystanes and Horsley Park . The Maltese, as in their home country, are predominantly Roman Catholic.

[ 10 ] One of the first women to migrate from Malta to Australia was Carmela Sant in 1915. The move was prompted by her husband Giuseppe Ellul, who had migrated in 1913. Giuseppe Ellul was a stonemason in Mosta before moving to Australia to commence a successful career in sugar cane and dairy farming in Mackay, Queensland. In 1916 the couple gave birth to the first born Maltese Australian, Joseph Ellul.

259 Maltese boys and 51 Maltese girls were sent alone to Catholic institutions in Western and South Australia between 1950 and 1965, following negotiations between the Maltese and Western Australian governments which had started in 1928 when Perth -based Maltese priest Father Raphael Pace urged the Christian Brothers to include Maltese children in its emerging migration scheme. Instead of receiving a better education as their Maltese parents hoped for, many of them were exploited for building works, and were never scholarised in English, while also forgetting their own Maltese language. Similar to other children living with the Christian Brother, the children were abused and measures were taken to not allow or limit contact with their family members in Malta.

[ 11 ] Notable individuals [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Maltese Australians" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

Adam Agius : Singer, guitarist and founding member of the heavy metal band Alchemist .

Jason Agius : Actor. Also of Italian descent.

Daniel Amalm . Actor and musician. Also of Swedish descent.

Brendan Aquilina : Lawn bowler .

John Aquilina : Politician.

Thomas Aquilina : Association footballer .

Jayden Attard : Australian rules footballer .

Monica Attard : Journalist and former host of Media Watch .

Jayne Azzopardi : [ 12 ] Journalist and television personality.

Steve Balbi : Musician.

Shaun Bonétt : [ 13 ] Entrepreneur.

Luke Branighan : Rugby League player.

Nicky Bomba : Musician.

Tony Briffa : [ 14 ] Politician and first known intersex mayor and public officeholder in the world.

Jake Brimmer : [ 15 ] Association footballer.

Tony Buhagiar : Australian rules footballer.

Trent Buhagiar : Association footballer.

John Buttigieg : Rugby League player. Also of Aboriginal descent.

Mark Buttigieg : Politician.

Jaryd Cachia : Australian rules footballer.

Ashley Callus : Swimmer Joe Camilleri : Musician.

Joseph Camilleri : Social scientist and philosopher.

Leslie Camilleri : [ 16 ] Criminal involved in the 1997 Bega schoolgirl murders .

Terry Camilleri : Actor.

Paul Capsis : [ 17 ] Singer, actor and cabaret performer. Also of Greek descent.

Troy Cassar-Daley : [ 18 ] Country singer-songwriter. Also of Aboriginal descent.

Tyler Cassel : Rugby League player. Also of Scottish descent.

Josh Cavallo : [ 19 ] Association footballer and first openly gay player in the A-League . Also of Italian descent.

Nicholas D'Agostino : Association footballer. Also of Italian descent.

Robyn Denholm ( née Sammut : Tesla chairman. Also of Italian and Scottish descent.

Lou Drofenik : Novelist and academic.

Laura Dundovic : Model. Also of Croatian descent.

Alby Falzon : Filmmaker, photographer and publisher.

Dan Falzon : Actor.

Joey Falzon : Association footballer.

Michael Falzon : [ 20 ] Musical theatre/rock tenor, actor and producer Adam Farrugia : [ 21 ] 2019 Love Island Australia contestant.

Amanda Farrugia : Australian rules footballer.

Amelia Farrugia : Soprano opera singer.

Jeff Fenech : Boxer.

Mario Fenech : Rugby League player.

Paul Fenech : Actor.

Darren Gauci : Horse Jockey.

Natalie Gauci : [ 22 ] Singer and 2007 Australian Idol winner. Also of Italian descent.

Ryan Gambin : Swimmer.

Matt Gafa : Rugby League player.

Ben Galea : Rugby League player.

Danny Galea : Rugby League player.

James Galea : Magician and actor.

Rob Galea :  Roman Catholic priest and contemporary Christian singer-songwriter.

Godwin Grech : Politician.

Blake Grima : Australian rules footballer.

Hollie Grima : Basketballer.

Nathan Grima : Australian rules footballer.

Andrew Heffernan : Rugby League player.

Jenny Hill : Mayor of Townsville, Queensland Adam Hills : [ 23 ] Television personality. Also of Austrian descent.

John Hutchinson : [ 24 ] Association footballer.

Jed Kurzel : Singer-songwriter-guitarist and film composer. Also of Polish descent.

Justin Kurzel : Singer-songwriter-guitarist and film composer. Also of Polish descent.

Jamie Maclaren : [ 25 ] Association footballer. Also of Scottish descent.

Alex Malley : Former chief executive of CPA Australia . Also of Greek descent.

Mark Mallia : Outsider artist.

Mitchell Mallia : Association footballer.

Jake Mamo : Rugby League player.

Sean McMahon : Rugby Union player.

Paul Mellor : Rugby League player.

Shaun Micallef : Television personality.

Steve Mifsud : [ 26 ] Snooker player.

Kevin Moore : [ 27 ] Sprinter. Also of Cypriot descent.

Christine Muscat : Member of the pop group Sister2Sister .

Kevin Muscat : Association footballer.

Manny Muscat : Association footballer.

Sharon Muscat : Member of the pop group Sister2Sister.

Steven Pace : Association footballer.

Shaun Parnis : Lawn bowler.

Reno Piscopo : [ 28 ] Association footballer. Also of Italian descent.

Diana Prazak : Boxer. Also of Croatian descent.

Geoff Robinson : Rugby League player. Also of English descent.

Jarrod Sammut : Rugby League player. Also of Aboriginal descent.

Madeleine Scerri : Swimmer.

Joe Spiteri : [ 29 ] Association footballer.

Shane Sultana : Rugby League coach.

Tash Sultana : Singer-songwriter.

Cartier Surjan : [ 21 ] 2019 Love Island Australia contestant.

Shane Shackleton : Rugby League player.

Jason Singh : [ 30 ] Singer for the Melbourne band Taxiride . Also of Indo-Fijian descent.

Sam Sparro : Singer, songwriter and record producer.

Sam Stone : [ 31 ] Rugby League player.

James Tedesco : Rugby League player. Also of Italian descent.

Melissa Tkautz : Actress. Also of Austrian descent.

Kym Valentine : Actress.

Adam Vella : Sport shooter.

Alex Vella : Businessman, former boxer and the former National President of the Rebels Motorcycle Club .

Michael Vella : Rugby League player.

Candice Warner : [ 32 ] Ironwoman, television personality and wife of Australian cricketer David Warner .

Samara Weaving : Actress and model. Also of English descent.

Bronson Xerri : [ 33 ] Rugby League player.

Tristan Xerri : Australian rules footballer.

Anthony Xuereb : Rugby League player.

Adrian Zahra : [ 34 ] Association footballer.

Christian Zahra : Politician.

Paul Zammit : Politician. Also of Greek descent.

John Zarb : Conscientious objector to military conscription during the Vietnam War .

Michael Zerafa : Boxer.

See also [ edit ] Australia portal Malta portal European Australians Europeans in Oceania Immigration to Australia Maltese New Zealanders Maltese people Maltralian – Dialect of Maltese in Australia Maltese Americans References [ edit ] ^ "2021 Australia, Census All persons QuickStats" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 27 July 2022 .

^ "People in Australia who were born in Malta" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021.

^ Ivan Magri-Overend (2001).

"Present Situation of Maltese of Egypt" . maltamigration.com. Archived from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ Bovingdon, Rigu (1985).

"Il-Lingwa Maltija go l-Awstralja" (PDF) .

Il-Malti .

3 (7): 12– 19. Archived from the original on 3 March 2019.

^ "1.3 Migration to Australia" . Maltamigration.com. 2013. Archived from the original on 29 January 2016 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ Barry York (April 1995).

"How Many Maltese in Australia?" .

WIRT MALTA – Maltese Cultural Association, Toronto, Ontario, Canada .

1 (10). Aboutmalta.com. Archived from the original on 28 August 2009.

^ York, Barry (28 October 1916).

"Conscription 1916: Who were the Maltese 'children of Billy Hughes'?" . Museum of Australian Democracy . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ Community Information Summary - Malta-born (PDF) (Report). Commonwealth of Australia: Australian Bureau of Statistics for the Department of Home Affairs. 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 July 2023 .

^ "Hillside Quickstats 2021" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2021.

^ Barry York (1990).

"Empire and Race: The Maltese in Australia, 1881–1949" . NSWU PRESS. p. iii. Archived from the original on 1 December 2017.

^ "On their own" . Archived from the original on 19 June 2018 . Retrieved 29 June 2018 .

^ " 'Meghan is Maltese? Maybe she's my long-lost cousin' " . 4 December 2018.

^ Gibson, Candy (Winter 2007).

"$220 million reasons to smile" .

Lumen .

The University of Adelaide . Retrieved 23 January 2016 .

^ Calleja, Claudia (16 February 2015).

" 'Healthy hermaphrodite' is both man and woman" .

The Times . Malta.

^ Davidson, John.

"Jake Brimmer following in the footsteps of Viduka and Kewell" . Inside Sport . Retrieved 17 August 2016 .

^ "Australian police in fresh questioning over 22-year-old murder" .

Times of Malta .

^ Northover, Kylie (21 April 2017).

"Lunch with Paul Capsis: 'I was never in the closet!' " .

The Age . Retrieved 27 April 2017 .

^ "Troy Cassar-Daley Biography, Songs, & Albums" .

AllMusic .

^ "Maltese-Australian footballer Josh Cavallo comes out as gay" .

Times of Malta . 27 October 2021.

^ Helen Musa (12 September 2012).

"Side by side with Falzon | Canberra CityNewsCanberra CityNews" . Citynews.com.au . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ a b " 'Incest' fear: Love Island stars may be related" .

New Idea . 10 October 2019.

^ Mifsud, Jennifer (10 December 2007).

"Down-to-earth Singer Living Life of the Stars" .

The Times .

Malta : Allied Newspapers Limited . Retrieved 14 April 2008 .

^ Knox, David (2 March 2013).

"Returning: Who Do You Think You Are?" .

TV Tonight . Retrieved 9 May 2019 .

^ "Aussie Hutchinson gets Malta call-up" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

^ Rugari, Vince (30 March 2017).

"A-League contract news: Jamie Maclaren on his Brisbane Roar future" .

Fox Sports Australia . Retrieved 31 March 2017 .

^ "Another defeat for Malta team as Steve Mifsud beats Drago and Borg" . Archived from the original on 15 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2011 .

^ 2014 CWG bio ^ "Reno Piscopo, un piccolo Insigne che sogna Neymar" . Archived from the original on 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 27 June 2025 .

^ Mooney, Shaun, ed. (2014).

Leopold Method Quarterly Edition Issue 1: Intelligent, Insightful Football Analysis . Leopold Method. p. 39.

ISBN 978-1-921134-47-0 .

^ "PROFILE: Taxiride star Jason Singh flies solo" . 9 October 2013.

^ "Sammut in Malta mix for Autumn internationals" . totalrl.com. 7 September 2016 . Retrieved 7 September 2016 .

^ Micallef, Anthony (28 February 2005).

"Candice Falzon in Search 2005 Miss Malta Knight" .

Rleague.com . Archived from the original on 11 April 2015 . Retrieved 27 July 2008 .

^ "Tats, studs and starring role for Cronulla X-factor Xerri" .

National Rugby League . 24 February 2019.

^ "Muscat handed eight-match ban" .

Times of Malta . 28 January 2011 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Maurice N. Cauchi, Maltese Migrants in Australia , Malta 1990 Barry York, Maltese 'prohibited immigrants': the Australian experience, 1912–1946 Barry York, The Maltese of Woolloomooloo Wharf Documents relating to Early Maltese Migration to Australia – Department of Immigration, Western Australian Branch, General Correspondence File, Maltese Immigrants and Stowaways [8 pages, 1927–34] Barry York, Maltese Identity in Australia – What Future?

Archived 7 November 2017 at the Wayback Machine , speech for the National Conference of Maltese Community Councils of Australia in 1993 Sandra Kipp, Maltese language maintenance in Australia (based on the 1996 Census) , from: Maltese Background Youth – Editors Cauchi M, Borland H, Adams R, 1999, [Europe Australia Institute], p 9 Maurice Cauchi, Education and Maltese language usage among persons of Maltese background , from: Maltese Background Youth – Editors Cauchi M, Borland H, Adams R, 1999, [Europe Australia Institute], p 1 External links [ edit ] Mark Caruana (2008).

"Maltese" .

Dictionary of Sydney . Retrieved 4 October 2015 .

[ CC-By-SA ] (History of Maltese in Sydney) CHAPTER 1 The Maltese in Australia 1881–84 How many Maltese in Australia?

Mark Caruana, Maltese Surnames on 2000 Telephone Directories [ permanent dead link ] , June 2000 Mark Caruana, The Maltese of New Caledonia Incident 1916 – Newspaper Coverage in Australia on the Maltese of New Caledonia Incident 1916 v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Maltese diaspora Australia Canada Egypt Gibraltar Greece Corfu India Italy Pachino United Kingdom United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maltese_Australians&oldid=1305289457 " Categories : Australia–Malta relations Australian people of Maltese descent European diaspora in Australia Maltese diaspora Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2017 Use dmy dates from November 2017 Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references Dynamic lists Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 05:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maltese Australians 1 language Add topic

