Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Ernst Heinsius 4 languages Deutsch Français Italiano 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German painter This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Johann Ernst Heinsius" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Self-portrait (1778) John Frederick, Prince of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt Johann Ernst Heinsius ( German: [ˈjoːhan ʔɛʁnst ˈhaɪnzi̯ʊs] ; 21 May 1731, Ilmenau - 18 October 1794, Erfurt ) was a German portrait painter and miniaturist .

Biography [ edit ] His father was Johann Christian Heintz (c.1706-1756), a gunsmith who had become an artist at the court of Rudolstadt . In addition to his father, he may have studied with Carl Christlieb Reinthaler (?-1770), a local decorative painter . He made his name as a portrait painter working for several noblemen of Thuringia . His presence is testified to in Heidecksburg , Rudolstadt and in Hildburghausen as well, until 1769 when his patron, Duke Ernst Frederick III , was compelled to declare bankruptcy.

In 1772, he was engaged to oversee the picture gallery at Castle Wilhelmsburg in Weimar , but lost this position in 1774 when the castle burned down and the collection was destroyed. After the arrival of Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach , who was still just a boy, he was occasionally employed by Duchess Anna Amalia of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel , the Grand Duke's mother. His portraits of them are among his best known, although some are reworkings of portraits by Johann Georg Ziesenis . Sometime during this period, he also created a portrait of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe .

Despite this limited success, his work in Weimar was always dogged by illnesses in the family, debt, and clinging relatives. In 1781, the Grand Duke granted him a three-year leave of absence, during which he was mostly resident in Hamburg , working for the wealthy bourgeoisie. His best known work from this period was a portrait of Johanna Margaretha Sieveking [ de ] , the wife of Georg Heinrich Sieveking . When he returned to Weimar, he found that his family had squandered all of the money he had sent them. They apparently remained in this destitute state until 1788, when Georg Melchior Kraus helped him obtain a teaching position at the Weimar Princely Free Drawing School .

He was temporarily disabled by a stroke in 1792. Upon recovering, he went to Erfurt to carry out a commission, but died there in 1794.

His brother, Johann Julius Heinsius , also became a painter and emigrated to France. Their styles are similar and they are often confused.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Werner Schneiders: "Der deutsche und der französische Heinsius. Fragen an ein Porträt des 18. Jahrhunderts", in: Das Achtzehnte Jahrhundert: Zeitschrift der Deutschen Gesellschaft für die Erforschung des achtzehnten Jahrhunderts 23/1 (1999) Further reading [ edit ] Walther Scheidig (1969).

"Heinsius, Ernst" .

Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 8. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

441– 442 . ( full text online ).

Hedwig Dauch-Schroeder: Johann Ernst Heinsius (1731-1794). Ein Thüringer Bildnismaler der Goethezeit , 1940.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Johann Ernst Heinsius .

More works by Heinsius @ ArtNet (some may actually be by Johann Julius. See note above).

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Artists ULAN RKD Artists FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Ernst_Heinsius&oldid=1241391947 " Categories : 1731 births 1794 deaths 18th-century German painters 18th-century German male artists German male painters German portrait painters People from Ilmenau Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2019 All articles needing additional references Pages with German IPA CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 August 2024, at 21:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Ernst Heinsius 4 languages Add topic

