Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In popular culture 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Eunoia 2 languages Svenska Tagalog Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Component of rhetoric For the book by Christian Bök, see Eunoia (book) . For the school, see Eunoia Junior College .

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e In rhetoric , eunoia ( Ancient Greek : εὔνοιᾰ , romanized : eúnoia , lit.

'well mind; beautiful thinking') [ 1 ] is the good will that speakers cultivate between themselves and their audiences, a condition of receptivity.

[ 2 ] In Book VIII of the Nicomachean Ethics , Aristotle uses the term to refer to the kind and benevolent feelings of good will a spouse has which form the basis for the ethical foundation of human life.

[ 3 ] Cicero translates εὔνοιᾰ with the Latin word benevolentia .

[ 4 ] It is also a rarely used medical term referring to a state of normal mental health .

[ 5 ] Eunoia is the shortest English word containing all five main vowel graphemes .

[ 1 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Eunoia is a work by poet Christian Bök consisting of five chapters, each one using only one vowel.

In the science-fiction television series Earth: Final Conflict , Eunoia is the name of the native language of the Taelon race. Christian Bök was a consultant on that series and helped develop the language.

The debut album of math rock band Invalids.

[ 6 ] In December 2015, the Ministry of Education in Singapore unveiled the name of a new junior College set to open in 2017, Eunoia Junior College . The unfamiliar name generated significant buzz in the Singapore community when it was first announced, [ 7 ] including memes referencing Singlish homophones .

[ 8 ] Eunoia Technologies is the name of the firm Christopher Wylie founded after leaving Cambridge Analytica In classical music , Eunoia is a piano composition by Juan María Solare in the key of C Major (2021) In 2023, South Korean group Billlie released the album The Billage of Perception: Chapter Three featuring the lead single "Eunoia" [ 9 ] [ unreliable source?

] In 2024, Japanese band Envy_(band) announced the release of their 8th album, 'Eunoia'.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Iouea , a similarly short word with all the vowels.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "Beautiful vowels" .

Today (BBC Radio 4) .

BBC . 30 October 2008.

Eunoia is the shortest word in English containing all five vowels - and it means "beautiful thought". It is also the title of Canadian poet Christian Bok's book of fiction in which each chapter uses only one vowel.

^ Garver, Eugene (1994).

Aristotle's Rhetoric: An Art of Character .

Chicago : University of Chicago Press . p. 112.

ISBN 9780226284255 .

^ "The Family In Aristotle" . Archived from the original on 2013-10-29 . Retrieved 2017-08-27 .

^ Gloria Vivenza, "Classical Roots of Benevolence in Economic Thought," Ancient Economic Thought (Routledge, 1997) pp. 198–199, 204–208 online ; Cicero's influence on patristic usage, Carolinne White, Christian Friendship in the Fourth Century (Cambridge University Press, 1992, 2002), pp. 16–17 online , 32, and p. 255, note 13.

^ Definition: eunoia from Online Medical Dictionary ^ Davis, Pete (2012).

"Invalids discography" .

Bandcamp . Retrieved 2 January 2019 .

^ There’s going to be a new junior college called Eunoia; here’s how to pronounce it ^ "What kinda weird school name is this la sial?!" . Archived from the original on 2016-01-04 . Retrieved 2015-12-29 .

^ Billlie | 'EUNOIA' M/V ^ ENVY - EUNOIA External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of eunoia at Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eunoia&oldid=1296066359 " Categories : Rhetoric Philosophy of Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2023 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eunoia 2 languages Add topic

