Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions and Concepts 2 Theorica et practica 3 Notes Toggle the table of contents Paul of Taranto 4 languages Français Italiano ไทย Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Paul of Taranto" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2011 ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Geberis philosophi perspicacissimi, summa perfectionis magisterii , 1542, Title page Paul of Taranto was a 13th-century Franciscan alchemist and author from southern Italy . ( Taranto is a city in Apulia.) Perhaps the best known of his works is his Theorica et practica , which defends alchemical principles by describing the theoretical and practical reasoning behind it.  It has also been argued that Paul is the author of the much more widely known alchemical text Summa perfectionis , generally attributed to the spurious Jabir, or Pseudo-Geber .

[ 1 ] Definitions and Concepts [ edit ] When examining Paul’s work, it is important to make the distinction from modern definitions of words to the definitions used by medieval philosophers and scientists.

Substance – Paul does not use “substance” as the modern definition of “material” or “ matter .”  Instead, substance describes something that is primary and can exist on its own.

Accident – Paul doesn’t use this term as an unexpected/unplanned event.  Instead, it is simply an attribute, or adjective, and cannot exist on its own.

Form/Substantial Form – Form is something that acts on matter that gives it characteristics (e.g.

color , hardness , and heaviness ).  Substantial form is a fundamental type of “form.” As an example to demonstrate:  Substance is simply the object itself, including characteristics that define the object, whereas accidents simply qualify it, but are not necessary for its existence.  For example, a bird could be considered the substance, generally combining characteristics such as feathers, a beak, and the ability to lay eggs.  Describing a bird as big/small or timid/aggressive simply adds qualification to the bird, but is not defining characteristics of a bird.  These concepts of substance and accident stem from Aristotle ’s works.

[ 2 ] Theorica et practica [ edit ] Nature and intellect relationship Paul argues that human intellect is superior to nature .  Therefore, humans must have the ability to manipulate nature as they see fit.  Sculptures and painters, for example, use nature (marble for statue , paint etc) to create various forms of art.  They take natural materials and manipulate them in such a way (chiseling a statue, combining colors/drawing shapes, patterns, and figures) to create artistic works.  They are able to in a controllable manner alter and improve nature.  This thought is also reflected in the act of writing.  “[T]he hand does not write by the motion alone of nature, but as ruled by intellect through art.” [ 3 ] Artists are able to control nature and use it as a tool or instrument.  This concept of intellect over nature is derived from the pseudo-Aristotelian Liber de Causis .

[ 4 ] Two categories of arts Paul then identifies two categories of arts: “Purely artificial” art alters the extrinsic form or “form of art” and “perfective art” alters the “intrinsic” form (or form of nature).  Purely artificial art only changes nature superficially, whereas perfective art changes the essence of nature.  Paul clarifies this distinction through the use of primary and secondary qualities.  The primary qualities are the four Aristotelian qualities , hot, cold, wet, and dry, which reside in the four elements (earth, water, air, and fire).  Secondary qualities include white, black, sweet, bitter, hard, soft, sharp, and dull.  Perfective art alters the primary qualities, while purely artificial art only results in changes among the secondary qualities; essential changes result from changes in primary qualities, while accidental changes are a result of changes in secondary qualities.  A painter and sculpture, then, only practice artificial art since they change shapes and colors of material.  Physicians are considered to practice perfective art since they attempt to control the four humors, which by their definition are characterized by the primary qualities.  Farmers too, practice perfective art since they work with the transmutation power inherent in seeds.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] An analogous modern example of extrinsic versus intrinsic changes is the difference between a physical and chemical reaction .  In a physical reaction, there is no change in the molecules in the system.  Boiling water is a classic example: The system starts with liquid water, and when enough heat has been added to the water, the water boils into the gaseous phase.  While there has been a phase change , the water molecule, H 2 O hasn’t broken apart and is still present at the end of the reaction, so this is analogous to an extrinsic change.

Electrolysis of water is a chemical change – electricity is used to break water into hydrogen and oxygen gas.  Since the molecules present have been changed, this is a chemical change, similar to an intrinsic change.

Sulfur-mercury theory of metals One of the goals of Theorica et practica is to affirm the validity of the sulfur-mercury theory of metals , which basically states that metals are composed of sulfur and mercury and the different proportions between the two form different types of metals.  Observations of the reactivity of metals suggest that metals were in fact composed of sulfur and mercury.  When metals were heated, they gave off a sulfurous odor.  When mercury came in contact with metals such as gold , silver , copper , tin , or lead , an amalgam resulted.  These observations lead to the conclusion that metals were composed of both mercury and sulfur.

[ 8 ] Paul addresses one of the many arguments against the sulfur-mercury theory: that intermediate substances cannot exist between the pure elements and the “final product.”  Therefore, metals cannot be broken down into sulfur and mercury.  In Theorica et practica , Paul first presents this argument before declining it in a contra and pro fashion.  He first states the argument against the sulfur-mercury theory.  Essentially the argument is as follows: In order to make “A” from “B and C”, “B and C” become corrupted as soon as they combine to make “A,” so “B and C” clearly cannot exist within “A.” [ 9 ] Paul then rebuttals against this argument in two ways: theoretical examples and scientific experimentations.  One example is how a smaller number can exist in a larger number.  For example, the quantity “3” resides in the quantity “4”; 4 can be viewed as the combination of 3 and 1.  A less abstract example is a live tree and a dead one.  The difference between them is simply the essence of life or its vegetative soul.  The dead tree still contains the substantial form of the wood, so clearly that form must have been there even when the tree was alive.  Paul’s experimental approach is to decompose metals into other materials, then attempt to recombine those materials into the metal again.  If the sulfur-mercury theory is correct, you can decompose metals into the four elements, but when attempting to recombine the elements, there is no reason for the elements to recombine into any one particular metal.  Paul writes that he successfully recreated the same metal after a process of calcining, dissolving, subliming, and lastly reducing metals.  Since he was able to recreate the same metal that he started with, he obviously did not break the metal down into the pure elements, but instead into some intermediate phases.

[ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Pseudo-Geber (1991).

The Summa Perfectionis of Pseudo-Geber: A Critical Edition, Translation and Study . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-09464-2 .

^ William R. Newman , Atoms and Alchemy: Chymistry and the Experimental Origins of the Scientific Revolution (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2006), 35.

^ Paul of Taranto, Theorica et practica , in William R. Newman, Promethean Ambitions: Alchemy and the Quest to Perfect Nature (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2004), 69.

^ Newman, The Summa Perfectionis of Pseudo-Geber: A Critical Edition, Translation, and Study (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1991), 26 ^ Newman, The Summa Perfectionis , 28.

^ Newman, Promethean Ambitions , 69-71.

^ Newman, Technology and Alchemical Debate , 434-35.

^ Newman, Technology and Alchemical Debate , 435-36 ^ Newman, Atoms and Alchemy , 38-40.

^ Newman, Atoms and Alchemy , 40-42.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐6856fbd995‐ts9p9
Cached time: 20250818103430
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.272 seconds
Real time usage: 0.384 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 695/1000000
Revision size: 9092/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65210/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 508/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23139/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.177/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4289609/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  312.284      1 -total
 30.84%   96.305      1 Template:Alchemy
 30.55%   95.393      3 Template:Navbox
 23.49%   73.351      1 Template:One_source
 22.25%   69.495      1 Template:Cite_book
 19.77%   61.753      2 Template:Ambox
 14.72%   45.962      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.15%   16.082      1 Template:Essay
  4.26%   13.303      1 Template:Essay-like
  3.87%   12.085      1 Template:Find_sources_mainspace Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24888846:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818103430 and revision id 1181108712. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_of_Taranto&oldid=1181108712 " Categories : Italian alchemists Italian Franciscans 13th-century alchemists 13th-century Italian writers 13th-century writers in Latin Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2011 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from October 2021 All articles with style issues This page was last edited on 20 October 2023, at 22:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul of Taranto 4 languages Add topic

