Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Technique 3 Benefits and drawbacks 4 Regionally Toggle Regionally subsection 4.1 Asia 4.2 Americas 4.3 Northern Europe 4.3.1 Svedjebruk 4.3.1.1 Description of process 4.3.1.2 Svedjebruk culture 5 Research 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 General literature 9 Citations 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Slash-and-burn agriculture 39 languages العربية Aragonés Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Svedjebruk ) Agricultural practice For the wildland management technique, see Controlled burn . For the military strategy, see Scorched earth . For the Manic Street Preachers song, see Slash 'n' Burn .

Slash-and-burn agriculture in Chiang Mai , Thailand Agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California On land Agrivoltaic Animal husbandry cattle pigs poultry sheep Dairy Dryland Extensive Fertilizer Free-range Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Hobby Intensive animals pigs crops Natural Monoculture Orchard Organic Paddy field Ranching Sharecropping Sowing Colonia Slash-and-burn Smallholding Terrace Steam sterilization Hydroculture Aquaculture Aquaponics Hydroponics Aeroponics Related Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Agriculture portal v t e Slash-and-burn agriculture is a form of shifting cultivation that involves the cutting and burning of plants in a forest or woodland to create a field called a swidden . The method begins by cutting down the trees and woody plants in an area. The downed vegetation , or "slash", is then left to dry, usually right before the rainiest part of the year. Then, the biomass is burned, resulting in a nutrient-rich layer of ash which makes the soil fertile , as well as temporarily eliminating weed and pest species . After about three to five years, the plot's productivity decreases due to depletion of nutrients along with weed and pest invasion, causing the farmers to abandon the field and move to a new area. The time it takes for a swidden to recover depends on the location and can be as little as five years to more than twenty years, after which the plot can be slashed and burned again, repeating the cycle.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In Bangladesh and India , the practice is known as jhum or jhoom .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Slash-and-burn agriculture is a type of shifting cultivation , an agricultural system in which farmers routinely move from one cultivable area to another. A rough estimate is that 200–300 million people worldwide use slash-and-burn.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Slash-and-burn causes deforestation and habitat loss . Ashes from the burnt trees help farmers by providing nutrients for the soil.

[ 8 ] While slash-and-burn agriculture has historically been sustainable in areas with low population density, increasing populations have accelerated the rate of deforestation, depleting the Earth's carbon reservoirs .

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] Historically, slash-and-burn cultivation has been practiced throughout much of the world. Fire was already used by hunter-gatherers before the invention of agriculture, and still is in present times. Clearings created by the fire were made for many reasons, such as to provide new growth for game animals and to promote certain kinds of edible plants.

During the Neolithic Revolution , groups of hunter-gatherers domesticated various plants and animals, permitting them to settle down and practice agriculture, which provided more nutrition per hectare than hunting and gathering. Some groups could easily plant their crops in open fields along river valleys, but others had forests covering their land. Thus, since Neolithic times, slash-and-burn agriculture has been widely used to clear land to make it suitable for crops and livestock.

[ 10 ] Large groups wandering in the woodlands was once a common form of society in European prehistory . The extended family burned and cultivated their swidden plots, sowed one or more crops, and then proceeded on to the next plot.

[ 11 ] Technique [ edit ] Slash-and-burn agriculture in Maaninka , Finland, in the 1920s Slash-and-burn fields are typically used and owned by a family until the soil is exhausted. At this point the ownership rights are abandoned, the family clears a new field, and trees and shrubs are permitted to grow on the former field. After a few decades, another family or clan may then use the land and claim usufructuary rights . In such a system there is typically no market in farmland, so land is not bought or sold on the open market and land rights are traditional.

[ citation needed ] In slash-and-burn agriculture, forests are typically cut months before a dry season. The "slash" is permitted to dry and then burned in the following dry season. The resulting ash fertilizes the soil [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and the burned field is then planted at the beginning of the next rainy season with crops such as rice, maize, cassava, or other staples. This work was once done using simple tools such as machetes , axes , hoes and shovels .

Benefits and drawbacks [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This system of agriculture provides millions of people with food and income. It has been ecologically sustainable for thousands of years. Because the leached soil in many tropical regions, such as the Amazon, are nutritionally extremely poor, slash-and-burn is one of the only types of agriculture which can be practiced in these areas. Slash-and-burn farmers typically plant a variety of crops, instead of a monoculture, and contribute to a higher biodiversity due to creating mosaic habitats. The general ecosystem is not harmed in traditional slash-and-burn, aside from a small temporary patch.

This technique is most unsuitable for the production of cash crops . A huge amount of land, or a low density of people, is required for sustainable slash-and-burn. When slash-and-burn is practiced in the same area too often, e.g., because the human population density has increased to an unsustainable level, the forest will eventually be destroyed.

Regionally [ edit ] Asia [ edit ] See also: Jhum Tribal groups in the northeastern Indian states of Tripura , Arunachal Pradesh , Meghalaya , Mizoram and Nagaland and the Bangladeshi districts of Rangamati , Khagrachari , Bandarban and Sylhet refer to slash-and-burn agriculture as podu , jhum or jhoom cultivation. The system involves clearing land, by fire or clear-felling, for economically important crops such as upland rice , vegetables or fruits. After a few cycles, the land's fertility declines and a new area is chosen.

Jhum cultivation is most often practiced on the slopes of thickly-forested hills. Cultivators cut the treetops to allow sunlight to reach the land, burning the trees and grasses for fresh soil. Although it is believed that this helps fertilize the land, it can leave it vulnerable to erosion . Holes are made for the seeds of crops [ 14 ] such as sticky rice , maize, eggplant and cucumber. After considering jhum ' s effects, the government of Mizoram has introduced a policy to end the method in the state.

[ 15 ] Vietnam is home to a diverse range of ethnic groups. Some of these groups form primarily rural communities that reside far from the larger cities of the country, living on swidden fields where slash-and-burn agriculture is still in regular use as a part of everyday life.

[ 16 ] Americas [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2021 ) Some American civilizations, like the Maya, have used slash-and-burn cultivation since ancient times.

Native Americans in the United States also used fire in agriculture and hunting .

[ 17 ] In the Amazon, many peoples such as the Yanomami Indians also live off the slash and burn method due to the Amazon's poor soil quality .

[ 18 ] Northern Europe [ edit ] A recently burned area at the Telkkämäki Heritage Farm in Finland, demonstrating the technique.

Slash-and-burn techniques were used in northeastern Sweden in agricultural systems. In Sweden, the practice is known as svedjebruk .

[ 19 ] Slash-and-burn in Småland , Sweden (1904) Telkkämäki Nature Reserve in Kaavi , Finland, is an open-air museum where slash-and-burn agriculture is demonstrated. Farm visitors can see how people farmed when slash-and-burn was the norm in the Northern Savonian region of eastern Finland beginning in the 15th century. Areas of the reserve are burnt each year.

[ 20 ] Svedjebruk [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Svedjebruk is a form of slash-and-burn agriculture practiced in Sweden and Norway. It originated in Russia in the region of Novgorod and was widespread in Finland and Eastern Sweden during the Medieval period. It spread to western Sweden in the 16th century when Finnish settlers were encouraged to migrate there by King Gustav Vasa to help clear the dense forests. Later, when the Finns were persecuted by the local Swedes, svedjebruk farming was spread by refugees to eastern Norway , more specifically in the eastern part of Solør , in the area bordering Sweden known as Finnskogen ("the Finnish woods").

The practice spread to New Sweden in North America. Reinforced by the use of fire in agriculture and hunting by American Indians , it became an important part of pioneering in America.

[ 17 ] Lemurs in dry deciduous forests of Madagascar are threatened by deforestation for the creation of farmland and pasture.

Description of process [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Svedjebruk involved stripping a ring of bark completely around the trunk of coniferous trees like pine or spruce or felling them, allowing them to dry, setting fire to the dried forest and growing crops on the fertile ash-covered soil. The resulting ash was highly fertile, but only for a short period. The clearing was initially planted to rye as soon as the ash had fully settled and sufficiently cooled. When the rain came, it packed the ash around the rye. The rye germinated and grew prolifically, with anywhere from 25 to 100 stalks (or straws), each with multiple grains.

Only two tools were required, the axe and the sickle. The axe cut the trees to start the cycle. When the rye had ripened, it was harvested with a sickle , which could reach among the rocks and stumps where a scythe would have been ineffective.

[ 21 ] In the second and third year the field would be sown with turnips or cabbages . It then might be grazed for several years before being allowed to return to woodland.

Svedjebruk culture [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Svedjebruk required felling new forest and burning a new area every year. It was necessary to allow the former fields to regrow with forest for 10–30 years before repeating the cycle. As a result, the dwellings were often many kilometers from the fields. Furthermore, since the process was man-power intensive, extended families tended to work together and live in compact communities.

The svedjebruk farming approach required a large area. When forest was plentiful, the Finns were very prosperous. As population grew and restrictions were placed on the forest which could be burned, it became increasingly difficult. By 1710, during the conflict with Sweden, because of their suspect loyalties Norwegian authorities considered expelling them [ clarification needed ] from the border area, but did not do so because it was judged they were too poor to survive if evicted.

Research [ edit ] This type of agriculture is discouraged by many developmental or environmentalist organisations, with the main alternatives being promoted as switching to more intensive , permanent farming methods, or promoting a shift from farming to working in different, higher-paying industries altogether. Other organisations promote helping farmers achieve higher productivity by introducing new techniques.

[ citation needed ] Not allowing the slashed vegetation to burn completely and ploughing the resultant charcoal into the soil ( slash-and-char ) has been proposed as a way to boost yields.

[ 22 ] Promoters of a project from the early 2000s claimed that slash-and-burn cultivation could be reduced if farmers grew black pepper crops, turmeric, beans, corn, cacao, rambutan, and citrus between Inga trees, which they termed ' Inga alley cropping '.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] A method of improving the yields in a type of traditional assarting cultivation used to grow common beans in Central America called 'slash-and-cover' has been proposed by additionally planting leguminous shrubs to act as a fallow crop after the soil is exhausted and one is ready to clear a new patch of forest.

[ 25 ] Gallery [ edit ] Santa Cruz , Bolivia Arunachal Pradesh , India See also [ edit ] 2006 Southeast Asian haze 2013 Southeast Asian haze 2015 Southeast Asian haze 2019 Amazon rainforest wildfires History of the forest in Central Europe Agricultural waste General literature [ edit ] Conklin, H. C. (February 1961).

"The Study of Shifting Cultivation" (PDF) .

Current Anthropology .

2 (1): 27– 61.

doi : 10.1086/200160 .

JSTOR 2739597 .

S2CID 132297474 .

Nesholen, Birger (1994). "Svedjebrukerne", Østlandske Skogsområder , Den Norske Turistforening .

Pyne, Stephen J.

(1997).

Vestal Fire: An Environmental History, Told Through Fire, of Europe and Europe's Encounter with the World . Seattle and London: University of Washington Press.

ISBN 0-295-97596-2 .

Sawyer, Birgit ; Sawyer, Peter H.

(1993).

Medieval Scandinavia: from Conversion to Reformation, Circa 800–1500 . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-1739-2 .

Stagg, Frank Noel (1956).

East Norway and Its Frontier . Allen & Unwin.

Citations [ edit ] ^ "Slash-and-burn agriculture" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . 22 May 2024.

^ EcoLogic Development Fund.

"Slash and Burn Agriculture" .

ecologic.org .

^ Md Shahidul Islam (2012).

"Jhum" . In Sirajul Islam and Ahmed A. Jamal (ed.).

Banglapedia: National Encyclopedia of Bangladesh (Second ed.).

Asiatic Society of Bangladesh .

^ Choudhury, Sanjoy (March–April 2010).

"Jhum" .

Geography and You . Vol. 10, no. 59.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2019.

^ Disha Experts (2018).

1500+ MCQs with Explanatory Notes For Geography, Ecology & Environment . Disha Publications. p. 130.

^ Skegg, Martin (24 September 2011).

"TV highlights 27/09/2011" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2017.

^ Hands, Michael (February 2021).

"The search for a sustainable alternative to slash-and-burn agriculture in the World's rain forests: the Guama Model and its implementation" .

Royal Society Open Science .

8 (2) rsos.201204.

Bibcode : 2021RSOS....801204H .

doi : 10.1098/rsos.201204 .

PMC 8074668 .

PMID 33972850 .

^ "Slash and Burn Agriculture – An Overview of Slash and Burn" . Geography.about.com. Archived from the original on 2013-12-05 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 .

^ Kukla, Jaroslav; Whitfeld, Timothy; Cajthaml, Tomáš; Baldrian, Petr; Veselá-Šimáčková, Hana; Novotný, Vojtěch; Frouz, Jan (2019).

"The effect of traditional slash-and-burn agriculture on soil organic matter, nutrient content, and microbiota in tropical ecosystems of Papua New Guinea" .

Land Degradation & Development .

30 (2): 166– 177.

Bibcode : 2019LDeDe..30..166K .

doi : 10.1002/ldr.3203 .

ISSN 1099-145X .

S2CID 133993874 .

^ Jaime Awe, Maya Cities and Sacred Caves , Cu bola Books (2006) ^ Clark J.G.D., 1952, Farming: Clearance and Cultivation II Prehistoric Europe: The Economic Basis, pg.s 91–107, Cambridge.

^ "Best Management Practices for Wood Ash as Agricultural Soil Amendment" (PDF) .

athenaeum.libs.uga.edu .

^ "Slash and Burn Agriculture | EcoLogic Development Fund" .

www.ecologic.org . Retrieved 2018-01-10 .

^ "Jhum" .

banglapedia.org .

^ TI Trade (2011-01-17).

"The Assam Tribune Online" . Assamtribune.com . Retrieved 2013-06-22 .

^ Nguyêñ Văn Huy (2001).

The Cultural Mosaic Of Ethnic Groups In Vietnam . Hà Nội: Education Publishing House.

OCLC 51320108 .

^ a b Pyne, 1997:470 ^ Owl, M. Y. (1976). "Yanomamo ecology, population control, and their relationship to slash and burn agriculture".

California Anthropologist .

6 (2): 6– 20.

ISSN 0272-5452 .

PMID 12334855 .

^ "Sviðna, Svedjebruk and Slash & Burn cultivation | Northern Bush" . Retrieved 2020-10-12 .

^ "Telkkämäki Nature Reserve" . Outdoors.fi. 2013-05-14. Archived from the original on 2013-07-17 . Retrieved 2013-06-22 .

^ Video on the procedure. In: YouTube ^ Biederman, L. A. (31 December 2012). "Biochar and its effects on plant productivity and nutrient cycling: a meta-analysis".

GCB Bioenergy .

5 (2): 202– 214.

doi : 10.1111/gcbb.12037 .

S2CID 86216355 .

^ Elkan, Daniel (21 April 2004).

"Fired with ambition" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2019.

^ "Inga Alley Cropping" .

ECHOcommunity . Retrieved 2024-11-11 .

^ Kettler, . S. (1996-08-01). "Fallow enrichment of a traditional slash/mulch system in southern Costa Rica: comparisons of biomass production and crop yield".

Agroforestry Systems .

35 (2): 165– 176.

Bibcode : 1996AgrSy..35..165K .

doi : 10.1007/BF00122777 .

ISSN 0167-4366 .

S2CID 40357446 .

External links [ edit ] Look up swidden in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Slash and burn Karki, Sameer (2002).

Community Involvement in and Management of Forest Fires in South East Asia (PDF) (Technical report). Project FireFight South East Asia.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2018.

Video of slash-and-burn at the Telkkämäki Nature Reserve , Finland, in 2012 Video of slash-and-burn in Sweden around 1930–32 (from the YouTube channel of the Nordic Museum ) v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Deforestation and desertification Deforestation Assarting Deforestation Deforestation and climate change Deforestation by region Illegal logging Mountaintop removal Slash-and-burn Slash-and-char Desertification Aridification Historic desertification Moisture recycling Soil retrogression and degradation Water scarcity By region: China Gobi Desert Lebanon Libya Mali Mauritania Mongolia Sahel Yemen Mitigation Afforestation Arid Lands Information Network Biochar Conservation grazing Desert greening Ecoforestry Ecological engineering Farmer-managed regeneration Flexible Mechanisms Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) Managed intensive rotational grazing Oasification Reforestation United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Related articles Forest Landscape Integrity Index Forestry Intact forest landscape Land surface effects on climate Land use, land-use change and forestry List of global issues Natural landscape Terra preta Wilderness v t e Fire History Control of fire by early humans Historic fires Native American use of fire in ecosystems Science Chain reaction Combustion Dust explosion Fire ecology Fire piston Flash point Fire protection Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Components Fuel Oxygen Heat Flame Smoke Individual fires By type By country By year Crime Arson Death by burning People Pyromanias Child Firefighter Culture Cremation Fire worship Terra preta Organizations International Flame Research Foundation The Combustion Institute Other Wildfires List of wildfires Backdraft Firefighting Firestorm Fire whirl Blue lava Ash Slash-and-burn Fire making Category Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slash-and-burn_agriculture&oldid=1301975134#Svedjebruk " Categories : Agriculture by type Environmental issues with forests Fire in culture Tropical agriculture Forest management Agriculture in Sweden Agriculture in the United Kingdom Forestry in Finland Forestry in Norway Forestry in Russia Forestry in Sweden Forestry in the United Kingdom Agriculture in Russia Agriculture in Finland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles to be expanded from August 2021 All articles to be expanded Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles needing additional references from February 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 18:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Slash-and-burn agriculture 39 languages Add topic

