Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Theology 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Baptist Metz 12 languages Català Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Catholic priest and theologian (1928–2019) The Reverend Johann Baptist Metz Johann Baptist Metz Born ( 1928-08-05 ) 5 August 1928 Auerbach in der Oberpfalz , Bavaria , Germany Died 2 December 2019 (2019-12-02) (aged 91) Münster , North Rhine-Westphalia , Germany Occupations Catholic priest Theologian Organizations University of Münster Johann Baptist Metz (5 August 1928 – 2 December 2019) was a German Catholic priest and theologian . He was ordinary professor of fundamental theology at the University of Münster and a consultant to the synod of German dioceses. He is regarded as one of the most important German theologians after the Second Vatican Council , and was an influence on the development of liberation theology .

Life and career [ edit ] Metz was born on 5 August 1928 in Auerbach in der Oberpfalz [ 1 ] and grew up there.

[ 2 ] As a teenager, Metz was drafted into the German military in 1944, towards the end of the Second World War .

[ 2 ] Six months before the end of the war, he was captured by the Americans and sent to prisoner of war camps in Maryland and then Virginia. After the war, he moved back to Germany. He studied theology and philosophy from 1948, first in Bamberg , then in Munich and at the University of Innsbruck , [ 3 ] He completed his dissertation on the philosophy of Martin Heidegger in 1951. Metz was ordained a priest in 1954, [ 1 ] working in ministry from 1958 to 1961.

[ 4 ] He was granted the Ph.D. for his dissertation on the theology of Thomas Aquinas ; his supervisor was Karl Rahner .

[ 3 ] His experience in the war matches that of the German Calvinist theologian Jürgen Moltmann who would go on to write with Metz on political theology against a background of direct confrontation with Nazism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1962–63, he was granted a scholarship from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft .

[ 4 ] He was professor of Fundamental Theology at the University of Münster from 1963 to 1993, [ 7 ] where he developed a Theology after Auschwitz ( Holocaust theology ).

[ 2 ] He introduced philosophical and political ideas of 1968, by Ernst Bloch and the Frankfurt School of Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno , in theology, which was received with opposition. His concepts were applied by the liberation theology in Latin America.

[ 1 ] He participated in the founding of the University of Bielefeld , and was a leading member of the international Paulus-Gesellschaft dedicated to a dialogue of Christianity and Marxism. After the Second Vatican Council , he was a consultant of the papal secretariate for the noncredentibus from 1968 to 1973.

[ 4 ] Metz was a consultant of the Würzburg Synod of the German dioceses from 1971 to 1975, and was the principal author of its document "Unsere Hoffnung" (Our hope) which became a key document for the reception of the Second Vatican Council in Germany.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Metz lived in Münster until his death on 2 December 2019.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 8 ] Theology [ edit ] Metz and Rahner A student of Karl Rahner , [ 2 ] Metz broke with Rahner's transcendental theology in a turn to a theology rooted in praxis . Metz was at the centre of a school of political theology that strongly influenced liberation theology .

[ 9 ] He is regarded as one of the most influential post– Vatican II German theologians.

[ 2 ] His thought turned around fundamental attention to the suffering of others. Key topics of his theology were memory, solidarity , and narrative.

[ 2 ] Works in English include: The Emergent Church , Faith in History and Society , Poverty of Spirit , and Hope Against Hope . Collected articles can be found in A Passion for God: The Mystical-Political Dimension of Christianity , translated by Matthew Ashley and in John K. Downey, ed., Love's Strategy: The Political Theology of Johann Baptist Metz .

[ 6 ] Fundamental to Metz's work is the concept of "dangerous memory", which relates to anamnesis in the Greek New Testament, a term which is central to the theology of the Eucharist . Metz spoke variously of "the dangerous memory of Jesus Christ", "the dangerous memory of freedom (in Jesus Christ)", the "dangerous memory of suffering", etc. One of the motivating factors for this category is Metz's determination, as a Christian theologian from Germany, to rework the whole of Christian theology from the ground up in light of the disruptive experience of the Holocaust. This need explains in part his break with Rahner, whose transcendental method appeals to historicity but does not come to terms with actual history. Metz was in dialogue with progressive Marxism, especially Walter Benjamin and the authors of the Frankfurt School. He levelled a fierce critique of what he called bourgeois Christianity and believed that the Christian Gospel had become less credible because it had become entangled with bourgeois religion. His work Faith in History and Society develops apologetics, or fundamental theology, from this perspective.

[ 2 ] A key motif of his theology is compassion, as a sensitivity for the suffering of others, a compassion of God, and also a passion for God ("Leidempfindlichkeit für andere, die Mitleidenschaft Gottes, auch die Leidenschaft für Gott").

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Metz, Johann Baptist (1969).

Theology of the World , trans. William Glen-Doepel. New York: Seabury.

ISBN 9780816425686 Metz, Johann Baptist (1980).

Faith in History and Society: Toward a Practical Fundamental Theology . New York: Seabury.

ISBN 9780816404261 Metz, Johann Baptist (1998).

Poverty in Spirit.

New York: Paulist Press.

ISBN 9780809137992 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Neue Politische TheologieTheologe Johann Baptist Metz gestorben" .

Stern (in German). 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Main, Andreas (3 December 2019).

Nachruf auf Johann Baptist Metz / Der Mitleidende (in German).

Deutschlandfunk . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ a b c d Arens, Edmund (3 December 2019).

"Gottespassion und Compassion. Zum Tod von Johann Baptist Metz" .

feinschwarz.net (in German) . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ a b c "Johann Baptist Metz" .

Munzinger (in German). 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ James C. Livingston and Francis Schüssler Fiorenza, ed. (2006).

Modern Christian thought: the twentieth century (Second ed.). Minneapolis: Fortress Press. pp.

275– 283.

ISBN 9780800637965 .

^ a b Metz, Johannes Baptist; Ashley, James Matthew (1998).

A passion for God: the mystical-political dimension of Christianity . Paulist Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-8091-3755-8 .

^ "Prof. DDr. Dr. h.c. mult. Johann Baptist Metz" .

University of Münster (in German). 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ "Begründer der "Neuen Politischen Theologie" wurde 91 / Theologe Johann Baptist Metz gestorben" .

katholisch.de (in German). 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ Assheuer (5 August 2008).

"Jesus war Jude / Die Erneuerung des Christentums aus dem Geist Jerusalems. Zum 80. Geburtstag des faszinierenden Theologen Johann Baptist Metz" .

Die Zeit (in German) . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Johann Baptist Metz .

The political theology, life, and works of Metz: https://www.johannbaptistmetz.com .

Literature by and about Johann Baptist Metz in the German National Library catalogue Chinn, Colleen E.

"Johannes Metz (Biography and Bibliography)" .

Theology Library .

Mobile, Alabama : Spring Hill College . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

Chapter 17. Johann Baptist Metz .

Blackwell Publishing . Abstract of The Blackwell Companion to Political Theology. Retrieved 1 March 2011.

Johann Baptist Metz (1928–2019) philos-website.de "Einer der einflussreichsten Theologen seit dem Zweiten Vatikanischen Konzil" / Theologe Johann Baptist Metz erhält NRW-Landesverdienstorden (in German) kirche-und-leben.de 7 December 2019 Ministerpräsident Armin Laschet würdigt Johann Baptist Metz als einen der bedeutendsten Theologen unserer Zeit North Rhine-Westphalia 15 February 2019 Johann Baptist Metz Gesammelte Schriften (11 Artikel) Verlag Herder v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Christianity Germany Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Baptist_Metz&oldid=1299345338 " Categories : 1928 births 2019 deaths 20th-century German Catholic theologians German male non-fiction writers Academic staff of the University of Münster Political theologians People from Amberg-Sulzbach Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from November 2017 Use dmy dates from November 2018 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 21:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Baptist Metz 12 languages Add topic

