Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Framework 2 Public safety organizations Toggle Public safety organizations subsection 2.1 National 2.2 Regional 2.3 Local 3 Sub-sectors Toggle Sub-sectors subsection 3.1 Law enforcement 3.2 Intelligence and information sharing 3.3 Emergency 3.4 Justice 3.5 Interior 3.6 Technique 4 Organizations 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Public security 27 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Ido Italiano Қазақша Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Public Safety ) Activity to ensure the safety and security of the public For other uses, see Public security (disambiguation) .

A member of the Republican Guard of the National Gendarmerie of France Public security or public safety is the prevention of and protection from events that could endanger the safety and security of the public from significant danger , injury , or property damage . It is often conducted by a state government to ensure the protection of citizens, persons in their territory, organizations, and institutions against threats to their well-being, survival, and prosperity.

[ 1 ] The public safety issues that a municipality , county , regional , or federal jurisdiction may handle include crimes (ranging from misdemeanors to felonies ), structure fires , conflagrations , medical emergencies , mass-casualty incidents , disasters , terrorism , and other concerns.

Public safety organizations are organizations that conduct public safety. They generally consist of emergency services and first responders such as law enforcement , fire services , emergency medical services , security forces , and military forces. They are often operated by a government, though some private public safety organizations exist where possible.

Framework [ edit ] Emergency services at the scene of an incident in Brampton , Ontario , Canada Organized crime and international terrorism are hardly deterred by geographical, linguistic, or financial barriers. The latter has largely contributed to public security becoming an important political and economic issue, nationally as well as internationally. Politics, public organizations and businesses closely collaborate to guarantee public security and maintain a stable environment for economic prosperity.

Although public security significantly contributes to the attractiveness of a location, the productivity of its people, and hence the overall success of an economy, the sector frequently suffers from low budgets, limited resources, and inadequate information systems. Large events, pandemics , severe accidents , environmental disasters , and terrorist attacks pose additional threats to public security and order.

The police, federal police and border authorities nonetheless need to warrant the security of the country as a fundamental prerequisite for the domestic political ability to act. The quality and scope of potential threats have changed significantly, and the tasks and general framework for the police, federal police and border authorities have changed accordingly.

Public safety organizations [ edit ] National [ edit ] Federal law enforcement agency Criminal investigation department Border patrol Gendarmerie Ministry or department of interior , justice , or public safety Regional [ edit ] County police Sheriff or constable 's office State trooper or provincial police Local [ edit ] Police department or marshal Fire services Emergency medical services Local government Municipal public affairs office Sub-sectors [ edit ] Law enforcement [ edit ] National or federal police Regional , state , and local police Intelligence and information sharing [ edit ] Intelligence services Investigator services Secret services Emergency [ edit ] Emergency medical services Fire service Police Park ranger Ocean Safety Lifeguard Search and rescue Justice [ edit ] Courts Judges Juries Lawyers and advocates Forensic Justice ministry Prison officers Interior [ edit ] Border and port authorities Coast guard Customer services Home guard Technique [ edit ] Crowd control Riot control Organizations [ edit ] By nation In Australia, Australian Institute of Public Safety , Australian Federal Police [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In Brazil, National Secretariat of Public Safety In Canada, Public Safety Canada In France, Committee of Public Safety In Japan, National Public Safety Commission (Japan) In South Korea, Ministry of the Interior and Safety (South Korea) In United Kingdom, Department of Health, Social Services and Public Safety (Northern Ireland only) In United States, United States Department of Homeland Security , Department of Public Safety In Mongolia, State Emergency Commission (Mongolia) Formerly Public Security (Czechoslovakia) with Czechoslovakia Airport security Association of Public-Safety Communications Officials-International Civil defense Civil defense sirens Common Alerting Protocol Consumer Product Safety Commission Emergency management Emergency telephone number Firefighting Neighborhood Watch Food safety Guardian Angels Good safety practice National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Natural disaster No-go area Occupational safety and health Office of Emergency Management Personal protective equipment Police Public health Public safety network Risk Road traffic safety Safety engineering SafetyLit See also [ edit ] National security Internal security Justice Law enforcement Societal security References [ edit ] ^ "Maritime Domain Awareness in the Canadian Safety and Security Program" (PDF) . December 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04.

^ "QFES" . Archived from the original on November 15, 2016.

^ "Public Safety Business Agency" . Archived from the original on August 5, 2015.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Public safety at Wikimedia Commons Murray N. Rothbard : The Public Sector, III: Police, Law, and the Courts aus For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_security&oldid=1278415765 " Categories : Emergency services Crime Law enforcement Justice Paramilitary Public sphere Public safety Public safety communications Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 09:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public security 27 languages Add topic

