Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In prokaryotes Toggle In prokaryotes subsection 1.1 Initiation 1.2 Elongation 1.3 Termination 2 In eukaryotes Toggle In eukaryotes subsection 2.1 Initiation 2.2 Elongation 2.3 Termination 3 In plants 4 References Toggle the table of contents Translational regulation 2 languages Bosanski Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Translational regulation refers to the control of the levels of protein synthesized from its mRNA . This regulation is vastly important to the cellular response to stressors, growth cues, and differentiation . In comparison to transcriptional regulation , it results in much more immediate cellular adjustment through direct regulation of protein concentration. The corresponding mechanisms are primarily targeted on the control of ribosome recruitment on the initiation codon , but can also involve modulation of peptide elongation, termination of protein synthesis , or ribosome biogenesis . While these general concepts are widely conserved, some of the finer details in this sort of regulation have been proven to differ between prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms.

In prokaryotes [ edit ] Initiation [ edit ] Initiation of translation is regulated by the accessibility of ribosomes to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence . This stretch of four to nine purine residues are located upstream the initiation codon and hybridize to a pyrimidine-rich sequence near the 3' end of the 16S RNA within the 30S bacterial ribosomal subunit .

[ 1 ] Polymorphism in this particular sequence has both positive and negative effects on the efficiency of base-pairing and subsequent protein expression.

[ 2 ] Initiation is also regulated by proteins known as initiation factors which provide kinetic assistance to the binding between the initiation codon and tRNA fMet , which supplies the 3'-UAC-5' anticodon. IF1 binds the 30S subunit first, instigating a conformational change [ 3 ] that allows for the additional binding of IF2 and IF3.

[ 4 ] IF2 ensures that tRNA fMet remains in the correct position while IF3 proofreads initiation codon base-pairing to prevent non-canonical initiation at codons such as AUU and AUC.

[ 5 ] Generally, these initiation factors are expressed in equal proportion to ribosomes, however experiments using cold-shock conditions have shown to create stoichiometric imbalances between these translational machinery. In this case, two to three fold changes in expression of initiation factors coincide with increased favorability towards translation of specific cold-shock mRNAs.

[ 6 ] Elongation [ edit ] Due to the fact that translation elongation is an irreversible process, there are few known mechanisms of its regulation. However, it has been shown that translational efficiency is reduced via diminished tRNA pools, which are required for the elongation of polypeptides. In fact, the richness of these tRNA pools are susceptible to change through cellular oxygen supply.

[ 7 ] Termination [ edit ] The termination of translation requires coordination between release factor proteins, the mRNA sequence, and ribosomes. Once a termination codon is read, release factors RF-1, RF-2, and RF-3 contribute to the hydrolysis of the growing polypeptide, which terminates the chain. Bases downstream the stop codon affect the activity of these release factors. In fact, some bases proximal to the stop codon suppress the efficiency of translation termination by reducing the enzymatic activity of the release factors. For instance, the termination efficiency of a UAAU stop codon is near 80% while the efficiency of UGAC as a termination signal is only 7%.

[ 8 ] In eukaryotes [ edit ] Initiation [ edit ] When comparing initiation in eukaryotes to prokaryotes, perhaps one of the first noticeable differences is the use of a larger 80S ribosome. Regulation of this process begins with the supply of methionine by a tRNA anticodon that basepairs AUG. This base pairing comes about by the scanning mechanism that ensues once the small 40S ribosomal subunit binds the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of mRNA. The usage of this scanning mechanism, in opposition to the Shine-Dalgarno sequence that was referenced in prokaryotes, is the ability to regulate translation through upstream RNA secondary structures . This inhibition of initiation through complex RNA structures may be circumvented in some cases by way of internal ribosomal entry sites (IRESs) that localize pre-initiation complexes (PIC) to the start site.

[ 9 ] In addition to this, the guidance of the PIC to the 5' UTR is coordinated by subunits of the PIC, known as eukaryotic initiation factors (eIFs). When some of these proteins are down-regulated through stresses, translation initiation is reduced by inhibiting cap dependent initiation , the activation of translation by binding eIF4E to the 5' 7-methylguanylate cap .

eIF2 is responsible for coordinating the interaction between the Met-tRNA i Met and the P-site of the ribosome. Regulation by phosphorylation of eIF2 is largely associated with the termination of translation initiation.

[ 10 ] Serine kinases , GCN2 , PERK, PKR, and HRI are examples of detection mechanisms for differing cellular stresses that respond by slowing translation through eIF2 phosphorylation.

Elongation [ edit ] The hallmark difference of elongation in eukaryotes in comparison to prokaryotes is its separation from transcription. While prokaryotes are able to undergo both cellular processes simultaneously, the spatial separation that is provided by the nuclear membrane prevents this coupling in eukaryotes.

Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 (eEF2) is a regulateable GTP -dependent translocase that moves nascent polypeptide chains from the A-site to the P-site in the ribosome. Phosphorylation of threonine 56 is inhibitory to the binding of eEF2 to the ribosome.

[ 11 ] Cellular stressors, such as anoxia have proven to induce translational inhibition through this biochemical interaction.

[ 12 ] Termination [ edit ] Mechanistically, eukaryotic translation termination matches its prokaryotic counterpart. In this case, termination of the polypeptide chain is achieved through the hydrolytic action of a heterodimer consisting of release factors, eRF1 and eRF3 . Translation termination is said to be leaky in some cases as noncoding-tRNAs may compete with release factors to bind stop codons. This is possible due to the matching of 2 out 3 bases within the stop codon by tRNAs that may occasionally outcompete release factor base pairing.

[ 13 ] An example of regulation at the level of termination is functional translational readthrough of the lactate dehydrogenase gene LDHB. This readthrough provides a peroxisomal targeting signal that localizes the distinct LDHBx to the peroxisome.

[ 14 ] In plants [ edit ] Translation in plants is tightly regulated as in animals, however, it is not as well understood as transcriptional regulation. There are several levels of regulation including translation initiation, mRNA turnover and ribosome loading. Recent studies have shown that translation is also under the control of the circadian clock. Like transcription, the translation state of numerous mRNAs changes over the diel cycle (day night period).

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ Nelson, David L.; Cox, Michael M. (2008).

Lehnniger: Principles of Biochemistry (Fifth ed.). W.H. Freeman and Company. p. 243.

ISBN 978-0716771081 .

^ Johnson G (1991). "Interference with phage lambda development by the small subunit of the phage 21 terminase, gp1".

Journal of Bacteriology .

173 (9): 2733–2738.

PMC 207852 .

PMID 1826903.

^ Carter, A. P.; Clemons, W. M.; Brodersen, D. E.; Morgan-Warren, R. J.; Hartsch, T.; Wimberly, B. T.; Ramakrishnan, V. Crystal Structure of an Initiation Factor Bound to the 30≪Em≫S≪/Em≫ Ribosomal Subunit.

Science 2001, 291 ,  498– 501, doi : 10.1126/science.1057766 ^ Milón P, Maracci C, Filonava L, Gualerzi CO, Rodnina MV. Real-time assembly landscape of bacterial 30S translation initiation complex. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2012;19:609–615.

^ Hartz D, McPheeters DS, Gold L. Selection of the initiator tRNA by Escherichia coli initiation factors. Genes Dev. 1989;3:1899–1912.

doi : 10.1101/gad.3.12a.1899 ^ Giuliodori A. M., Brandi A., Gualerzi C. O., Pon C. L., 2004.  Preferential translation of cold-shock mRNAs during cold adaptation. RNA 10(2): 265–276.

doi : 10.1261/rna.5164904 ^ Taylor, R. C., Webb Robertson, B.-J. M., Markille, L. M., Serres, M. H., Linggi, B. E., Aldrich, J. T., … Wiley, S. (2013). Changes in Translational Efficiency is a Dominant Regulatory Mechanism in the Environmental Response of Bacteria.

Integrative Biology : Quantitative Biosciences from Nano to Macro , 5 (11), 1393–1406.

doi : 10.1039/c3ib40120k ^ Poole, E. S., Brown, C. M., & Tate, W. P. (1995). The identity of the base following the stop codon determines the efficiency of in vivo translational termination in Escherichia coli.

The EMBO Journal , 14 (1), 151–158.

^ López-Lastra, M; Rivas, A; Barría, MI (2005). "Protein synthesis in eukaryotes: the growing biological relevance of cap-independent translation initiation".

Biological research .

38 (2–3): 121–46.

doi : 10.4067/s0716-97602005000200003 PMID 16238092.

^ Kimball S.R. Eukaryotic initiation factor eIF2. Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 1999;31:25–29.

^ Ovchinnikov LP, Motuz LP, Natapov PG, Averbuch LJ, Wettenhall RE, Szyszka R, Kramer G, Hardesty B. 1990. Three phosphorylation sites in elongation factor 2. FEBS Lett. 275: 209– 212 ^ Horman S, Browne G, Krause U, Patel J, Vertommen D, Bertrand L, Lavoinne A, Hue L, Proud C, Rider M. 2002. Activation of AMP-activated protein kinase leads to the phosphorylation of elongation factor 2 and an inhibition of protein synthesis. Curr. Biol. 12: 1419– 1423 ^ Dabrowski M, Bukowy-Bieryllo Z, Zietkiewicz E. Translational readthrough potential of natural termination codons in eucaryotes - the impact of RNA sequence. RNA Biol. 2015;12:950–8.

^ Schueren F, Lingner T, George R, Hofhuis J, Gartner J, Thoms S (2014). "Peroxisomal lactate dehydrogenase is generated by translational readthrough in mammals".

eLife .

3 : e03640.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.03640 ^ Missra, Anamika; Ernest, Ben; Lohoff, Tim; Jia, Qidong; Satterlee, James; Ke, Kenneth; Arnim, Albrecht G. von. "The Circadian Clock Modulates Global Daily Cycles of mRNA Ribosome Loading".

The Plant Cell .

27 (9): 2582–2599.

doi : 10.1105/tpc.15.00546 PMC 4815098 .

PMID 26392078.

v t e Gene expression Introduction to genetics Genetic code Central dogma DNA → RNA → Protein Special transfers RNA→RNA RNA→DNA Protein→Protein Transcription Types Bacterial Archaeal Eukaryotic Key elements Transcription factor RNA polymerase Promoter Post-transcription Precursor mRNA (pre-mRNA / hnRNA) 5' capping Splicing Polyadenylation Histone acetylation and deacetylation Translation Types Bacterial Archaeal Eukaryotic Key elements Ribosome Transfer RNA (tRNA) Ribosome-nascent chain complex (RNC) Post-translational modification Regulation Epigenetic imprinting Transcriptional Gene regulatory network cis-regulatory element lac operon Post-transcriptional sequestration (P-bodies) alternative splicing microRNA Translational Post-translational reversible irreversible Influential people François Jacob Jacques Monod v t e Molecular biology History Index Glossary Overview Central dogma DNA replication ( DNA ) Transcription ( RNA ) Translation ( protein ) Element Genetic Heredity Promoter Pribnow box TATA box Operon gal operon lac operon trp operon Intron Exon Terminator Enhancer Repressor lac repressor trp repressor Silencer Histone methylation Linked life Cell biology Biochemistry Computational biology Developmental biology Functional biology/medicine Genetics Engineering Concepts Cultured meat Mitosis Cell signalling Post-transcriptional modification Post-translational modification Dry lab / Wet lab Techniques Cell culture Model organisms (such as C57BL/6 mice ) Methods Nucleic acid Protein Fluorescence , Pigment & Radioactivity High-throughput technique (" -omics ") DNA microarray Mass spectrometry Lab-on-a-chip Gene regulation Epigenetic Genetic Post-transcriptional Post-translational regulation Molecular biology WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Translational_regulation&oldid=1294577814 " Categories : Gene expression RNA This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Translational regulation 2 languages Add topic

