Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early 1.2 Oscan and Roman Cumae 1.3 Diocese of Cuma(e) 1.3.1 Resident bishops 1.3.2 Titular see 2 Archaeology 3 Development of the ancient city Toggle Development of the ancient city subsection 3.1 Surviving ancient monuments 3.1.1 Arco Felice 3.1.2 Crypta Romana 3.2 Sculpture 4 Mythology 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cumae 46 languages አማርኛ العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Русский Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°50′55″N 14°3′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.84861°N 14.05361°E ﻿ / 40.84861; 14.05361 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Roman city near Naples, Italy For other places with the same name, see Cuma .

Cumae Κύμη / Κύμαι / Κύμα Cuma The terrace of the Temple of Apollo Shown within Italy Show map of Italy Cumae (Campania) Show map of Campania Location Cuma, Metropolitan City of Naples , Campania , Italy Region Magna Graecia Coordinates 40°50′55″N 14°3′13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.84861°N 14.05361°E ﻿ / 40.84861; 14.05361 Type Settlement History Builder Colonists from Euboea Founded 8th century BCE Abandoned 1207 AD Periods Archaic Greek to High Medieval Associated with Cumaean Sibyl , Gaius Blossius Events Battle of Cumae Site notes Management Direzione Regionale per i Beni Culturali e Paesaggistici della Campania Website Sito Archeologico di Cuma (in Italian) Cumae ( Ancient Greek : Κύμη , romanized : (Kumē) or Κύμαι (Kumai) or Κύμα (Kuma) ; [ 1 ] Italian : Cuma ) was the first ancient Greek colony of Magna Graecia on the mainland of Italy and was founded by settlers from Euboea in the 8th century BCE. It became a rich Roman city, the remains of which lie near the modern village of Cuma, a frazione of the comune Bacoli and Pozzuoli in the Metropolitan City of Naples , Campania , Italy. The archaeological museum of the Campi Flegrei in the Aragonese castle contains many finds from Cumae.

History [ edit ] Main article: Greek colonisation Early [ edit ] The lower city of Cumae seen from the acropolis The oldest archaeological finds by Emil Stevens in 1896 date to 900–850 BC [ 2 ] [ a ] and more recent excavations have revealed a Bronze Age settlement of the ‘ pit-culture ’ people, and later dwellings of Iron Age Italic peoples whom the Greeks referred to by the names Ausones and Opici (whose land was called Opicia ).

The Greek settlement was founded in the 8th century BCE by emigrants from cities of Eretria and Chalcis in Euboea , next to an Opician settlement . The Greeks were already established at nearby Pithecusae (modern Ischia ) [ 4 ] and were led to Cumae by the joint oecists (founders): Megasthenes of Chalcis and Hippocles of Cyme .

[ b ] The site chosen was on the hill and later acropolis of Monte di Cuma surrounded on one side by the sea, and on the other by particularly fertile ground on the edge of the Campanian plain. While continuing their maritime and commercial traditions, the settlers of Cumae strengthened their political and economic power by exploitation of the land and extended their territory at the expense of neighbouring peoples.

The colony thrived and in the 8th century BCE it was already strong enough to send Perieres to found Zancle in Sicily , [ 5 ] and another group to found Tritaea in Achaea, Pausanias was told.

[ 6 ] Cuma established its dominance over almost the entire Campanian coast up to Punta Campanella over the 7th and 6th centuries BCE, gaining sway over Puteoli and Misenum .

The colony spread Greek culture in Italy and introduced a dialect of Greek, and the Euboean alphabet , a variant of which was adapted and modified by the Etruscans and then re‑adapted by the Romans and became the Latin alphabet , still used worldwide today.

According to Dionysius of Halicarnassus , [ 7 ] Cumae was at that time celebrated throughout all Italy for its riches, power, and all the other advantages, as it possessed the most fertile part of the Campanian plain and was mistress of the most convenient havens round about Misenum.

The growing power of the Cumaean Greeks led many indigenous tribes of the region to organise against them, notably the Dauni and Aurunci with the leadership of the Capuan Etruscans . This coalition was defeated by the Cumaeans in 524 BCE [ 8 ] at the first Battle of Cumae under the direction of Aristodemus . The glorious victories of the colony increased its prestige, so much so that according to Diodorus Siculus , it was usual to associate the whole region of the Phlegraean Fields with Cumaean territory.

At this time the Roman senate sent agents to Cumae to purchase grain in anticipation of a siege of Rome.

[ 9 ] Then in 505 BCE Aristodemus led a Cumaean contingent to assist the Latin city of Aricia in defeating the Etruscan forces of Clusium (see also War between Clusium and Aricia ) and having attained the people's favour he overthrew the aristocratic faction and became a tyrant himself. It was probably at this point that Cumae founded Neapolis (“new city”) in the late 6th century BCE.

Further contact between the Romans and the Cumaeans occurred during the reign of Aristodemus .

Tarquinius , the last of the legendary Kings of Rome , lived his life in exile with Aristodemus at Cumae after the Battle of Lake Regillus and died there in 495 BCE.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Livy records that Aristodemus became the heir of Tarquinius , and in 492 BCE when Roman envoys travelled to Cumae to purchase grain, Aristodemus seized the envoys' vessels on account of the property of Tarquinius which had been seized at the time of Tarquinius' exile.

[ 12 ] Eventually, the dispossessed nobles and their sons were able to take over Cumae in 490 BCE, and executed Aristodemus .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The combined fleets of Cumae and Syracuse (on Sicily) defeated the Etruscans at the Battle of Cumae in 474 BCE.

The temple of Apollo sent the revered Sibylline Books to Rome in the 5th c. BCE. Also Rome obtained its priestesses who administered the important cult of Ceres from the temple of Demeter in Cumae.

Oscan and Roman Cumae [ edit ] Entrance to the Cave of the Sibyl The Temple of Zeus at Cumae was converted into a paleochristian basilica . The baptismal font can still be seen in the back of the building.

Grotta di Cocceio The Greek period at Cumae came to an end in 421 BC, when the Oscans allied to the Samnites broke down the walls and took the city, ravaging the countryside.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Some survivors fled to Neapolis.

The walls on the acropolis were rebuilt from 343 BCE. Cumae came under Roman rule with Capua and in 338 BCE was granted partial citizenship, a civitas sine suffragio . In the Second Punic War , in spite of temptations to revolt from Roman authority, [ 17 ] Cumae withstood Hannibal 's siege, under the leadership of Tib. Sempronius Gracchus .

[ 18 ] The city prospered in the Roman period from the 1st c. BCE along with all the cities of Campania and especially the bay of Naples as it became a desirable area for wealthy Romans who built large villas along the coast. The "central baths" and the amphitheatre are built.

During the civil wars Cumae was one of the strongholds that Octavian used to defend against Sextus Pompey . Under Augustus extensive public building works and roads were begun and in or near Cumae several road tunnels were dug: one through the Monte di Cumae linking the forum with the port, the Grotta di Cocceio 1 km long to Lake Avernus and a third, the "Crypta Romana", 180m long between Lake Lucrino and Lake Averno. The temples of Apollo and Demeter were restored.

The proximity to Puteoli , the commercial port of Rome and to Misenum , the naval fleet base, also helped the region to prosper.

Another very important innovation was the construction of the great Serino aqueduct, the Aqua Augusta supplying many of the cities in the area from about 20 BC.

Domitian 's via Domitiana provided an important highway to the via Appia and thence to Rome from 95 AD.

The early presence of Christianity in Cumae is shown by the 2nd-century AD work The Shepherd of Hermas , in which the author tells of a vision of a woman, identified with the church, who entrusts him with a text to read to the presbyters of the community in Cuma. At the end of the 4th century, the temple of Zeus at Cumae was transformed into a Christian basilica.

The first historically documented bishop of Cumae was Adeodatus, a member of a synod convoked by Pope Hilarius in Rome in 465. Another was Misenus, who was one of the two legates that Pope Felix III sent to Constantinople and who were imprisoned and forced to receive Communion with Patriarch Acacius of Constantinople in a celebration of the Divine Liturgy in which Peter Mongus and other Miaphysites were named in the diptychs , an event that led to the Acacian Schism . Misenus was excommunicated on his return but was later rehabilitated and took part as bishop of Cumae in two synods of Pope Symmachus .

Pope Gregory the Great entrusted the administration of the diocese of Cumae to the bishop of Misenum . Later, both Misenum and Cumae ceased to be residential sees and the territory of Cumae became part of the diocese of Aversa after the destruction of Cumae in 1207.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Accordingly, Cumae is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see .

[ 22 ] Under Roman rule, so-called "quiet Cumae" [ 23 ] was peaceful until the disasters of the Gothic Wars (535–554), when it was repeatedly attacked, as the only fortified city in Campania aside from Neapolis: Belisarius took it in 536, Totila held it, and when Narses gained possession of Cumae, he found he had won the whole treasury of the Goths.

Diocese of Cuma(e) [ edit ] Not to be confused with Cuma (Aeolis) in Asia Minor.

A bishopric was established around 450 AD. In 700 it gained territory from the suppressed Diocese of Miseno .

In 1207 it was suppressed when forces from Naples, acting for the boy- King of Sicily , destroyed the city and its walls, as the stronghold of a nest of bandits. Its territory was divided and merged into the Roman Catholic Diocese of Aversa and Roman Catholic Diocese of Pozzuoli . Some of the citizens from Cumae, including the clergy and the cathedral capitular, took shelter in Giugliano .

Resident bishops [ edit ] Saint Massenzio (300? – ?) Rainaldo (1073? – 1078?) Giovanni (1134? – 1141?) Gregorio (1187? – ?) Leone (1207? – ?) Titular see [ edit ] In 1970, the diocese was nominally restored as a Latin titular see . The title has been held by: Bishop Louis-Marie-Joseph de Courrèges d’Ustou (1970.09.02 – 1970.12.10) Archbishop Edoardo Pecoraio (1971.12.28 – 1986.08.09) Bishop Julio María Elías Montoya, O.F.M.

Archaeology [ edit ] Despite the abandonment of the area of Cumae due to the formation of marshes, the memory of the ancient city remained alive. The ruins, although in a state of neglect, were later visited by many artists and with the repopulation of the area due to land reclamation, short excavation campaigns were made. The first excavations date to 1606 when thirteen statues and two marble bas-reliefs were found; later finds included the large statue of Jupiter from the Masseria del Gigante exhibited at the National Archaeological Museum of Naples. However, after the discovery of the Vesuvian sites the attention of the Bourbon explorers was diverted there and the Cumae area was abandoned and plundered of numerous finds which were then sold to private individuals. A first campaign of systematic excavations took place between 1852 and 1857 under Prince Leopoldo, brother of Ferdinando II of the Two Sicilies [ 24 ] when the area of the Masseria del Gigante and some necropoles were explored. Later Emilio Stevens was given the concession and worked at Cumae between 1878 and 1893, completing the excavation of the necropolis, even though news of the various finds led to a continuous looting of the area.

A disaster occurred between 1910 and 1922 when draining of Lake Licola caused part of the necropolis to be destroyed.

Crypta Romana The explorations of the acropolis started in 1911, bringing to light the Temple of Apollo. Between 1924 and 1934 Amedeo Maiuri and Vittorio Spinazzola investigated the Temple of Jupiter, the Cave of the Sibyl and the Crypta Romana, while between 1938 and 1953 the lower city was explored. A chance discovery occurred in 1992 when during the construction of a gas pipeline near the beach a temple of Isis was discovered. In 1994 the "Kyme" project was activated for the restoration of the site. Excavation of the tholos tomb was completed, first partly explored in 1902. In the area of the forum a basilica-shaped building, the Aula Sillana, was discovered, while along the coastline three maritime villas were found.

Since 2001 the CNRS has been excavating a necropolis dating from 6th to 1st c. BCE outside the Porta mediana.

[ 25 ] In June 2018 a painted tomb dating to the 2nd century BCE and depicting a banquet scene was discovered.

[ 26 ] Development of the ancient city [ edit ] Athena terracotta antefix 6th c. BC Doric frieze from temple ~340 BC The ancient city was divided into two zones, namely the acropolis and the lower part on the plains and the coast. The acropolis was accessible only from the south side and it was on this area that the first nucleus of the city developed crossed by a road called Via Sacra leading to the main temples. The road began with two towers, one of which collapsed with part of the hill and the other was restored in the Byzantine era and is still visible. The lower city developed from the Samnite period and to a greater extent during the Roman age.

The lower city was defended by walls and during the Greek age the acropolis had probably the same type of defences, even if the remains today dating back to the 6th century BCE are only on the southeastern part of the hill perhaps also used as retaining walls of the ridge.

In the 6th c. BCE temples were built in tufa, wood and terracotta. Columns, cornices and capitals were made of yellow tufa, roofs and architraves of wood and to protect the overhang, terracotta tiles and elaborate antefix decorations. The city and acropolis walls were built from 505 BC, as well as the Sibyl's cave.

When the city was allied with the Romans in 338 BCE a new temple was built with exceptional painted friezes and ornamentation which have been discovered though the temple was destroyed after a few decades by fire.

Between the Punic Wars and the adoption of Latin as the official trading language (180 BC) the city walls were restored and a large stadium built west of the Porta mediana. The central baths were built and major work was done on the acropolis temples. From the end of the 2nd c. BCE Cumae's architecture became increasingly romanised.

The Augustan age saw many fine new buildings in the city such as the basilica or "Sullan Aula" south of the forum, decorated with polychrome marble. Water supply to the town was increased by an extension to the town of the great Serino aqueduct, the Aqua Augusta , after 20 BCE and paid for by local benefactors, the Lucceii family, praetors of the city, who also built an elaborate nymphaeum in the forum as well as several other monuments and buildings.

In the 1st c. AD the "Temple of the Giant" was built, so-called because the famous giant bust of Jupiter (now in Naples Archaeological Museum) was discovered in its ruins; the walls of the temple are incorporated into a later farmhouse.

After Mount Vesuvius erupted in 79 AD, survivors from Herculaneum came to Cumae and it became a well prosperous town.

Surviving ancient monuments [ edit ] The Thermae of the Forum The visible monuments include: Temple of Diana Capitoline temple of Jupiter, Juno and Minerva Temple of Isis Temple of Demeter Temple of Apollo, built in the 6th or 5th century BC, renewed in the late 4th century BC and again under Augustus, transformed into a church around 500 AD.

[ 27 ] The Acropolis Arco Felice The Forum Grotta di Cocceio Crypta Romana Masseria del Gigante Arco Felice [ edit ] Arco Felice and via Domitiana in use today The Arco Felice was a 20 m high monumental entrance to the city built in a cut through Monte Grillo which Domitian made in 95 AD to avoid the long detour imposed by the via Appia , and allow easier access to Cumae along what was later called the via Domitiana while the bridge also carried a road along the ridge of the hill. It was built of brick and tiled in marble, and surmounted by two rows of arches of lighter concrete covered with brick. The piers had three niches on both sides where statues were placed.

The via Domitiana, whose paving is still perfectly preserved and is in continuous use today, connected to the via Appia, the artery of communication with Rome, as well as with Pozzuoli and Naples.

The arch probably replaced a smaller gate from Greek times and in a higher position.

Crypta Romana [ edit ] The Crypta Romana is a tunnel dug into the tufa under the Cuma hill, crossing the acropolis in an east-west direction, giving an easier route from the city to the sea. Its construction is part of the set of military enhancement works built by Agrippa for Augustus and designed by Lucius Cocceius Auctus in 37 BC, including the construction of the new Portus Iulius and its connection with the port of Cumae through the so-called Grotta di Cocceio and the Crypta Romana itself.

With the displacement of the fleet from Portus Iulius to the port of Miseno in 12 BCE and the end of the Civil War between Octavian and Mark Antony in 31 BCE the tunnel lost its strategic value. The forum entrance was made monumental with 4 statue niches in 95 AD at the same time as the Arco Felice was built.

[ 28 ] An avalanche closed the sea entrance in the 3rd c. After 397 it was reopened. In the Christian age it was used as a cemetery area; in the 6th c. the Byzantine general Narsete tried to use it to reach the city during the siege of Cumae, but weakened the structure and a large section of the vault collapsed.

It was brought to light between 1925 and 1931 by the archaeologist Amedeus Maiuri.

Sculpture [ edit ] Psyche and Eros, forum 1-2c AD Diana Votive relief 400 BCE ( Antikensammlung Berlin ) Nymph Colossal Jupiter statue ( Naples museum ) Mythology [ edit ] Main article: Cumaean Sibyl Cumae is perhaps most famous as the seat of the Cumaean Sibyl . Her sanctuary is now open to the public.

In Roman mythology , there is an entrance to the underworld located at Avernus , a crater lake near Cumae, and was the route Aeneas used to descend to the Underworld.

Gallery [ edit ] The walls of the acropolis The Temple of Apollo Street in Cumae The Temple of Diana Acropolis seen from west Amphitheater See also [ edit ] List of ancient Greek cities Graecians Fusaro Lake Notes [ edit ] ^ Eusebius of Caesarea placed Cumae's Greek foundation at 1050 BCE; modern archaeology has not yet found the first settlers' graves, but fragments of Greek pottery c.

750-740 BCE have been excavated near the city wall.

[ 3 ] : 140 ^ Fox (2008) [ 3 ] : 140 notes that whether the Euboeans were from the Ischian colony or freshly arrived is a moot question.

References [ edit ] ^ "William J. Slater, Lexicon to Pindar, Κύ̂μα" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ Caputo, Paolo (1996).

Cuma e il suo Parco Archeologico. Un territorio e le sue testimonianze . Roma, IT: Bardi.

^ a b Fox, R.L.

(2008).

Travelling Heroes in the Epic Age of Homer .

^ Strabo .

[no title cited] . v.4.

^ Thucydides .

[no title cited] . 4, 4.

^ Pausanias .

Description of Greece . vii.22.6.

^ Dionysius of Halicarnassus .

Roman Antiquities . VII, 2.

^ Periklis Deligiannis ( Περικλής Δεληγιάννης ) (4 June 2014).

"The Battle of Cumae, Italy (524 BC)" .

Delving into History ® _ Periklis Deligiannis (personal website).

^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita . 2.9.

^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita . ii.21.

^ Cicero .

Tusculan Disputations . iii.27.

^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita . 2:34.

^ Dionysius of Halicarnassus .

[no title cited] . vii.3.

^ Plutarch .

De mulierum virturibus [ Regarding virtuous women ]. 26.

tells the story of Xenocrite, the girl who roused the Cumaeans against Aristodemus .

^ Livy, iv.44 ^ Diodorus Siculus , xii. 76.

^ "The Project Gutenberg eBook of The History of Rome; Books Nine to Twenty-Six, by Titus Livius" .

www.gutenberg.org .

^ Livy, xxiii.35-37.

^ Camillo Minieri Riccio, Cenni storici sulla distrutta città di Cuma , Napoli 1846, pp. 37–38 ^ Giuseppe Cappelletti, Le Chiese d'Italia dalla loro origine sino ai nostri giorni , vol. XIX, Venezia 1864, pp. 526–535 ^ Francesco Lanzoni, Le diocesi d'Italia dalle origini al principio del secolo VII (an. 604) , vol. I, Faenza 1927, pp. 206–210 ^ Annuario Pontificio 2013 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2013 ISBN 978-88-209-9070-1 ), p. 877 ^ Juvenal, Satire III ^ Paolo Caputo u. a.: Cuma e il suo Parco Archeologico. Un territorio e le sue testimonianze. Bardi, Roma 1996 ^ "Cumes - Centre Jean Bérard" .

^ "Painted tomb discovered in Cumae (Italy) : A banquet frozen in time" .

CNRS . 25 September 2018.

^ Wolf, Markus (2023).

Hellenistische Heiligtümer in Kampanien. Sakralarchitektur im Grenzgebiet zwischen Großgriechenland und Rom [Hellenistic sanctuaries in Campania. Sacred architecture in the border region between Greater Greece and Rome]. DAI Rom Sonderschriften, vol. 26. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, ISBN 978-3-447-11940-5 , pp. 15-34, plates 23-62 and inserts 1-2.

^ "McKAY, A. (1997). THE MONUMENTS OF CUMAE. Vergilius, 43, 78-88" .

www.jstor.org .

JSTOR 41587083 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cumae .

Official website (in Italian) GigaCatholic with resiedential.titular incumbenty biography links v t e Archaeological sites in Campania Province of Avellino Aeclanum Aequum Tuticum Compsa Province of Benevento Benevento Arch of Trajan Roman Theatre Caudium Ligures Baebiani Saticula Province of Caserta Allifae Ausona Calatia Cales Santa Maria Capua Vetere Arch of Hadrian (Capua) Amphitheatre of Capua Casilinum Sant'Angelo in Formis Sinuessa Trebula Balliensis Vescia Province of Naples Atella Baiae Cumae Grotta di Cocceio Herculaneum Villa of the Papyri Liternum Miseno Piscina Mirabilis Naples Aqua Augusta Bourbon Tunnel Catacombs of San Gaudioso Catacombs of San Gennaro Crypta Neapolitana Virgil's tomb Macellum of Naples Oplontis Villa Poppaea Palazzo a Mare Pompeii Pozzuoli Flavian Amphitheater (Pozzuoli) Lucrinus Lacus Lake Avernus Macellum of Pozzuoli Portus Julius Stabiae Suessula Castello Barbarossa Villa of Augustus Villa Jovis Villa Boscoreale Province of Salerno Monte Pruno Paestum Heraion at the mouth of the Sele Temple of Athena Second Temple of Hera Tomb of the Diver Pertosa Caves Velia Villa Romana of Minori v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Landmarks of Campania Aeclanum Amalfi Cathedral Ancient remains of Capua Cumae Caserta Palace Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park Faraglioni Herculaneum Paestum Pompeii Santa Sofia, Benevento Solfatara Sorrento Peninsula Stabiae Trinità della Cava Vesuvius National Park Villa Poppaea Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9sj85
Cached time: 20250817222210
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.868 seconds
Real time usage: 1.350 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3951/1000000
Revision size: 26371/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 211370/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6637/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 125059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.517/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16027163/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1122.377      1 -total
 26.86%  301.460      2 Template:Reflist
 20.96%  235.244      1 Template:Infobox_ancient_site
 20.25%  227.336      1 Template:Infobox
 14.46%  162.327      4 Template:Cite_web
 10.19%  114.370     12 Template:Navbox
  9.99%  112.166      3 Template:Lang
  7.40%   83.051      1 Template:Archaeological_sites_in_Campania
  6.85%   76.935      1 Template:Short_description
  6.10%   68.464     12 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:180366:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222210 and revision id 1278455575. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cumae&oldid=1278455575 " Categories : Cumae (ancient city) Bacoli Pozzuoli Euboean colonies of Magna Graecia Archaeological sites in Campania Roman sites of Campania Buildings and structures in Campania Former populated places in Italy Populated places established in the 8th century BC Tourist attractions in Campania Populated places disestablished in the 13th century 8th-century establishments in Italy 1207 disestablishments in Europe 13th-century disestablishments in Italy National museums of Italy Greek city-states Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Italian-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 15:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cumae 46 languages Add topic

