Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 Books 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Spencer G. Lucas 7 languages العربية Català Deutsch Français Nederlands Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American paleontologist Spencer George Lucas Citizenship American Alma mater University of New Mexico , Yale University [ 1 ] Scientific career Fields Paleontology Institutions New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science [ 1 ] Author abbrev. (zoology) S. G. Lucas Spencer George Lucas is an American paleontologist and stratigrapher, and curator of paleontology at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science .  His main areas of study are late Paleozoic , Mesozoic and early Cenozoic vertebrate fossils, stratigraphy , and continental deposits, particularly in the American Southwest. His research has taken him on field trips to northern Mexico, Costa Rica , Nicaragua , Jamaica , Kazakhstan , and Georgia , and he conducted extensive field and museum research in China in the 1980s and 1990s. He has written more than 500 scientific contributions (about 25-percent are articles in peer-reviewed journals), three books, and has co-edited 14 books.

In 2007, some publications by Lucas and associates at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science came under scrutiny after allegations that information was improperly taken from the unpublished and in-press work of graduate students not on his team.  Formal complaints were made to the New Mexico Department of Cultural Affairs regarding publications on a new genus of aetosaur (a type of armored prehistoric reptile from the Triassic ), and a reinterpretation of another aetosaur's armor.

[ 2 ] In July 2008, the Ethics Committee of the Society of Vertebrate Paleontology concluded that the matter could not be resolved in favor of either side.

[ 3 ] In 2012, he co-authored a paper describing the world's smallest tetrapod footprints, found at Joggins, Nova Scotia.

[ 4 ] Lucas was a master-level chess player (New Mexico state champion in 1973 and 1974).

[ 5 ] He gave up chess, for the most part, in the mid-1970s to focus on his academic career.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Category:Taxa named by Spencer G. Lucas Books [ edit ] Lucas, Spencer G.

Dinosaurs : the textbook (Sixth ed.). New York.

ISBN 0231173113 .

Lucas, Spencer G.; Bailey, Garrick; Davis, Andrew; Scheinbaum, David; Newhall, Beaumont (1987).

Bisti (1st ed.). Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

ISBN 978-0826309785 .

Lucas, Spencer G. (2001).

Chinese fossil vertebrates . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0231084833 .

Khosla, Ashu; Lucas, Spencer G. (2020).

Late Cretaceous Dinosaur Eggs and Eggshells of Peninsular India . [S.l.]: SPRINGER NATURE.

ISBN 978-3030564537 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "Spencer G. Lucas, Ph. D. Curator of Paleontology" .

New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science . New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science . Retrieved 7 May 2020 .

^ Nature News , "Fossil reptiles mired in controversy" Published online 30 January 2008 ^ SVP news , "Executive committee's Final statement concerning allegations from..." Archived July 26, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Brian Switek, "Tiny Carboniferous Steps" , Wired Blog, September 6, 2012 ^ "New Mexico State Champions" . New Mexico Chess Organization . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

External links [ edit ] "Home page" . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

"Arctos Agent Page" . Retrieved 27 October 2017 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spencer_G._Lucas&oldid=1185316589 " Categories : American paleontologists Living people American chess players Yale University alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Zoologists with author abbreviations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 15 November 2023, at 23:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spencer G. Lucas 7 languages Add topic

