Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Legal and political philosophy Toggle Legal and political philosophy subsection 3.1 Integralism and support for Catholic world government 3.2 Judicial interpretation 3.3 Common-good constitutionalism 3.4 Responses 4 Controversy 5 Personal life and views 6 Scholarly works Toggle Scholarly works subsection 6.1 Books 6.2 Selected articles 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Adrian Vermeule 3 languages Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American legal scholar Adrian Vermeule Vermeule in 2018 Born Cornelius Adrian Comstock Vermeule ( 1968-05-02 ) May 2, 1968 (age 57) Spouse Yun Soo Relatives Cornelius Vermeule (father) Emily Vermeule (mother) Blakey Vermeule (sister) Academic background Education Harvard University ( BA , JD ) Influences Aquinas de Maistre [ 1 ] Newman Schmitt [ 1 ] Sunstein Academic work Discipline Administrative law Constitutional law Institutions University of Chicago Harvard University Notable ideas Common good constitutionalism Website blogs .harvard .edu /adrianvermeule Cornelius Adrian Comstock Vermeule ( / v ər ˈ m juː l / , [ 2 ] born May 2, 1968) is an American legal scholar who is the Ralph S. Tyler Professor of Constitutional Law at Harvard Law School . An expert on constitutional and administrative law , since 2016 he has voiced support for Catholic integralism .

[ 3 ] He has articulated this into his theory of common-good constitutionalism .

Early life and education [ edit ] Vermeule was born on May 2, 1968.

[ 4 ] His father, Cornelius Clarkson Vermeule III , was a curator of ancient and classical art at the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston . His mother, Emily Vermeule , was a professor of philology and archaeology at Harvard University . Vermeule graduated from Harvard College in 1990 with a Bachelor of Arts , summa cum laude , in East Asian languages and civilizations. He then attended Harvard Law School, graduating in 1993 with a Juris Doctor , magna cum laude .

After graduating from law school, Vermeule was a law clerk to Judge David Sentelle of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit from 1993 to 1994 and to Justice Antonin Scalia of the U.S. Supreme Court from 1994 to 1995.

[ 5 ] Career [ edit ] Vermeule joined the faculty of the University of Chicago Law School in 1998.

[ 6 ] Vermeule became professor of law at Harvard Law School in 2006, was named John H. Watson Professor of Law in 2008, and was named Ralph S. Tyler Professor of Constitutional Law in 2016. He was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2012 at the age of 43.

Vermeule's writings focus on constitutional law, administrative law, and the theory of institutional design. He has authored or co-authored nine books.

[ 7 ] He teaches administrative law, legislation, and constitutional law.

In 2015, Vermeule co-founded the book review magazine The New Rambler .

[ 8 ] Vermeule became a contributing editor to Compact in 2022.

[ 9 ] On July 24, 2020, Vermeule was appointed to the Administrative Conference of the United States .

[ 10 ] Legal and political philosophy [ edit ] Integralism and support for Catholic world government [ edit ] A convert to Catholicism , Vermeule has become an advocate of integralism , a form of modern legal and political thought originating in historically Catholic-dominant societies and opposed to the Founding Fathers' ideal of division between church and state . Integralism in practice gives rise to state order (identifiable as theocratic ) in which the Common Good has precedence over individual autonomy, the value prioritized by American democracy. Rather than electoral politics, the path to confessional political order in integralist theory is "strategic ralliement ", or transformation within institutions and bureaucracies, that lays the groundwork for a realized integralist regime to succeed a liberal democratic order it assumes to be dying. The new state would "exercise coercion over baptized citizens in a manner different from non-baptized citizens".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Judicial interpretation [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e On judicial interpretation, Vermeule believes: The central question is not "How, in principle, should a text be interpreted?" The question instead should be, "How should certain institutions, with their distinctive abilities and limitations, interpret certain texts?" My conclusions are that judges acting under uncertainty should strive, above all, to minimize the costs of mistaken decisions and the costs of decision making, and to maximize the predictability of their decisions.

[ 6 ] Vermeule is a judicial review skeptic . Jonathan Siegel has written that Vermeule's approach to the interpretation of law: eschews, and attempts to transcend, the main elements of the long-standing debates over methods that courts should use to interpret statutes and the Constitution ... he sees no need to resolve apparently burning questions such as whether courts are bound by what legislatures write , or by what legislatures intend ... For Vermeule, everything comes down to a simple but withering cost–benefit analysis .

[ 14 ] In 2007, Vermeule said about the United States Supreme Court that it should stay away from controversial political matters, such as abortion laws and anti-sodomy statutes and defer to Congress, as the elected representatives of the people, except in extremely obvious cases. This would require both liberals and conservatives to step back and realize that the benefits of such a court would outweigh the drawbacks for both. Vermeule was thus suggesting "a kind of arms-control agreement, a tacit deal".

[ 15 ] Vermeule believes that legal change can only come about through cultural improvements. In an interview in 2016 after his conversion to Catholicism, Vermeule said, I put little stock or faith in the law. It is a tool that may be put to good uses or bad. In the long run it will be no better than the polity and culture in which it is embedded. If that culture sours and curdles; so will the law; indeed that process is well underway and its tempo is accelerating. Our hope lies elsewhere.

[ 5 ] Common-good constitutionalism [ edit ] Main article: Common Good Constitutionalism Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e In an article in The Atlantic in March 2020, Vermeule suggests that originalism – the idea that the meaning of the American Constitution was fixed at the time of its enactment, which has been the principal legal theory of conservative judges and legal scholars for the past 50 years, but which Vermeule now characterizes as merely "a useful rhetorical and political expedient" – has outlived its usefulness and needs to be replaced by what he calls "common-good constitutionalism".

Vermeule's concept of common-good constitutionalism is: based on the principles that government helps direct persons, associations, and society generally toward the common good, and that strong rule in the interest of attaining the common good is entirely legitimate. ... This approach should take as its starting point substantive moral principles that conduce to the common good, principles that officials (including, but by no means limited to, judges) should read into the majestic generalities and ambiguities of the written Constitution. These principles include respect for the authority of rule and of rulers; respect for the hierarchies needed for society to function; solidarity within and among families, social groups, and workers' unions, trade associations, and professions; appropriate subsidiarity, or respect for the legitimate roles of public bodies and associations at all levels of government and society; and a candid willingness to "legislate morality –indeed, a recognition that all legislation is necessarily founded on some substantive conception of morality, and that the promotion of morality is a core and legitimate function of authority. Such principles promote the common good and make for a just and well-ordered society.

[ 16 ] Vermeule specified that common-good constitutionalism is "not tethered to particular written instruments of civil law or the will of the legislators who created them". However, the determination of the common good made by the legislators is instrumental insofar as it embodies the background principles of the natural law.

[ 17 ] In other words, while the legislative intent is not per se controlling, positive law always seeks to put into effect natural law principles, and the intended principles behind the positive law are controlling. In that vein, he also says that "officials (including, but by no means limited to, judges)" will need "a candid willingness to 'legislate morality'" in order to create a "just and well-ordered society." [ 16 ] The main aim of common-good constitutionalism: is certainly not to maximize individual autonomy or to minimize the abuse of power (an incoherent goal in any event), but instead to ensure that the ruler has the power needed to rule well ... Just authority in rulers can be exercised for the good of subjects, if necessary even against the subjects' own perceptions of what is best for them — perceptions that may change over time anyway, as the law teaches, habituates, and re-forms them. Subjects will come to thank the ruler whose legal strictures, possibly experienced at first as coercive, encourage subjects to form more authentic desires for the individual and common goods, better habits, and beliefs that better track and promote communal well-being.

[ 16 ] In a critique in New York , politics and economics writer Eric Levitz argued that this theory of jurisprudence "allows the religious right to impose its vision of the good on the American people, whether they like it or not." [ 18 ] Garrett Epps , a professor of law at the University of Baltimore , also wrote a critique in The Atlantic , linking common-good constitutionalism to integralism and arguing that Vermeule's approach represents authoritarianism and objects "not [because] it is harmful and antihuman, but simply that, in the end, it is so banal .

[ 19 ] Responses [ edit ] Vermeule's common good constitutionalism has drawn a range of responses, both positive and negative. Legal scholar Richard H. Helmholz , in a review of Common Good Constitutionalism , described it as "a serious contribution to some of the most pressing legal debates of our times... Vermeule's book has the merit of providing some of the details about how such a change might occur. It also includes some marching orders." [ 20 ] Jack Goldsmith praised Common Good Constitutionalism as "the most important book of American constitutional theory in many decades".

[ 21 ] Legal scholar Conor Casey has criticized critics of common good constitutionalism as having fundamentally misunderstood it. According to Casey, common good constitutionalism "is entirely consistent with the natural law legal tradition and emphatically not an argument for authoritarianism unbound from legal and democratic constraint or concern for human rights".

[ 22 ] According to Eric Levitz, the values Vermeule promotes are those of Catholicism and the Christian right .

[ 18 ] Law professor Randy E. Barnett characterizes Vermeule's essay as "an argument for the temporal power of the state to be subordinated to the spiritual power of the Church ".

[ 23 ] Constitutional law professor Garrett Epps characterizes Vermeule as "an authentic Christian nationalist to whom the Constitution is only an obstacle". Vermeule's common-good constitutionalism argument is, according to Epps, really "authoritarian extremism" which "has absolutely nothing to do with the actual United States Constitution, and in many ways flatly contradicts it. ... In fact, the Constitution as such is not a binding text to Vermeule" since it must be, in Vermeule's words, "read into" in order to arrive at the results he prefers. In the end, Epps criticizes Vermeule's concept as a "banal" anti-constitutional theory akin to Falangism .

[ 24 ] Levitz notes that Vermeule received little support from conservatives for his arguments, although some did object to characterizing him as "authoritarian".

[ 18 ] [ 16 ] In a column in The Washington Post , libertarian columnist George F. Will described Vermeule's "common-good constitutionalism" as "Christian authoritarianism — muscular paternalism, with government enforcing social solidarity for religious reasons. This is the Constitution minus the Framers' purpose: a regime respectful of individuals' diverse notions of the life worth living." About Vermeule's and some other contemporary conservative views, Will goes on to say that "... American conservatism, when severed from the Enlightenment and its finest result, the American Founding, becomes spectacularly unreasonable and literally un-American." [ 25 ] Elliot Kaufman, writing in the conservative magazine National Review , has described Vermeule as a " reactionary " and an " illiberal " following in the footsteps of German Nazi thinker Carl Schmitt . In Kaufman's view, Vermeule's illiberalism is "dangerous".

[ 26 ] Law professor Rick Hills described Vermeule's recent writings as a kind of "anti-liberal chic", or "a really cheap way to signal one's willingness to offend without putting any specific cards on the table about one's own specific views about, say, the acceptability of locking up demonstrators who offend the regime in power".

[ 27 ] Peter J. Wallison , who served as White House Counsel during the Reagan presidency, described Vermeule's book as "more an embarrassment than a legal masterpiece" and that "the political structure he devises is highly authoritarian, perhaps even totalitarian". Wallison complained that Vermeule "never successfully defines what he means by the common good or how it can be achieved" and for failing to understand the distinction between textualism and originalism.

[ 28 ] Controversy [ edit ] In February 2020, Vermeule compared attendees of a conservative conference to concentration camp detainees, calling them "The very first group for the camps." [ 29 ] The Harvard Crimson wrote at the time that, "The comment drew criticism from professors and Harvard alumni, who interpreted the line as a reference to Nazi concentration camps during the Holocaust." UC Berkeley law professor Orin Kerr , whose father survived the Holocaust,  similarly responded by saying, "Bummed I wasn't invited, but then my family hasn't had good experiences in the camps." [ 29 ] Personal life and views [ edit ] Vermeule was raised as an Episcopalian , abandoning the denomination in college, but returning to it later in life.

[ 30 ] He announced his conversion to Catholicism in 2016.

[ 5 ] He said in an October 2016 interview that the logic behind his Catholic beliefs is inspired by John Henry Newman , and added: Raised a Protestant, despite all my thrashing and twisting, I eventually couldn't help but believe that the apostolic succession through Peter as the designated leader and primus inter pares is in some logical or theological sense prior to everything else – including even Scripture, whose formation was guided and completed by the apostles and their successors, themselves inspired by the Holy Spirit.

[ 5 ] Scholarly works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Vermeule, Adrian (2006).

Judging Under Uncertainty: An Institutional Theory of Legal Interpretation . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian; Posner, Eric (2007).

Terror in the Balance: Security, Liberty, and the Courts . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian (2009).

Law and the Limits of Reason . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian; Posner, Eric (2010).

The Executive Unbound: After the Madisonian Republic . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian (2011).

The System of the Constitution . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian; Breyer, Stephen G.

; Stewart, Richard B.; Sunstein, Cass R.

; Herz, Michael (2011).

Administrative Law and Regulatory Policy: Problems Text, and Cases (7th ed.). New York: Wolters Kluwer Law & Business.

ISBN 9780735587441 .

Vermeule, Adrian (2014).

The Constitution of Risk . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Sunstein, Cass R.; Vermeule, Adrian (2020).

Law & Leviathan: Redeeming the Administrative State . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Vermeule, Adrian (February 2022).

Common Good Constitutionalism: Recovering the Classical Legal Tradition . Medford, MA: Polity Press .

ISBN 978-1509548873 .

Selected articles [ edit ] Vermeule, Adrian (1997). "Saving Constructions".

Georgetown Law Journal .

85 (6): 1945– 78.

— (1998). "Legislative History and the Limits of Judicial Competence: The Untold Story of Holy Trinity Church ".

Stanford Law Review .

50 (6): 1833– 96.

doi : 10.2307/1229242 .

JSTOR 1229242 .

— (2000).

"Interpretive Choice" .

New York University Law Review .

75 (1): 74– 149.

—; Posner, Eric A.

(2002).

"Interring the Nondelegation Doctrine" .

University of Chicago Law Review .

69 (4): 1721– 62.

JSTOR 1600617 .

—; Sunstein, Cass R.

(2003).

"Interpretation and Institutions" .

Michigan Law Review .

101 (4): 885– 951.

—; Sunstein, Cass R. (2005).

"Is Capital Punishment Morally Required? Acts, Omissions, and Life-Life Tradeoffs" (PDF) .

Stanford Law Review .

58 (3): 703– 50.

—; Freeman, Jody (2008). " Massachusetts v. EPA : From Politics to Expertise".

Supreme Court Review .

2007 : 51– 110.

doi : 10.1086/655170 .

— (2009).

"Our Schmittian Administrative Law" .

Harvard Law Review .

122 (4): 1095– 1150.

—; Stephenson, Matthew C.

(2009).

" Chevron Has Only One Step" .

Virginia Law Review .

95 (3): 597– 610.

JSTOR 25478714 .

— (2013).

"Conventions of Agency Independence" .

Columbia Law Review .

113 (5): 1163– 1238.

JSTOR 23479725 .

—; Sunstein, Cass R. (2018).

"The Morality of Administrative Law" .

Harvard Law Review .

131 (7): 1924– 78.

JSTOR 44865917 .

See also [ edit ] List of law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States (Seat 9) References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Integralism of Adrian Vermeule" . October 5, 2020.

^ Martin, Douglas (December 9, 2008) "Cornelius C. Vermeule III, a Curator of Classical Antiquities, Is Dead at 83" , The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2012 ^ "The Integralism of Adrian Vermeule" .

Commonweal Magazine . October 5, 2020 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ Carter, Jane B. & Morris, Sarah P. (1995).

The Ages of Homer: A Tribute to Emily Townsend Vermeule . University of Texas Press. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-292-73376-3 .

^ a b c d Teahan, Madeleine (October 28, 2016).

"There is no middle way between atheism and Catholicism, says Harvard professor who is converting" .

Catholic Herald . Archived from the original on December 15, 2016 . Retrieved October 28, 2016 .

^ a b Schuler, Peter (June 10, 2004).

"Adrian Vermeule, Professor in the Law School" .

The University of Chicago Chronicle . Vol. 23, no. 18 . Retrieved September 8, 2012 .

^ "Adrian Vermeule" .

Harvard Law School . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ Kerr, Orin (March 3, 2015).

"The New Rambler" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved May 24, 2016 .

^ "Compact Magazine Makes a Strong Case for Liberalism" . March 28, 2022.

^ "President Donald J. Trump Announces Intent to Appoint Individuals to Key Administration Posts" .

whitehouse.gov . Retrieved September 7, 2020 – via National Archives .

^ Peters, Nathaniel (April 11, 2018) "The Ultimate Catholic Showdown? Liberalism vs. Integralism at Harvard" Public Discourse ^ Vermeule, Adrian (March 16, 2018) "Ralliement: Two Distinctions" The Josias ^ Beauchamp, Zack (September 9, 2019) "The anti-liberal moment" Vox ^ Siegel, Jonathan R. (January 2008).

"Judicial Interpretation in the Cost-Benefit Crucible" (PDF) .

Minnesota Law Review .

92 . Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota : 387– 88. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 17, 2016 . Retrieved December 27, 2011 .

^ Shea, Christopher (October 7, 2007) "Supreme downsizing" The Boston Globe ^ a b c d Vermeule, Adrian (March 31, 2020) "Beyond Originalism" The Atlantic Monthly ^ Vermeule, Adrian (2022).

Common good constitutionalism : recovering the classical legal tradition . Cambridge, UK. pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-1-5095-4887-3 .

OCLC 1266642815 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b c Levitz, Eric (April 2020) "No, Theocracy and Progressivism Aren't Equally Authoritarian" New York ^ Epps, Garrett (April 2020) "Common-Good Constitutionalism Is an Idea as Dangerous as They Come" The Atlantic ^ Helmholz, R. H. (May 2022).

"Marching Orders" .

First Things .

^ "Common Good Constitutionalism" .

Polity .

^ Casey, Conor (October 2021).

" 'Common Good Constitutionalism' and the New Debate over Constitutional Interpretation in the United States" .

Public Law : 765– 787.

SSRN 3725068 .

^ Barnett, Randy E. (April 3, 2020) "Common-Good Constitutionalism Reveals the Dangers of Any Non-originalist Approach to the Constitution" The Atlantic Monthly ^ Epps, Garrett (April 3, 2020) "Common-Good Constitutionalism Is an Idea as Dangerous as They Come" The Atlantic Monthly ^ Will, George F.

(May 29. 2020) "When American conservatism becomes un-American" The Washington Post ^ Kaufman, Elliot (December 2017).

"Editorship and the Art of Writing" .

National Review . Retrieved April 1, 2020 .

^ Hills, Rick (May 11, 2018).

"Adrian Vermeule's Anti-Liberal Chic?" .

Pawfsblawg . Retrieved April 1, 2020 .

^ "Review: Common Good Constitutionalism" .

American Enterprise Institute - AEI . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ a b "Harvard Law School Professor Receives Backlash for Tweet About 'Camps' | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved July 10, 2022 .

^ Deardurff, Christina (October 2016) "Finding Stable Ground" (interview) Inside the Vatican External links [ edit ] Official website Harvard Law School biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ldtbj
Cached time: 20250817055027
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.940 seconds
Real time usage: 1.171 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5703/1000000
Revision size: 30567/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 189907/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10900/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 148633/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.552/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10497522/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  919.585      1 -total
 25.50%  234.486      1 Template:Infobox_academic
 14.57%  133.952     11 Template:Cite_book
 12.70%  116.784      1 Template:Reflist
 12.37%  113.775      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  9.47%   87.126     14 Template:Cite_journal
  6.83%   62.796      1 Template:Short_description
  6.35%   58.364      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.08%   46.750     10 Template:Cite_web
  4.55%   41.804     50 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7144012:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817055027 and revision id 1304548669. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adrian_Vermeule&oldid=1304548669 " Categories : 1968 births American Roman Catholics Converts to Roman Catholicism from Anglicanism Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Harvard College alumni Harvard Law School alumni Harvard Law School faculty Integralism Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States Living people The New Rambler Scholars of administrative law American scholars of constitutional law University of Chicago faculty Vermeule family Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adrian Vermeule 3 languages Add topic

