Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 Events 4 Notable people 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Weil der Stadt 49 languages Alemannisch العربية Aragonés تۆرکجه Беларуская Cebuano Čeština ChiTumbuka Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Lombard Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°45′3″N 8°52′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.75083°N 8.87056°E ﻿ / 48.75083; 8.87056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(February 2009) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Weil der Stadt]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Weil der Stadt}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Town in Baden-Württemberg, Germany Weil der Stadt Town Church of Saints Peter and Paul Coat of arms Location of Weil der Stadt   within Böblingen   district Weil der Stadt Show map of Germany Weil der Stadt Show map of Baden-Württemberg Coordinates: 48°45′3″N 8°52′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.75083°N 8.87056°E ﻿ / 48.75083; 8.87056 Country Germany State Baden-Württemberg District Böblingen Government • Mayor (2020–28) Christian Walter [ 1 ] Area • Total 43.17 km 2 (16.67 sq mi) Elevation 406 m (1,332 ft) Population (2023-12-31) [ 2 ] • Total 19,463 • Density 450/km 2 (1,200/sq mi) Time zone UTC+01:00 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+02:00 ( CEST ) Postal codes 71255–71263 Dialling codes 07033 Vehicle registration BB Website www.weil-der-stadt.de Weil der Stadt ( German pronunciation: [ˈvaɪl deːɐ̯ ˈʃtat] ) is a town of about 19,000 inhabitants in the Stuttgart Region of the German state of Baden-Württemberg . It is about 30 km (19 mi) west of Stuttgart city centre, in the valley of the River Würm , and is often called the "Gate to the Black Forest ".

Name [ edit ] The name Weil derives from the Latin word villa , an estate or manor. The suffix die Stadt (the town) was added to distinguish Weil from various nearby villages of the same name, such as Weil im Dorf and Weil im Schönbuch . The modern name is unusual in that it contains the dative article der rather than the nominative article die . This quirk arose because place names typically come after prepositions that govern the dative case in German, such as in or aus .

[ 3 ] The Roman origins of the town are immortalized in its coat of arms, which features the motto SPQR .

History [ edit ] The village of Wile was first mentioned in 1075, and described as the property of the famous abbey of Hirsau . Weil der Stadt became a Free Imperial City in the 13th century, but had existed for centuries before as an important trading place.

The city was completely destroyed during the Thirty Years' War in 1648 but was subsequently rebuilt, and is still dominated by buildings from this period. The city's fortifications have survived largely intact, with city walls, gates, and several towers.

Weil der Stadt is best known as the birthplace of the astronomer Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), and it bears the unofficial title of Keplerstadt , or Kepler town.

[ 4 ] Another famous son is the Protestant reformer Johannes Brenz (1499–1570).

[ 5 ] Due to its surroundings and attractive cityscape, dominated by the church steeple of St. Peter and Paul, Weil der Stadt is a popular destination for excursions in the Stuttgart region.

Events [ edit ] Weil der Stadt is a stronghold of traditional carnival , which is celebrated with a parade in the city centre. In contrast to the carnival in the Rhineland, the carnival in Weil der Stadt, called Fasnet , is based on Alemannic traditions, shared by various towns in southwestern Germany and Switzerland.

Weil der Stadt escaped destruction in World War II when a French artillery barrage was called off in honour of it being Kepler's birthplace.

Notable people [ edit ] Heinrich Steinhöwel (ca. 1410 - 1479), German doctor, humanist, translator and writer.

Paul Scriptoris (ca. 1460 – 1505), a German Franciscan mathematician and Scotist Johannes Brenz (1499–1570), Lutheran theologian and the Protestant Reformer.

[ 5 ] Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), astronomer, mathematician, astrologer, natural philosopher and writer on music.

[ 4 ] Joseph Anton Gall (1748–1807), the Bishop of Linz from 1788 to 1807.

Adolph Schoeninger (1833–1900), American businessman in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania ; owned Western Wheel Works which manufactured bicycles References [ edit ] Borst, Otto and Joachim Feist. Weil der Stadt. Stuttgart: Theiss Verlag, Second Edition 1989.

^ Aktuelle Wahlergebnisse , Staatsanzeiger, accessed 11 September 2021.

^ "Bevölkerung nach Nationalität und Geschlecht am 31. Dezember 2023 (Fortschreibung auf Basis des Zensus 2022)" [Population by nationality and sex as of December 31, 2023 (updated based on the 2022 census)] (CSV) (in German).

Statistisches Landesamt Baden-Württemberg .

^ Scott, Alan (2014).

The Genitive Case in Dutch and German . Leiden: Koninklijke Brill. p. 97.

ISBN 9789004183285 .

^ a b Clerke, Agnes Mary (1911).

"Kepler, Johann" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). pp.

749– 751.

^ a b Gordon, Alexander (1911).

"Brenz, Johann" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). p. 497.

External links [ edit ] Official website (in German) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Weil der Stadt .

Marktplatz, Weil der Stadt, Baden Württemberg, Deutschland (360TOURIST Germany) v t e Swabian League History Swabian War Knights' War Franconian War Peasants' War Members Aalen Augsburg Baden Bavaria Bayreuth Biberach Bopfingen Brandenburg-Ansbach Dinkelsbühl Donauwörth Esslingen Giengen Heilbronn Hesse Isny Kaufbeuren Kempten Leutkirch Lindau Mainz Memmingen Nördlingen Palatinate Pfullendorf Ravensburg Reutlingen Schwäbisch Gmünd Schwäbisch Hall Trier Überlingen Ulm Wangen Weil Wimpfen Württemberg Category Commons v t e Swabian Circle (1500–1806) of the Holy Roman Empire Ecclesiastical Augsburg Constance Ellwangen Kempten Lindau Secular Baden Heiligenberg Hohenzollern-Hechingen Klettgau Vaduz Waldburg Scheer Trauchburg Waldsee Wolfegg Wurzach Zeil Württemberg Prelates Baindt Buchau Elchingen Gengenbach Gutenzell Heggbach Irsee Kaisheim Mainau Marchtal Neresheim Ochsenhausen Petershausen Roggenburg Rot Rottenmünster Salmanweiler St. George's in Isny Schussenried Söflingen Ursberg Weingarten Weißenau Wettenhausen Zwiefalten Counts / Lords Altshausen Baar Bondorf Eberstein Eglingen Eglofs Fugger Jakob Johann Markus Gundelfingen Gutenstein Hausen Heiligenberg Helfenstein Hohenems Hohengeroldseck Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen Justingen Kinzigerthal Königsegg and Aulendorf Lustenau Meßkirch Mindelheim / Schwabegg Oberdischingen Öttingen Baldern Öttingen Wallerstein Rechberg Rothenfels and Stauffen Stühlingen and Hohenhöwen Tettnang / Langenargen Thannhausen Wiesensteig Cities Aalen Augsburg Biberach Bopfingen Buchau Buchhorn Dinkelsbühl Eßlingen Gengenbach Giengen Heilbronn Isny Kaufbeuren Kempten Leutkirch Lindau Memmingen Nördlingen Offenburg Pfullendorf Ravensburg Reutlingen Rottweil Schwäbisch Gmünd Schwäbisch Hall Überlingen Ulm Wangen Weil Wimpfen Zell Circles est. 1500: Bavarian , Swabian , Upper Rhenish , Lower Rhenish–Westphalian , Franconian , (Lower) Saxon Circles est. 1512: Austrian , Burgundian , Upper Saxon , Electoral Rhenish · Unencircled territories v t e Free imperial cities of the Holy Roman Empire By 1792 Aachen Aalen Augsburg Biberach Bopfingen Bremen H Buchau Buchhorn Cologne H Dinkelsbühl Dortmund H Eßlingen Frankfurt Friedberg Gengenbach Giengen Goslar H Hamburg H Heilbronn Isny Kaufbeuren Kempten Kessenich Leutkirch Lindau Lübeck H Memmingen Mühlhausen Mülhausen D, S Nordhausen Nördlingen Nuremberg Offenburg Pfullendorf Ravensburg Regensburg Reutlingen Rothenburg Rottweil S Schwäbisch Gmünd Schwäbisch Hall Schweinfurt Speyer Überlingen Ulm Wangen Weil Weißenburg in Bayern Wetzlar Wimpfen Windsheim Worms Zell Free Imperial Cities by 1792 Lost imperial immediacy or no longer part of the Holy Roman Empire by 1792 Basel S Bern S Besançon Brakel Cambrai Diessenhofen Donauwörth Duisburg Düren Gelnhausen Hagenau D Herford Kaysersberg D Kolmar D Konstanz Landau D Lemgo Lucerne S Mainz Metz Munster D Obernai D Pfeddersheim Rheinfelden Riga Rosheim D St. Gallen S Sarrebourg Schaffhausen S Schmalkalden Schlettstadt D Seltz D Soest H Solothurn S Straßburg Toul Turckheim D Verden Verdun Warburg Weißenburg in Elsaß D Zürich S D Member of the Décapole H Member of the Hanseatic League S Member or associate of the Swiss Confederacy v t e Towns and municipalities in Böblingen (district) Aidlingen Altdorf bei Böblingen Böblingen Bondorf Deckenpfronn Ehningen Gärtringen Gäufelden Grafenau Herrenberg Hildrizhausen Holzgerlingen Jettingen Leonberg Magstadt Mötzingen Nufringen Renningen Rutesheim Schönaich Sindelfingen Steinenbronn Waldenbuch Weil im Schönbuch Weil der Stadt Weissach Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Weil_der_Stadt&oldid=1292951877 " Categories : Towns in Baden-Württemberg Böblingen (district) 1803 disestablishments States and territories established in the 13th century Free imperial cities Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Geography articles needing translation from German Wikipedia Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with German IPA Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 20:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Weil der Stadt 49 languages Add topic

