Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Freud Toggle Freud subsection 2.1 Origin of the theory 2.2 Aggression/Aggressive instinct 2.3 Application to society and civilization 2.4 Philosophical connections to Schopenhauer 3 Analytic reception Toggle Analytic reception subsection 3.1 Melanie Klein 3.2 Jacques Lacan 3.3 Other reactions 4 Mortido and Destrudo Toggle Mortido and Destrudo subsection 4.1 Paul Federn 4.2 Edoardo Weiss 4.3 Eric Berne 4.4 Jean Laplanche 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Death drive 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept from Freudian psychoanalytics Not to be confused with Death Drive (album) .

Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e In classical psychoanalysis , the death drive ( German : Todestrieb ) is an aspect of libidinal energy that seeks "to lead organic life back into the inanimate state." [ 1 ] For Sigmund Freud , it "express[es] itself—though probably only in part—as an drive of destruction directed against the external world and other organisms", [ 2 ] for example, in the behaviour of predation . It complements the life drive , which encompasses self-preservation and reproduction behaviours such as nutrition and sexuality. Both aspects of libido form the common basis of Freud's dual drive theory .

The death drive is not only expressed through instinctive aggression , such as hunting for nourishment, but also through pathological behaviour such as repetition compulsion , and self-destructiveness .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Dynamics of the death- and life drive in Freud's three instances model, referenced to his rider metaphor: The head symbolizes the ego (reality principle) the animal body the id (pleasure principle). Dualistic in an analogue way, the libidinal energy branches out into two main areas: the mental urge to know (up), and the bodily urge to act (down). Both combine through the ego in order to fulfil the needs of the id. This includes perception and judgement of inner/outer reality, leading to experiences by muscle control, that imprint the superego. The superego contains the socialisation taking place during childhood. If it supports the id's instinctual needs, the organism remains mentally healthy – the 'rider' carries out the will of his 'animal' "as if it were his own".

[ 6 ] Freud proposed the concept of the death and life drives in his work Beyond the Pleasure Principle in 1920. It was developed to solve problems arising from the distinction between the pleasure principle of the id and the reality principle of the ego, with which he was still unable to explain seemingly meaningless or even self-destructive phenomena like recurring dreams of veterans that constantly remind of their war injuries. Freud also proposes that redirection of the death instinct outwards is the source of aggression.

The death drive forms an important part of Freud's psychoanalytic theory, being one of the two fundamental drives that influence behaviour. It is a controversial aspect of Freud's theory, with many later analysts modifying it or outright rejecting it. Later analysts who have accepted the concept have created the concept of mortido and destrudo to provide an analogous term to Eros's libido .

Terminology [ edit ] Three major terms are used to refer to the same Freudian concept: death drive, death instinct, and Thanatos .

Death drive and death instinct both originate from varying translations of the German words Instinkt ( instinct ) and Trieb ( drive ). While Freud typically used the word Trieb when referring to the death drive, [ 7 ] the Standard Edition of Freud uses the word "instinct" for both Instinkt and Trieb.

[ 7 ] [ note 1 ] Death instinct and death drive are typically synonymous.

The term Thanatos was coined by Wilhelm Stekel and its use was advocated by Paul Federn .

[ 9 ] The term is never found in Freud's written works, but according to biographer Ernest Jones, Freud occasionally used the term in conversation when referring to the death drive.

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] The term is a reference to the personification of death from Greek myth, Thanatos , who is used to provide an opposite to the mythological term used to refer to the life drive, Eros .

[ 9 ] [ 5 ] Thanatos is also typically synonymous with death drive.

Freud [ edit ] Origin of the theory [ edit ] Freud arrived at the concept of the death instinct through these observations of repetition compulsion —the tendency of people who have undergone traumatic events to return to their painful experience repeatedly, often in dreams, and children's play.

[ 11 ] He found the phenomenon of people involuntarily subjecting themselves to disturbing stimuli would be irreconcilable with the pleasure principle (the idea that the mind works to lessen tension within it).

[ 12 ] While maintaining his theory of the pleasure principle and its regulation by the reality principle , Freud introduced the concept of the death instinct in his 1920 work Beyond the Pleasure Principle . He cites Sabina Spielrein and her paper "Destruction as the Cause of Coming into Being" as a predecessor for his line of thinking.

[ 13 ] In this work, Freud claims that repetition compulsion has a highly instinctual characteristic and gives the appearance of a "daemonic force at work".

[ 14 ] [ 12 ] From there, he argues that another instinct beside the pleasure principle must be responsible for the phenomena.

[ 12 ] He claims that all instincts are "an urge inherent in organic life to restore an earlier state of things", and since the earliest state instinct could restore is the state preceding life itself, there must be an instinct that aims to return oneself into inorganic non-existence.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He claims that this instinct is used to provide mastery over unpleasant experiences by repeating them in play and dreams.

[ 12 ] In The Ego and the Id , he states that the death instinct forms a duality within the id alongside Eros.

[ 15 ] Freud also predicated his notion of the death drive on the "nirvana principle": the fundamental tendency to aim toward reducing all instinctual tension to zero, that is, non-existence.

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] [ note 2 ] Aggression/Aggressive instinct [ edit ] Freud originally held that aggressive impulses could be variously explained by both the sexual and self-preservative instincts.

[ 16 ] In Beyond the Pleasure Principle , Freud moves away from this belief by claiming that the two primary instincts are the life instinct Eros (which incorporates both the sexual and self-preservative instincts), and the death instinct.

[ 16 ] Freud believed that the death instinct was aimed toward the self, and that aggression (or the "aggressive instinct") was the death instinct reoriented at the outside world.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] The death instinct can be directed outwards as aggression when the ego is disturbed and engages in a defense mechanism such as projection . This is tempered by the super-ego , which redirects that aggression onto the ego itself and creates the feeling of guilt .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] In childhood, frustration of desires by parents causes aggression towards them, and then results in introjection and identification of this aspect into the super-ego during its formation.

[ 19 ] To summarize, the death instinct (as a part of the id , like the Eros) is originally oriented at the self, then when oriented outwards as aggression, it is repressed as the super-ego develops, which results in the death instinct being again oriented inwards at the ego.

Application to society and civilization [ edit ] ...civilization is a process in the service of Eros, whose purpose is to combine single human individuals, and after that families, then races, peoples and nations, into one great unity, the unity of mankind... But man’s natural aggressive instinct, the hostility of each against all and of all against each, opposes this programme of civilization. This aggressive instinct is the derivative and the main representative of the death instinct which we have found alongside Eros and which shares world-dominion with it. And now, I think, the meaning of the evolution of civilization is no longer obscure to us. It must present the struggle between Eros and Death, between the instinct of life arid the instinct of destruction, as it works itself out in the human species.

— Sigmund Freud, Civilization and Its Discontents , (SE, XXI.122) In Civilization and Its Discontents , Freud discusses the importance of instincts to the structure of civilization, with civilization performing a moderating role which reorients aggression to the outside world onto the self.

[ 21 ] Freud believed that aggression stemming from the death instinct must be repressed via reaction formation in order for civilization to exist.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] In the process of civilization, Freud places the death instinct behind Eros in visibility and importance, stating it is only detected when "alloyed with Eros".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Philosophical connections to Schopenhauer [ edit ] From a philosophical perspective, the death drive may be viewed in relation to the work of the German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer . In The World as Will and Representation , he postulates that all exists by a metaphysical "will" (more clearly, a will to live ), and that pleasure affirms this will.

[ 24 ] Schopenhauer's pessimism led him to believe that the affirmation of the "will" was a negative and immoral thing, due to his belief of life producing more suffering than happiness. The death drive would seem to manifest as a natural and psychological negation of the "will".

Freud was well aware of such possible linkages. In a letter of 1919, he wrote that regarding "the theme of death, [that I] have stumbled onto an odd idea via the drives and must now read all sorts of things that belong to it, for instance Schopenhauer".

[ 25 ] Ernest Jones (who like many analysts was not convinced of the need for the death drive, over and above an instinct of aggression) considered that "Freud seemed to have landed in the position of Schopenhauer, who taught that 'death is the goal of life'".

[ 26 ] However, as Freud put it to the imagined auditors of his New Introductory Lectures (1932), "You may perhaps shrug your shoulders and say: "That isn't natural science, it's Schopenhauer's philosophy!" But, ladies and gentlemen, why should not a bold thinker have guessed something that is afterwards confirmed by sober and painstaking detailed research?" [ 27 ] He then went on to add that "what we are saying is not even genuine Schopenhauer....we are not overlooking the fact that there is life as well as death. We recognise two basic instincts and give each of them its own aim".

[ 28 ] Analytic reception [ edit ] The concept of the death drive has been controversial. Freud acknowledged this, saying "the assumption of the existence of an instinct of death or destruction has met with resistance even in analytic circles".

[ 29 ] Ernest Jones would comment of Beyond the Pleasure Principle that the book not only "displayed a boldness of speculation that was unique in all his writings" but was "further noteworthy in being the only one of Freud's which has received little acceptance on the part of his followers".

[ 30 ] Salman Akhtar writes in the Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychoanalysis that "with the exception of Melanie Klein , her followers, and Kurt Eissler , most subsequent analysts laid the postulate of death instinct to rest." [ 31 ] Otto Fenichel in his compendious survey of the first Freudian half-century concluded that "the facts on which Freud based his concept of a death instinct in no way necessitate the assumption ... of a genuine self-destructive instinct".

[ 32 ] Heinz Hartmann set the tone for ego psychology when he "chose to ... do without 'Freud's other, mainly biologically oriented set of hypotheses of the "life" and "death instincts"'".

[ 33 ] In the object relations theory , among the independent group, the most common repudiation was the loathsome notion of the death instinct'.

[ 34 ] Melanie Klein [ edit ] Melanie Klein and her immediate followers considered that "the infant is exposed from birth to the anxiety stirred up by the inborn polarity of instincts—the immediate conflict between the life instinct and the death instinct"; [ 4 ] and her followers built much of their theory of early childhood around the outward deflection of the latter. The former vice-president of the International Psychoanalytical Association , Hanna Segal , writes "This deflection of the death instinct, described by Freud, in Melanie Klein's view consists partly of a projection, partly of the conversion of the death instinct into aggression".

[ 4 ] Jacques Lacan [ edit ] French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan castigated the "refusal to accept this culminating point of Freud's doctrine ... by those who conduct their analysis on the basis of a conception of the ego ... that death instinct whose enigma Freud propounded for us at the height of his experience".

[ 35 ] Characteristically, he stressed the linguistic aspects of the death drive: "the symbol is substituted for death in order to take possession of the first swelling of life .... There is therefore no further need to have recourse to the outworn notion of primordial masochism in order to understand the reason for the repetitive games in ... his Fort!

and in his Da!

." [ 36 ] Other reactions [ edit ] Eric Berne too would proudly proclaim that he, "besides having repeated and confirmed the conventional observations of Freud, also believes right down the line with him concerning the death instinct, and the pervasiveness of the repetition compulsion ".

[ 3 ] Freud's conceptual opposition of death and Eros drives in the human psyche was applied by Walter A. Davis in Deracination: Historicity, Hiroshima, and the Tragic Imperative [ 37 ] and Death's Dream Kingdom: The American Psyche since 9/11.

[ 38 ] Davis described social reactions to both Hiroshima and 9/11 from the Freudian viewpoint of the death force. Unless they consciously take responsibility for the damage of those reactions, Davis claims that Americans will repeat them.

Mortido and Destrudo [ edit ] The terms mortido and destrudo (though both rejected by Freud), [ 39 ] formed analogously to libido and refer to the energy of the death instinct .

[ 40 ] In the 21st century, their use among Freudian psychoanalysts has been waning, but still designate destructive energy.

[ 41 ] [ 40 ] The importance of integrating mortido into an individual's life, as opposed to splitting it off and disowning it, has been taken up by figures like Robert Bly in the men's movement.

[ 42 ] Paul Federn used the term mortido for the new energy source, [ 43 ] and has generally been followed in that by other analytic writers.

[ 44 ] His disciple and collaborator Weiss, however, chose destrudo, which was later taken up by Charles Brenner .

[ 45 ] Mortido has also been applied in contemporary expositions of the Kabbalah .

[ 46 ] Literary criticism has been almost more prepared than psychoanalysis to make at least metaphorical use of the term 'Destrudo'. Artistic images were seen by Joseph Campbell in terms of "incestuous 'libido' and patricidal 'destrudo'"; [ 47 ] while literary descriptions of the conflict between destrudo and libido [ 48 ] are still fairly widespread in the 21st century.

[ 49 ] Paul Federn [ edit ] Mortido was introduced by Freud's pupil Paul Federn to cover the psychic energy of the death instinct, something left open by Freud himself: [ 50 ] Providing what he saw as clinical proof of the reality of the death instinct in 1930, Federn reported on the self-destructive tendencies of severely melancholic patients as evidence of what he would later call inwardly-directed mortido.

[ 51 ] Edoardo Weiss [ edit ] Destrudo is a term introduced by Italian psychoanalyst Edoardo Weiss in 1935 to denote the energy of the death instinct, on the analogy of libido [ 52 ] [ 53 ] —and thus to cover the energy of the destructive impulse in Freudian psychology.

Destrudo is the opposite of libido—the urge to create, an energy that arises from the Eros (or "life") drive—and is the urge to destroy arising from Thanatos (death), and thus an aspect of what Sigmund Freud termed "the aggressive instincts, whose aim is destruction".

[ 54 ] Weiss related aggression/destrudo to secondary narcissism , something generally only described in terms of the libido turning towards the self.

[ 55 ] Eric Berne [ edit ] Main article: Eric Berne Eric Berne, who was a pupil of Federn's, made extensive use of the term mortido in his pre- transactional analysis study, The Mind in Action (1947). As he wrote in the foreword to the third edition of 1967, "the historical events of the last thirty years...become much clearer by introducing Paul Federn's concept of mortido".

[ 56 ] Berne saw mortido as activating such forces as hate and cruelty, blinding anger and social hostilities; [ 57 ] and considered that inwardly directed mortido underlay the phenomena of guilt and self-punishment, as well as their clinical exacerbations in the form of depression or melancholia.

[ 58 ] Berne saw sexual acts as gratifying mortido at the same time as libido; and recognised that on occasion the former becomes more important sexually than the latter, as in sadomasochism and destructive emotional relationships.

[ 59 ] Berne's concern with the role of mortido in individuals and groups, social formations and nations, arguably continued throughout all his later writings.

[ 60 ] Jean Laplanche [ edit ] Jean Laplanche has explored repeatedly the question of mortido, [ 61 ] and of how far a distinctive instinct of destruction can be identified in parallel to the forces of libido.

[ 62 ] See also [ edit ] Aggression Cupio dissolvi Group conflict Id resistance L'appel du vide Karl Menninger Psychical inertia Suicide The Scorpion and the Frog Thoughts for the Times on War and Death Useless machine Notes [ edit ] ^ Though the Standard Edition of the Works of Freud translates both Instinkt ("instinct") and Trieb ("drive") as "instinct", Freud actually treats each word as being distinct.

[ 8 ] ^ The difference between the pleasure principle and the nirvana principle is complex due to changes in Freud's conceptions throughout his years of thinking. Put simply, the pleasure principle strives to reduce displeasure/tension, while the nirvana principle strives to end the possibility of tension entirely.

References [ edit ] ^ Freud, On Metapsychology p. 380.

^ Freud, On Metapsychology p. 381.

^ a b Eric Berne, What Do You say After You Say Hello?

(London, 1975) pp. 399–400.

^ a b c Hanna Segal , Introduction to the work of Melanie Klein (London, 1964), p. 12.

^ a b Rycroft, Charles (1995).

A critical dictionary of psychoanalysis . Penguin reference books (2nd ed.). London: Penguin Books. p. 183.

ISBN 978-0-14-051310-3 .

^ Freud, Sigmund (1978).

The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud. Volume XIX (1923–26) The Ego and the Id and Other Works . Strachey, James, Freud, Anna, Rothgeb, Carrie Lee, Richards, Angela, Scientific Literature Corporation. London: Hogarth Press. p. 19.

ISBN 0701200677 .

OCLC 965512 .

^ a b Nagera, Humberto, ed. (2014) [1970].

"Instinct and Drive (pp. 19 ff.)" .

Basic Psychoanalytic Concepts on the Theory of Instincts . Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-67045-2 .

^ Nagera 2014 , p. 19.

^ a b c Akhtar, Salman (2018).

Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychoanalysis . London: Routledge. p. 284.

ISBN 978-1-85575-860-5 .

^ Jones, Ernest (1957) [1953].

The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud. Volume 3 . New York City: Basic Books . p. 273.

It is a little odd that Freud himself never, except in conversation, used for the death instinct the term Thanatos , one which has become so popular since. At first he used the terms "death instinct" and "destructive instinct" indiscriminately, alternating between them, but in his discussion with Einstein about war he made the distinction that the former is directed against the self and the latter, derived from it, is directed outward. Stekel had in 1909 used the word Thanatos to signify a death-wish, but it was Federn who introduced it in the present context.

^ a b Nagera 2014 , p. 68.

^ a b c d e f Storr, Anthony (2001).

Freud: A Very Short Introduction . Very Short Introductions. Oxford New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

64– 66.

ISBN 978-0-19-285455-1 .

^ Freud, Sigmund (1961).

Beyond the Pleasure Principle (PDF) . W.W. Norton & Company, Inc. p. 49.

ISBN 0393007693 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Akhtar 2018 , pp. 67–68.

^ Laplanche, Jean (2018).

The Language of Psychoanalysis . Jean-Bertrand Pontalis, Daniel Lagache, D. N. Smith. London: Karnac Books. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-946439-49-2 .

^ a b Nagera 2014 , pp. 71–72.

^ Nagera 2014 , p. 75.

^ a b Storr 2001 , p. 69.

^ a b Nagera 2014 , p. 76.

^ Storr 2001 , pp. 69–70.

^ a b Neu, Jerome, ed. (1991).

The Cambridge companion to Freud . Cambridge [England]; New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 279.

ISBN 978-0-521-37424-8 .

^ Freud, S. (1930). Civilization and Its Discontents.

The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works of Sigmund Freud , Volume XXI (1927-1931): The Future of an Illusion, Civilization and its Discontents, and Other Works, 121 ^ Laplanche 2018 , p. 99.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur (2008).

The World as Will and Presentation . Translated by Richard E. Aquila and David Carus. New York: Longman.

^ Quoted in Peter Gay, Freud: A life for our time (London, 1989), p. 391.

^ Ernest Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud (London, 1964), p. 508.

^ Sigmund Freud, New Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (London, 1991), pp. 140–1.

^ Freud, New Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis , p. 141.

^ Freud, Civilization , p. 310.

^ Jones, Life , p. 505.

^ Akhtar 2018 , p. 176.

^ Otto Fenichel, The Psychoanalytic Theory of Neurosis (London, 1946), p. 60.

^ Quoted in Gay, Freud , pp. 402–3n.

^ Richard Appignanesi, ed., Introducing Melanie Klein (Cambridge, 2006), p. 157.

^ Lacan, Ecrits , p. 101.

^ Lacan, Ecrits pp. 124 and 103.

^ Davis, Walter A. (2001).

Deracination; Historicity, Hiroshima, and the Tragic Imperative . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-79144834-2 .

^ Davis, Walter A. (2006).

Death's Dream Kingdom . London: Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0-74532468-5 .

^ Akhtar 2018 , p. 227.

^ a b Rycroft 1995 , p. 37, 104.

^ Jadran Mimica, Explorations in Psychoanalytic Ethnography (2007) p. 78 ^ Keith Tudor, in B. J. Brother, Power and Partnership (1995) p. 71 ^ Eric Berne, A Layman's Guide to Psychiatry and Psychoanalysis (Middlesex 1976) p. 101 ^ J. G. Watkins, The Therapeutic Self (1978) p. 142 ^ Todd Dufresne, Tales from the Freudian Crypt (2000) p. 24 ^ Z. B. S. Halevi, Introduction to the Cabbala (1991) p. 197 ^ Quoted in Margery Hourihan, Deconstructing the Hero (1994) p. 22 ^ M. Beugnet/M. Schmid, Proust at the Movies (2004) p. 194 ^ Andrew Gibson, Beckett and Badiou (2006) p. 255 ^ Salman Akhtar , Comprehensive Dictionary of Psychoanalysis (2009) p. 176 ^ Franz Alexander et al, Psychoanalytic Pioneers (1995) p. 153 ^ International Journal of Psycho-Analysis (1953) Vol 23 p. 74 ^ Eric Berne, A Layman's Guide to Psychiatry and Psychoanalysis (Middlesex 1976), p. 101 ^ Sigmund Freud, New Introductory Lectures in Psychoanalysis (London 1991), p. 136 ^ Herbert A. Rosenfeld , Impasse and Interpretation (1987) p. 126 ^ Berne, A Layman's Guide , p. 16 ^ Berne, A Layman's Guide , p. 69 ^ Berne, A Layman's Guide p. 95 and p. 214 ^ Berne, A Layman's Guide p. 124 ^ Petrushka Clarkson, Transactional Analysis Psychotherapy (1993) p. 5 ^ "Bernard Golse "Destrudo" " . Archived from the original on 2011-08-09 . Retrieved 2021-01-14 .

^ Jean Laplanche/John Fletcher, Essays on Otherness (1999) p. 34 Further reading [ edit ] Otto Fenichel, "A Critique of the Death Instinct" (1935), in Collected Papers , 1st Series (1953), 363–72.

K. R. Eissler, "Death Drive, Ambivalence, and Narcissism", The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child , XXVI (1971), 25–78.

Paul Federn, Ego Psychology and the Psychoses (1952) Jean Laplanche , Vie et Mort en Psychanalyse (1970) Rob Weatherill, The death drive: new life for a dead subject?

(1999).

Niklas Hageback, The Death Drive: Why Societies Self-Destruct Gaudium; Reprint edition. (2020).

ISBN 978-1592110346 .

Edoardo Weiss , Principles of Psychodynamics (New York 1950) External links [ edit ] Laplanche, Jean ; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (1974).

The Language of Psychoanalysis .

Norton .

ISBN 0393011054 . Retrieved 1 July 2022 .

" Death Instincts "  [ sic ]; " Nirvana Principle" ; " Compulsion to Repeat " (" Repetition compulsion ").

Bernard Golse, "Destrudo" Archived 2011-08-09 at the Wayback Machine v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Death_drive&oldid=1305596271 " Categories : Death Energy and instincts Psychoanalytic terminology Freudian psychology 1910s neologisms Thanatos Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from July 2025 Articles containing German-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Death drive 22 languages Add topic

