Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Apostle of Andalusia 1.3 Death 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Modern editions 3 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 3.1 Veneration 4 Works Toggle Works subsection 4.1 English translations 4.2 Spanish editions 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents John of Ávila 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish priest and Doctor of the Church Not to be confused with John Avila or John of the Cross .

Saint John of Ávila Portrait by El Greco (1580) Priest , Doctor of the Church and Apostle of Andalusia Born 6 January 1499 Almodóvar del Campo , Kingdom of Toledo , Crown of Castile Died 10 May 1569 (1569-05-10) (aged 70) Montilla , Kingdom of Córdoba , Crown of Castile Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 12 November 1893 by Pope Leo XIII Canonized 31 May 1970 by Pope Paul VI Major shrine Church of the Incarnation Montilla , Córdoba , Spain Feast 10 May Patronage Andalusia , Spain Spanish secular clergy Influenced Teresa of Ávila , John of God , Francis Borgia , Louis of Granada Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e John of Ávila ( Spanish : Juan de Ávila ; 6 January 1499 [ 1 ] – 10 May 1569) was a Spanish priest , preacher , scholastic author, and religious mystic , who has been declared a saint and Doctor of the Church by the Catholic Church . He is called the " Apostle of Andalusia ", for his extensive ministry in that region.

Life [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] He was born in Almodóvar del Campo , in the modern-day Province of Ciudad Real , to Alfonso de Ávila, of Jewish converso descent, and Catalina Xixón (or Gijón ), a wealthy and pious couple.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] At the age of fourteen, in 1513, he was sent to the University of Salamanca to study law; he withdrew in 1517, however, without receiving a degree.

[ 5 ] Returning home, Ávila spent the next three years in the practice of austere piety. His sanctity impressed a Franciscan friar journeying through Almodóvar, on whose advice he resumed his studies by matriculating at the University of Alcalá de Henares (which was moved to the national capital in the 19th century and renamed the Complutense University of Madrid ). There he undertook the study of philosophy and theology, in which he was fortunate to have as his teacher the noted Dominican friar Domingo de Soto . It appears that Ávila earned his bachelor's degree during his years at Alcalá and then left without completing requirements for the licentiate degree.

[ 5 ] Both his parents died while Ávila was still a student, and after his ordination in spring 1526, he celebrated his first Mass in the church where they were buried. He then sold the family property and gave the proceeds to the poor. He saw in the severing of natural ties a vocation to foreign missionary work and prepared to go to Mexico. He therefore traveled to Seville to await departure for the Indies in January 1527 with the Dominican friar, Julián Garcés , appointed the first Bishop of Tlaxcala . While waiting in Seville, his unusually great devotion in celebrating Mass , and his skills in catechesis and preaching, attracted the attention of Hernando de Contreras, a local priest, who mentioned him to the Archbishop of Seville and Inquisitor General , Alonso Manrique de Lara . The archbishop saw in the young cleric a powerful instrument to stir up the faith in Andalusia , and after considerable persuasion Juan was induced to abandon his journey to America.

[ 5 ] The basement of the family home of John of Ávila in Almodóvar del Campo , Ciudad Real , Spain John seems to have lived in the initial years after 1526 in a small house in Seville with another priest, probably Contreras, and disciples gathered around him, in a loosely structured fraternal life. It was at the request of the younger sister of one of these disciples, Sancha Carrillo, that he began in 1527 to write the Audi, filia ( Listen, Daughter ), a work he continued expanding and editing until his death.

[ 5 ] Apostle of Andalusia [ edit ] John's first sermon was preached on 22 July 1529, and immediately established his reputation. During his nine years of missionary work in Andalusia, crowds packed the churches at all his sermons. However, his strong pleas for reform and his denunciation of the behaviour of the aristocracy meant that he was denounced to the office of the Inquisition in Seville in 1531, and put in prison in the summer of 1532. He was charged with exaggerating the dangers of wealth and with closing the gates of heaven to the rich. The charges were refuted and he was declared innocent and released in July 1533.

[ 6 ] Around the end of 1534 or the beginning of 1535, John of Ávila was incardinated into the Diocese of Córdoba , from which he received a small benefice . This city became his base for directing his disciples and moving around Andalusia, preaching and establishing schools and colleges in various neighbouring cities such as Granada , Baeza , Montilla and Zafra . It is thought that during this time Ávila received the title of Master of Sacred Theology , probably in Granada around 1538.

Of special importance was the University of Baeza , established in 1538 by a papal bull of Pope Paul III .

[ 7 ] Ávila served as its first rector , [ 8 ] and it became a model for seminaries and for the schools of the Jesuits.

[ 6 ] Ávila stayed in Granada from 1538–9, where it appears some kind of community was taking shape. Likewise, during the years 1546 to 1555, John lived with about 20 disciples in Córdoba, making it seem that he intended to begin some kind of formal foundation of apostolic priests. However, the foundation and fast expansion of the Jesuits meant that these ideas never came to fruition; from early 1551, when Ávila began to experience poor health, he began actively encouraging his disciples who so desired to join the Jesuits (around 30 in total seem to have joined).

[ 9 ] Death [ edit ] From early 1551 Ávila was in constant ill-health. He spent the last years of his life in semi-retirement in the town of Montilla , in the Province of Córdoba . He died there on 10 May 1569, and in accordance with his wishes was buried in that city, in the Jesuit Church of the Incarnation, which now serves as the sanctuary to his memory.

[ 10 ] Works [ edit ] The Spanish critical edition of 1970 presents Ávila's work in 6 volumes. These consist of two redactions he made of the Audi, filia , 82 sermons and spiritual conferences, a few Biblical commentaries, 257 letters (representing the period from 1538 until his death), several treatises on reform and other minor treatises. John wrote letters to prelates who consulted him, such as Pedro Guerrero, Archbishop of Granada , and Juan de Ribera and Thomas of Villanova , both archbishops of Valencia who were later canonised. He also wrote to Ignatius of Loyola , John of God and Teresa of Ávila .

[ citation needed ] Modern editions [ edit ] Saint John of Ávila's works were collected at Madrid in 1618, 1757, 1792 and 1805; a French translation by D'Andilly was published at Paris in 1673; and a German translation by Schermer in six volumes was issued at Regensburg between 1856 and 1881.

[ citation needed ] The Audi, filia was translated into English in 1620.

[ 11 ] A modern translation was published by the American scholar Joan Frances Gormley in 2006.

[ citation needed ] A selection of his letters, entitled Spiritual Letters , were translated into English in 1631, a facsimile edition of which was printed in 1970.

[ 12 ] Influence [ edit ] Ávila's saintly reputation, as well as his efforts to reform the clergy, to establish schools and colleges, and to catechise the laity, were the inspiration for many later reformers. He is especially revered by the Jesuits .

[ 6 ] Their development in Spain is attributed to his friendship and support for the Society of Jesus .

[ 6 ] There is a church in Alcalá de Henares dedicated to him: St. John of Ávila Parish Church .

[ 13 ] The school Colegio Maestro Ávila in Salamanca is named after him.

[ 14 ] Veneration [ edit ] A relic of St. John of Ávila preserved in Almodóvar del Campo Ávila was declared Venerable by Pope Clement XIII on 8 February 1759. He was beatified by Pope Leo XIII on 15 November 1894, and the cause for his canonization was opened on 14 March 1952.

[ 15 ] On 31 May 1970 he was canonized by Pope Paul VI .

Pope Benedict XVI named him a Doctor of the Church on 7 October 2012, the Feast of the Holy Rosary .

[ 16 ] The proclamation of the two new Doctors of the Church was made by Pope Benedict before tens of thousands of people in St. Peter's Square .

[ 17 ] During his homily , Pope Benedict said that John of Ávila was a "profound expert on the sacred Scriptures, he was gifted with an ardent missionary spirit. He knew how to penetrate in a uniquely profound way the mysteries of the redemption worked by Christ for humanity. A man of God, he united constant prayer to apostolic action. He dedicated himself to preaching and to the more frequent practice of the sacraments, concentrating his commitment on improving the formation of candidates for the priesthood, of religious and of lay people, with a view to a fruitful reform of the Church".

[ 18 ] According to the Apostolic letter for the proclamation to Doctor of the Church, John of Ávila explained that "Christian spiritual life, as a participation in the life of the Blessed Trinity, begins with faith in the God who is Love, is grounded in God's goodness and mercy as expressed in the merits of Christ, and is wholly guided by the Spirit". More than a venerable professor, "Father Master Avila"  was primarily a preacher and closely friend of Ignatius Loyola . John of Ávila authored a "prayerful and sapiential" theology, based on the "primacy of Christ and of grace in relation to the love of God, for which he showed "a profound knowledge of the Bible", without setting forth a systematic synthesis.

[ 19 ] The Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments fixed his optional memorial as 10 May.

[ 20 ] Works [ edit ] English translations [ edit ] John of Avila, Audi, filia = Listen, O daughter , translated and introduced by Joan Frances Gormley; foreword by Francisco Javier Martínez Fernández, (New York: Paulist Press, 2006) Saint John of Ávila, My Burden Is Light: Suffering and Consolation in the Christian Life , compiled and translated by Brandon P. Otto (Gastonia, NC: TAN Books, 2024) Spanish editions [ edit ] San Juan de Avila, Obras completas: Nueva edición crítica , vols 1–2, ed L Sala Balust and Francisco Martín Hernández, (Madrid: BAC, 2000-1) [the new critical edition of John's works] San Juan de Avila, Obras completas , vols 1–6, ed L Sala Balust and Francisco Martín Hernández, (Madrid: BAC, 1970) El Maestro Avila: Actas del Congreso Internacional , (Madrid: Conferencia Episcopal Española, 2000) Fray Luís de Granada, Vida del padre maestro Juan de Avila y las partes que ha de tener un predicador del evangelio , (Madrid: Edibesa, 2000) References [ edit ] ^ Some authorities, following Luis de Granada , give 1500 as the date of Avila's birth. The date 1499 is based on the records of the Inquisition. See Obras Completas (2000), vol. 1, pp. 15–22 for more information.

^ Wilke 2003 , p. 963 ^ Note that Ávila is simply John's family name – not his place of origin.

^ Domínguez Ortiz 1992 ^ a b c d Avila, John of; Gormley, Joan Frances (2006).

Audi, filia – Listen, O Daughter .

Mahwah, New Jersey : Paulist Press . pp.

6– 11.

^ a b c d Wilke 2003 , p. 964 ^ Introducción Histórica Archived 26 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Universidad de Jaén, 26 September 2005. Accessed online 2010-02-05.

^ José Biedma, Juan de Ávila y la Universidad de Baeza , cibernous.com. Accessed online 5 February 2010.

^ Avila, John of (2006).

Audi, filia – Listen, O Daughter . Translated by Joan Frances Gormley. Mahwah, New Jersey: Paulist Press . p. 15.

^ Wikimapia "Iglesia de la Encarnación (Santuario de San Juan de Ávila) (in Spanish) ^ Juan de Ávila, The Audi filia, or, A Rich Cabinet Full of Spiritual Jewels , trans. Toby Matthews (1620). Reprinted in English Recusant Literature 1558–1640, vol. 49 (Menston: Scolar Press, 1970).

^ Juan de Ávila, Certain selected spirituall epistles, 1631 , English recusant literature, 1558–1640, vol. 331 (Ilkley, UK: Scolar Press, 1977).

^ "Parroquia San Juan de Ávila" .

Parroquia San Juan de Ávila (in Spanish). 2 December 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2023 .

^ "Colegio Maestro Ávila - S Juan de Ávila" .

www.maestroavila.com . Retrieved 17 August 2023 .

^ Index ac status causarum beatificationis servorum dei et canonizationis beatorum (in Latin). Typis polyglottis vaticanis. January 1953. p. 114.

^ Vatican Radio (7 October 2012).

"Pope : Two new Doctors of the Church" . NEWS.VA. Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 27 April 2015 .

^ "Pope Declares Spanish Saint a Doctor of the Church" .

Latin American Herald Tribune . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 11 October 2012 .

^ Pope opens synod on new evangelization, declares 2 new doctors of the Church ^ Pope Benedict XVI (7 October 2012).

"Apostolic Letter: Proclaiming Saint John of Avila, diocesan priest, a Doctor of the Universal Church" .

Holy See (in English and Latin).

Archived from the original on 21 July 2015.

^ "DECREE on the Inscription of the Celebrations of Saint Gregory of Narek, Abbot and Doctor of the Church, Saint John De Avila, Priest and Doctor of the Church and Saint Hildegard of Bingen, Virgin and Doctor of the Church, in the General Roman Calendar (25 January 2021)" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Bl. John of Avila ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Rady Roldán-Figueroa, The Ascetic Spirituality of Juan de Ávila (1499–1569) , (Brill, 2010) St. John of Ávila (1904).

Letters of Blessed John of Avila . Stanbrook Abbey: Burns & Oates Ltd.

Wilke, J. C. (2003). "John of Avila, St.". In Catholic University of America (ed.).

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7 (Hol–Jub) (2d ed.). Washington, D.C.: Gale. pp.

446– 449.

ISBN 0-7876-4004-2 .

Domínguez Ortiz, Antonio (1992).

Los judeoconversos en la España moderna (in Spanish) (2. ed.). Madrid: Mapfre.

ISBN 978-84-7100-353-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of a 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article about John of Ávila .

Media related to John of Ávila at Wikimedia Commons John of Ávila in the Historical Archives of the Pontifical Gregorian University v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Spain Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_of_Ávila&oldid=1303619964 " Categories : 1500 births 1569 deaths 16th-century Christian saints 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic priests 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic theologians Burials in the Province of Córdoba (Spain) Canonizations by Pope Paul VI Complutense University of Madrid alumni Doctors of the Church People from the Crown of Castile Roman Catholic Ecclesiastical Province of Seville Roman Catholic mystics Spanish male non-fiction writers Spanish people of Jewish descent Spanish Roman Catholic saints Spanish Roman Catholic writers University of Salamanca alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Use dmy dates from January 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 01:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John of Ávila 35 languages Add topic

