Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundation 2 Conductors of CUMS 3 Ensembles Toggle Ensembles subsection 3.1 Cambridge University Orchestra (CUO) 3.2 Cambridge University Sinfonia (CUS) 3.3 Cambridge University Wind Orchestra (CUWO) 3.4 Cambridge University Symphony Chorus (CUSC) 3.5 Cambridge University Chamber Choir 3.6 Cambridge University Lunchtime Concerts 3.7 Cambridge University Percussion Ensemble 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Musical Society Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia College orchestral and choral ensemble federation The Cambridge University Musical Society (CUMS) is a federation of the university's main orchestral and choral ensembles, which cumulatively put on a substantial concert season during the university term.

Foundation [ edit ] In 1843 the Cambridge University Musical Society (CUMS) was established, [ 1 ] and was originally called the Peterhouse Musical Society as most of its members were originally undergraduates from that college.

[ 2 ] The founders of CUMS included John Bacchus Dykes , [ 3 ] William Thomson and John A. L. Airey.

[ 4 ] Conductors of CUMS [ edit ] Many respected musical figures have directed the Cambridge University Musical Society, including the following: Charles Villiers Stanford Cyril Rootham Colin Davis David Willcocks Philip Ledger Stephen Cleobury Robin Ticciati Richard Armstrong (conductor) Mark Elder Peter Stark David Hill (choral director) Roger Norrington Nicholas Collon Ensembles [ edit ] Students wishing to join an orchestra are required to audition at the beginning of the academic year. One audition is required for all ensembles, and based on your abilities and preferences, you are allocated a position. Competition for places is variable depending on instrument. Selection is purely on merit, and irrespective of age, standing in the university, or subject being read. At least half, if not more, of the ensembles are made up of students who do not read music at the university.

Cambridge University Orchestra (CUO) [ edit ] A full symphony orchestra, consisting of the university's elite instrumental musicians, most of whom either hold university instrumental awards or have been involved in nationally significant music making, particularly the National Youth Orchestra . The ensemble is conducted by professional conductors, such as Sir Mark Elder, Sir Roger Norrington, and John Wilson.

Cambridge University Sinfonia (CUS) [ edit ] The second symphony orchestra of CUMS, giving three concerts in the academic year. Conducted by the CUMS Conducting Scholar.

Cambridge University Wind Orchestra (CUWO) [ edit ] The wind orchestra, conducted by the CUMS Assistant Conductor.

Cambridge University Symphony Chorus (CUSC) [ edit ] The large choir, conducted by many well-known conductors over the years (see above).

Cambridge University Chamber Choir [ edit ] A small choir, consisting of the university's elite singers, directed by Martin Ennis and David Lowe.

Cambridge University Lunchtime Concerts [ edit ] A series of lunchtime recitals, run by a committee of students, supported by CUMS.

Cambridge University Percussion Ensemble [ edit ] The newest addition to the CUMS family. Run by students.

References [ edit ] ^ Lindley, David (2004).

Degrees Kelvin: a tale of genius, invention, and tragedy .

National Academies Press . p.

21 .

ISBN 978-0-309-09073-5 .

^ Gerald Norris (1980): p. 7 ^ Carroll, Lewis (1997). Edward Wakeling (ed.).

Lewis Carroll's diaries: the private journals of Charles Lutwidge Dodgson (Lewis Carroll) : the first complete version of the nine surviving volumes with notes and annotations, Volume 4 . Lewis Carroll Society. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-904117-09-7 .

^ Craik, Alex D. D. (2008).

Mr Hopkins' Men: Cambridge Reform and British Mathematics in the 19th Century .

Springer Science+Business Media . p.

152 .

ISBN 978-1-84800-132-9 .

Gerald Norris: Stanford the Cambridge Jubilee and Tchaikovsky , Newton Abbot: David and Charles, 1980 ISBN 0-7153-7856-2 External links [ edit ] Cambridge University Musical Society Cambridge University Faculty of Music v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Musical_Society&oldid=1288112102 " Categories : Cambridge choirs Musical groups from Cambridge Clubs and societies of the University of Cambridge 1843 establishments in England Musical groups established in 1843 University musical groups in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 14:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Musical Society Add languages Add topic

