Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Hypothetical example 3 Observed universe 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Big Rip 37 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Boarisch Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cosmological model Part of a series on Physical cosmology Big Bang · Universe Age of the universe Chronology of the universe Early universe Inflation · Nucleosynthesis Backgrounds Gravitational wave (GWB) Microwave (CMB) · Neutrino (CNB) Expansion · Future Hubble's law · Redshift Expansion of the universe FLRW metric · Friedmann equations Lambda-CDM model Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components · Structure Components Dark energy · Dark matter Photons · Baryons Structure Shape of the universe Galaxy filament · Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization · Structure formation Experiments Black Hole Initiative (BHI) BOOMERanG Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Dark Energy Survey Planck space observatory Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey ("2dF") Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Scientists Aaronson Alfvén Alpher Copernicus de Sitter Dicke Ehlers Einstein Ellis Friedmann Galileo Gamow Guth Hawking Hubble Huygens Kepler Lemaître Mather Newton Penrose Penzias Rubin Schmidt Smoot Suntzeff Sunyaev Tolman Wilson Zeldovich List of cosmologists Subject history Discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation History of the Big Bang theory Timeline of cosmological theories Category Astronomy portal v t e In physical cosmology , the Big Rip is a hypothetical cosmological model concerning the ultimate fate of the universe , in which the matter of the universe , from stars and galaxies to atoms and subatomic particles, is progressively torn apart by the gravitational influence of the dark energy at a certain time in the future, until distances between particles will infinitely increase.

According to the standard model of cosmology, the scale factor of the universe is accelerating , and, in the future era of cosmological constant dominance, will increase exponentially. But this expansion is similar for every moment of time (hence the exponential law—the expansion of a local volume is the same number of times over the same time interval), and is characterized by an unchanging, small Hubble constant , effectively ignored by any bound material structures. By contrast, in the Big Rip scenario the Hubble constant increases to infinity in a finite time. According to recent studies, the universe is set for a constant expansion and heat death , [ 1 ] because the equation of state parameter w = −1.

The Big Rip is only possible if the universe contains phantom energy , a hypothetical form of dark energy with implausible physical properties.

[ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Spacetime diagram of a hypothetical big rip universe in proper distance coordinates . Time goes up the vertical axis and space is on the horizontal axis.

Main articles: Future of an expanding universe , Heat death of the universe , Timeline of the far future , and Ultimate fate of the universe The truth of the hypothesis relies on the type of dark energy present in our universe . The type that could prove this hypothesis is a constantly increasing form of dark energy known as phantom energy . If the dark energy in the universe increases without limit, it could overcome all forces that hold the universe together. The key value is the equation of state parameter w , the ratio between the dark energy pressure and its energy density . If −1 < w < 0, the expansion of the universe tends to accelerate, but the dark energy tends to dissipate over time, and the Big Rip does not happen. Phantom energy has w < −1, which means that its density increases as the universe expands.

A universe dominated by phantom energy is an accelerating universe , expanding at an ever-increasing rate. But this implies that the size of the observable universe and the cosmological event horizon is continually shrinking—the distance at which objects can influence an observer becomes ever closer, and the distance over which interactions can propagate becomes ever shorter. When the size of the horizon becomes smaller than any particular structure, no interaction by any of the fundamental forces can occur between the most remote parts of the structure, and the structure is "ripped apart". The progression of time itself will stop. The model implies that after a finite time there will be a final singularity, called the "Big Rip", in which the observable universe eventually reaches zero size and all distances diverge to infinite values.

The authors of this hypothesis, led by Robert R. Caldwell of Dartmouth College , calculate the time from the present to the Big Rip to be t r i p − − t 0 ≈ ≈ 2 3 | 1 + w | H 0 1 − − Ω Ω m {\displaystyle t_{\mathrm {rip} }-t_{0}\approx {\frac {2}{3\left|1+w\right|H_{0}{\sqrt {1-\Omega _{\mathrm {m} }}}}}} where w is defined above, H 0 is Hubble's constant and Ω m is the present value of the density of all the matter in the universe.

Observations of galaxy cluster speeds by the Chandra X-ray Observatory seem to suggest the value of w is between approximately −0.907 and −1.075, meaning the Big Rip cannot be ruled out. Based on the above equation, if the observation determines that w is less than −1 but greater than or equal to −1.075, the Big Rip would occur in approximately 152 billion years at the earliest.

[ 3 ] More recent data from Planck mission indicates the value of w to be −1.028 (±0.031), pushing the earliest possible time of Big Rip to approximately 200 billion years into the future.

[ 4 ] Hypothetical example [ edit ] In their paper, the authors consider a hypothetical example with w = −1.5, H 0 = 70 km/s/Mpc, and Ω m = 0.3, in which case the Big Rip would happen approximately 22 billion years from the present. In this scenario, galaxies would first be separated from each other about 200 million years before the Big Rip. About 60 million years before the Big Rip, galaxies would begin to disintegrate as gravity becomes too weak to hold them together.

Planetary systems like the Solar System would become gravitationally unbound about three months before the Big Rip, and planets would fly off into the rapidly expanding universe. In the last minutes, stars and planets would be torn apart, and the now-dispersed atoms would be destroyed about 10 −19 seconds before the end (the atoms will first be ionized as electrons fly off, followed by the dissociation of the atomic nuclei ). At the time of the Big Rip occurs the scale factor becomes infinity.

[ 5 ] Observed universe [ edit ] Evidence indicates w to be very close to −1 in our universe, which makes w the dominating term in the equation. The closer w is to −1, the closer the denominator is to zero and the further the Big Rip is in the future. If w were exactly −1, the Big Rip could not happen, regardless of the values of H 0 or Ω m .

According to the latest cosmological data available, the uncertainties are still too large to discriminate among the three cases w < −1, w = −1, and w > −1.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Moreover, it is nearly impossible to measure w to be exactly at −1 due to statistical fluctuations. This means that the measured value of w can be arbitrarily close to −1 but not exactly at −1, hence the earliest possible date of the Big Rip can be pushed back further with more accurate measurements but the Big Rip is very difficult to completely rule out.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Big Bounce – Model for the origin of the universe Big Crunch – Hypothetical scenario for the ultimate fate of the universe Big Chill – Aspect of physical cosmology Entropy (arrow of time) – Use of the second law of thermodynamics to distinguish past from future False vacuum decay – Hypothetical vacuum, less stable than true vacuum Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Heat death of the universe – Possible fate of the universe " Last Contact " – A short story describing what Big Rip would be like from an everyday perspective References [ edit ] ^ Sutter, Paul (2024-02-26).

"What is the big rip, and can we stop it?" .

Space.com . Retrieved 2024-09-11 .

^ Ellis, George F. R.

; Maartens, Roy & MacCallum, Malcolm A. H. (2012).

Relativistic Cosmology . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press . pp.

146 –147.

ISBN 978-0-52138-115-4 .

^ Vikhlinin, A.; Kravtsov, A. V.; Burenin, R. A.; et al. (2009). "Chandra Cluster Cosmology Project III: Cosmological Parameter Constraints".

The Astrophysical Journal .

692 (2): 1060– 1074.

arXiv : 0812.2720 .

Bibcode : 2009ApJ...692.1060V .

doi : 10.1088/0004-637X/692/2/1060 .

S2CID 15719158 .

^ The Planck Collaboration (2020). "Planck 2018 results. VI. Cosmological parameters".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

641 : A6.

arXiv : 1807.06209 .

Bibcode : 2020A&A...641A...6P .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/201833910 .

S2CID 119335614 .

^ Caldwell, Robert R.; Kamionkowski, Marc; Weinberg, Nevin N. (2003). "Phantom Energy and Cosmic Doomsday".

Physical Review Letters .

91 (7): 071301.

arXiv : astro-ph/0302506 .

Bibcode : 2003PhRvL..91g1301C .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.071301 .

PMID 12935004 .

S2CID 119498512 .

^ "WMAP 9 Year Mission Results" .

wmap.gsfc.nasa.gov . Retrieved 22 September 2017 .

^ Allen, S. W.; Rapetti, D. A.; Schmidt, R. W.; Ebeling, H.; Morris, R. G.; Fabian, A. C. (2008).

"Improved constraints on dark energy from Chandra X-ray observations of the largest relaxed galaxy clusters" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

383 (3): 879.

arXiv : 0706.0033 .

Bibcode : 2008MNRAS.383..879A .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12610.x .

S2CID 18200810 .

^ Mack, Katie (7 October 2020).

"Tearing Apart the Universe" .

American Scientist .

External links [ edit ] Overbye, Dennis (17 February 2004).

"From Space, A New View Of Doomsday" .

The New York Times .

Devlin, Hannah (3 July 2015).

"This is the way the world ends: not with a bang, but with a Big Rip" .

The Guardian .

Mastin, Luke (2009).

"The Big Crunch, the Big Freeze and the Big Rip" .

Physics of the Universe .

v t e Timeline of the Big Bang Chronology of the universe Big Bang Planck epoch Grand unification epoch Electroweak epoch Inflation Baryogenesis Quark epoch Nucleosynthesis Matter domination Recombination Dark ages Reionization Cosmological phase transition Fate of the universe Heat death of the universe Big Rip Big Crunch Big Bounce Big Slurp v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Portals : Astronomy Stars Outer space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Big_Rip&oldid=1302329498 " Categories : Dark energy 2003 introductions 2003 in science Ultimate fate of the universe Physical cosmology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Big Rip 37 languages Add topic

