Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Political activism 3 Academic career 4 Archives 5 Selected publications 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Hans Reichenbach 32 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (1891–1953) Hans Reichenbach Born ( 1891-09-26 ) September 26, 1891 Hamburg , German Empire Died April 9, 1953 (1953-04-09) (aged 61) Los Angeles , California , U.S.

Education Education University of Berlin University of Göttingen University of Munich University of Erlangen (PhD, 1916) Technische Hochschule Stuttgart ( Dr. phil. hab.

, 1920) Theses Der Begriff der Wahrscheinlichkeit für die mathematische Darstellung der Wirklichkeit (The Concept of Probability for the Mathematical Representation of Reality) (1916) The Theory of Relativity and A Priori Knowledge (Relativitätstheorie und Erkenntnis Apriori) (1920) Doctoral advisors Paul Hensel , Max Noether (PhD advisors) Other advisors Max Born , Ernst Cassirer , David Hilbert , Max Planck , Arnold Sommerfeld , Albert Einstein Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Berlin Circle Logical empiricism Institutions University of Berlin Istanbul University UCLA Doctoral students Carl Gustav Hempel , Hilary Putnam , Wesley Salmon Main interests Philosophy of science Notable ideas List Probabilistic justification / reasoning Philosophical implications of the theory of relativity Philosophical foundations of quantum mechanics The "context of discovery"/"context of justification" distinction [ 1 ] Relativized a priori [ 1 ] (the fallible set of constitutive principles underlying knowledge) Axioms of connection ( empirical laws ) vs. axioms of coordination (constitutive principles) [ 2 ] Hans Reichenbach ( / ˈ r aɪ x ən b ɑː x / ; [ 4 ] German: [ˈʁaɪçənbax] ; September 26, 1891 – April 9, 1953) was a leading philosopher of science , educator , and proponent of logical empiricism . He was influential in the areas of science , education , and of logical empiricism. He founded the Gesellschaft für empirische Philosophie (Society for Empirical Philosophy) in Berlin in 1928, also known as the " Berlin Circle ".

Carl Gustav Hempel , Richard von Mises , David Hilbert and Kurt Grelling all became members of the Berlin Circle.

In 1930, Reichenbach and Rudolf Carnap became editors of the journal Erkenntnis . He also made lasting contributions to the study of empiricism based on a theory of probability ; the logic and the philosophy of mathematics ; space , time , and relativity theory ; analysis of probabilistic reasoning ; and quantum mechanics .

[ 5 ] In 1951, he authored The Rise of Scientific Philosophy , his most popular book.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Early life [ edit ] Hans was the second son of a Jewish merchant, Bruno Reichenbach, who had converted to Protestantism . He married Selma Menzel, a school mistress, who came from a long line of Protestant professionals which went back to the Reformation .

[ 8 ] His elder brother Bernard played a significant role in the left communist movement . His younger brother, Herman was a music educator.

After completing secondary school in Hamburg , Hans Reichenbach studied civil engineering at the Hochschule für Technik Stuttgart , and physics , mathematics and philosophy at various universities, including Berlin , Erlangen , Göttingen and Munich . Among his teachers were Ernst Cassirer , David Hilbert , Max Planck , Max Born , Edmund Husserl , and Arnold Sommerfeld .

Political activism [ edit ] Reichenbach was active in youth movements and student organizations. He joined the Freistudentenschaft in 1910.

[ 9 ] He attended the founding conference of the Freideutsche Jugend umbrella group at Hoher Meissner in 1913. He published articles about the university reform, the freedom of research, and against anti-Semitic infiltrations in student organizations.  His older brother Bernard shared in this activism and went on to become a member of the Communist Workers' Party of Germany , representing this organisation on the Executive Committee of the Communist International . Hans wrote the Platform of the Socialist Student Party, Berlin which was published in 1918.

[ 10 ] The party had remained clandestine until the November Revolution when it was formally founded with him as chairman. He also worked with Karl Wittfogel , Alexander Schwab and his other brother Herman at this time.

[ 11 ] In 1919 his text Student und Sozialismus: mit einem Anhang: Programm der Sozialistischen Studentenpartei was published by Hermann Schüller , an activist with the League for Proletarian Culture . However following his attending lectures by Albert Einstein in 1919, he stopped participating in political groups.

[ 12 ] Academic career [ edit ] Reichenbach received a degree in philosophy from the University of Erlangen in 1915 and his PhD dissertation on the theory of probability , titled Der Begriff der Wahrscheinlichkeit für die mathematische Darstellung der Wirklichkeit ( The Concept of Probability for the Mathematical Representation of Reality ) and supervised by Paul Hensel and Max Noether , was published in 1916. Reichenbach served during World War I on the Russian front, in the German army radio troops. In 1917 he was removed from active duty, due to an illness, and returned to Berlin . While working as a physicist and engineer, Reichenbach attended Albert Einstein 's lectures on the theory of relativity in Berlin from 1917 to 1920.

In 1920 Reichenbach began teaching at the Technische Hochschule Stuttgart as Privatdozent . In the same year, he published his first book (which was accepted as his habilitation in physics at the Technische Hochschule Stuttgart) on the philosophical implications of the theory of relativity , The Theory of Relativity and A Priori Knowledge ( Relativitätstheorie und Erkenntnis Apriori ), which criticized the Kantian notion of synthetic a priori . He subsequently published Axiomatization of the Theory of Relativity (1924), From Copernicus to Einstein (1927) and The Philosophy of Space and Time (1928), the last stating the logical positivist view on the theory of relativity.

Reichenbach distinguishes between axioms of connection and of coordination. Axioms of connection are those scientific laws which specify specific relations between specific physical things, like Maxwell’s equations . They describe empirical laws. Axioms of coordination are those laws which describe all things and are a priori , like Euclidean geometry and are “general rules according to which the connections take place”. For example the axioms of connection of gravitational equations are based upon the axioms of coordination of arithmetic .

[ 13 ] Another distinction of his was between the 'context of discovery' and 'context of justification'. The way scientists come up with ideas is not always the same as the way they justify them, and so as separate objects of study Reichenbach distinguished between them.

[ 14 ] In 1926, with the help of Albert Einstein, Max Planck and Max von Laue , Reichenbach became assistant professor in the physics department of the University of Berlin. He gained notice for his methods of teaching, as he was easily approached and his courses were open to discussion and debate. This was highly unusual at the time, although the practice is nowadays a common one.

In 1928, Reichenbach founded the so-called " Berlin Circle " ( German : Die Gesellschaft für empirische Philosophie ; English: Society for Empirical Philosophy ). Among its members were Carl Gustav Hempel , Richard von Mises , David Hilbert and Kurt Grelling . The Vienna Circle manifesto lists 30 of Reichenbach's publications in a bibliography of closely related authors. In 1930 he and Rudolf Carnap began editing the journal Erkenntnis .

When Adolf Hitler became Chancellor of Germany in 1933, Reichenbach was immediately dismissed from his appointment at the University of Berlin under the government's so called "Race Laws" due to his Jewish ancestry. Reichenbach himself did not practise Judaism, and his mother was a German Protestant, but he nevertheless suffered problems. He thereupon emigrated to Turkey , where he headed the department of philosophy at Istanbul University . He introduced interdisciplinary seminars and courses on scientific subjects, and in 1935 he published The Theory of Probability .

In 1938, with the help of Charles W. Morris , Reichenbach moved to the United States to take up a professorship at the University of California, Los Angeles in its Philosophy Department . Reichenbach helped establish UCLA as a leading philosophy department in the United States in the post-war period.

Carl Hempel , Hilary Putnam , and Wesley Salmon were perhaps his most prominent students. During his time there, he published several of his most notable books, including Philosophic Foundations of Quantum Mechanics in 1944, Elements of Symbolic Logic in 1947, and The Rise of Scientific Philosophy (his most popular book) in 1951.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Reichenbach died unexpectedly of a heart attack on April 9, 1953. He was living in Los Angeles at the time, and had been working on problems in the philosophy of time and on the nature of scientific laws . As part of this he proposed a three part model of time in language, involving speech time, event time and — critically — reference time, which has been used by linguists since for describing tenses .

[ 15 ] This work resulted in two books published posthumously: The Direction of Time and Nomological Statements and Admissible Operations .

Archives [ edit ] Hans Reichenbach manuscripts, photographs, lectures, correspondence, drawings and other related materials are maintained by the Archives of Scientific Philosophy, Special Collections, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh.

[ 5 ] Much of the content has been digitized. Some more notable content includes: Correspondence to Nagel, 1934-1938 [ 16 ] Philosophy Congress [ 17 ] Responses to Questionnaire [ 18 ] Weyl's Extension of the Riemannian Concept of Space, Appendix [ 19 ] Selected publications [ edit ] 1916.

Der Begriff der Wahrscheinlichkeit für die mathematische Darstellung der Wirklichkeit (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Erlangen ).

1920.

Relativitätstheorie und Erkenntnis Apriori ( habilitation thesis, Technische Hochschule Stuttgart ). English translation: 1965.

The theory of relativity and a priori knowledge . University of California Press.

1922. "Der gegenwärtige Stand der Relativitätsdiskussion."  English translation: "The present state of the discussion on relativity" in Reichenbach (1959).

1924.

Axiomatik der relativistischen Raum-Zeit-Lehre . English translation: 1969.

Axiomatization of the theory of relativity . University of California Press.

1924. "Die Bewegungslehre bei Newton, Leibniz und Huyghens." English translation: "The theory of motion according to Newton, Leibniz, and Huyghens" in Reichenbach (1959).

1927.

Von Kopernikus bis Einstein. Der Wandel unseres Weltbildes . English translation: 1942, From Copernicus to Einstein . Alliance Book Co.

1928.

Philosophie der Raum-Zeit-Lehre . English translation: Maria Reichenbach, 1957, The Philosophy of Space and Time . Dover.

ISBN 0-486-60443-8 1930.

Atom und Kosmos. Das physikalische Weltbild der Gegenwart . English translation: 1932, Atom and cosmos: the world of modern physics . G. Allen & Unwin, ltd.

1931. "Ziele und Wege der heutigen Naturphilosophie." English translation: "Aims and methods of modern philosophy of nature" in Reichenbach (1959).

1935.

Wahrscheinlichkeitslehre: eine Untersuchung über die logischen und mathematischen Grundlagen der Wahrscheinlichkeitsrechnung . English translation: 1949, The theory of probability, an inquiry into the logical and mathematical foundations of the calculus of probability . University of California Press.

1938.

Experience and prediction: an analysis of the foundations and the structure of knowledge .

University of Chicago Press .

1942.

From Copernicus to Einstein . Dover 1980: ISBN 0-486-23940-3 1944.

Philosophic Foundations of Quantum Mechanics . University of California Press. Dover 1998: ISBN 0-486-40459-5 1947.

Elements of Symbolic Logic . Dover 1980: ISBN 0-486-24004-5 1948. "Philosophy and physics" in Faculty research lectures, 1946 .  University of California Press.

1949. "The philosophical significance of the theory of relativity" in Schilpp, P. A., ed., Albert Einstein: philosopher-scientist . Evanston: The Library of Living Philosophers.

1951.

The Rise of Scientific Philosophy .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-01055-0 1954.

Nomological statements and admissible operations . North Holland.

1956.

The Direction of Time . University of California Press. Dover 1971.

ISBN 0-486-40926-0 1959.

Modern philosophy of science: Selected essays by Hans Reichenbach . Routledge & Kegan Paul. Greenwood Press 1981: ISBN 0-313-23274-1 1978.

Selected writings, 1909–1953: with a selection of biographical and autobiographical sketches (Vienna circle collection). Dordrecht: Reidel. Springer paperback vol 1: ISBN 90-277-0292-6 1979.

Hans Reichenbach, logical empiricist (Synthese library). Dordrecht: Reidel.

1991.

Erkenntnis Orientated: A Centennial volume for Rudolf Carnap and Hans Reichenbach . Kluwer. Springer 2003: ISBN 0-7923-1408-5 1991.

Logic, language, and the structure of scientific theories: proceedings of the Carnap-Reichenbach centennial , University of Konstanz, 21–24 May 1991. University of Pittsburgh Press.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ a b "Hans Reichenbach" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Nov 1, 2016 [first published August 24, 2008].

ISSN 1095-5054 .

^ Michael Friedman, Dynamics of Reason: The 1999 Kant Lectures at Stanford University (CSLI/University of Chicago Press, 2001), p. 32.

^ a b Nikolay Milkov, "The Berlin Group and the Vienna Circle: Affinities and Divergences", in: N. Milkov & V. Peckhaus (eds.), The Berlin Group and the Philosophy of Logical Empiricism. Springer , pp. 3–32. esp. pp. 13–14 (2013).

^ "Signal Achievements" - the story of Hans Reichenbach on YouTube ^ a b "Guide to the Hans Reichenbach Papers, 1884-1972 ASP.1973.01" .

ULS Archives & Special Collections . University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

^ a b Salmon, W. C. (2012).

Hans Reichenbach: Logical Empiricist . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 721.

ISBN 978-94-009-9404-1 .

^ a b MacTutor History of Mathematics archive ^ Salmon, W. C. (2012).

Hans Reichenbach: Logical Empiricist . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 3.

ISBN 978-94-009-9404-1 .

^ Milkov, Nikolay; Peckhaus, Volker (2013).

The Berlin Group and the Philosophy of Logical Empiricism . Heidelberg: Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-94-007-5485-0 .

^ Reichenbach, Hans (1978). "Report of the Socialist Student Party, Berlin".

Hans Reichenbach Selected Writings 1909–1953 . pp.

181– 185.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-9761-5_10 .

ISBN 978-90-277-0292-0 .

^ "Wittfogel, Karl August" .

www.bundesstiftung-aufarbeitung.de . Bundesstiftung zur Aufarbeitung der SED-Diktatur . Retrieved 9 July 2020 .

^ Mcadam, Roger Michael.

"Hans Reichenbach: philosopher-engineer" (PDF) .

Durham e-Theses . Durham University . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ Padovani, Flavia (July 2011). "Relativizing the relativized a priori: Reichenbach's axioms of coordination divided".

Synthese .

181 (1): 41– 62.

doi : 10.1007/s11229-009-9590-0 .

^ Encyclopedia of Science Education . Springer. 2015. pp.

229– 232.

^ Derczynski, L; Gaizauskas, R (2013).

"Empirical Validation of Reichenbach's Tense Framework" .

Proceedings of the International Conference on Computational Semantics . Archived from the original on 2016-10-27 . Retrieved 2013-03-14 .

^ "Philipp Frank Correspondence" (PDF) .

Archives of Scientific Philosophy, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

^ "Philosophy Congress" (PDF) .

Archives of Scientific Philosophy, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

^ "Responses to Questionnaire" (PDF) .

Archives of Scientific Philosophy, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

^ "Weyl's Extension of the Riemannian Concept of Space and the Geometrical Interpretation of Electricity" (PDF) .

Archives of Scientific Philosophy, University Library System, University of Pittsburgh . Retrieved 2015-12-01 .

Sources [ edit ] Adolf Grünbaum , 1963, Philosophical Problems of Space and Time . Alfred A. Knopf. Ch. 3.

Günther Sandner, The Berlin Group in the Making: Politics and Philosophy in the Early Works of Hans Reichenbach and Kurt Grelling . Proceedings of 10th International Congress of the International Society for the History of Philosophy of Science (HOPOS), Ghent, July 2014. ( Abstract Archived 2018-11-16 at the Wayback Machine .) Carl Hempel , 1991, Hans Reichenbach remembered , Erkenntnis 35 : 5–10.

Wesley Salmon , 1977, "The philosophy of Hans Reichenbach," Synthese 34 : 5–88.

Wesley Salmon (ed.), 1979, Hans Reichenbach: Logical Empiricist . Springer.

Wesley Salmon, 1991, "Hans Reichenbach's vindication of induction," Erkenntnis 35 : 99–122.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Hans Reichenbach .

Works by or about Hans Reichenbach at the Internet Archive The Rise of Scientific Philosophy – Descriptive summary & full searchable text at Google Book Search O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Hans Reichenbach" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Hans Reichenbach by Mauro Murzi.

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Hans Reichenbach by Clark Glymour and Frederick Eberhardt The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: " Reichenbach's Common Cause Principle " by Frank Arntzenius.

Guide to the Hans Reichenbach Collection at the University of Pittsburgh's Archive of Scientific Philosophy "Reichenbach's Theory of Tense and its Application to English" University of Pittsburgh Library System archives and manuscript collections Main article Archives Service Center Collections and archives Stephen Foster Collection and archive Stephen Foster's sketchbook Joe Negri Archives Jane McDowell Foster Wiley Darlington Collection Hans Reichenbach Carnap Papers Carl Gustav Hempel Papers Robert Schmertz Collection The Four Evans Frank E. Bolden Walter Leuba P.L. Prattis Pittsburgh Courier Ohio Company Alexander Addison Erroll Garner Archive James R. Cox Collection Henry Overholt Collection Dick Thornburgh Papers Songs of Robert Schmertz Morrison Foster v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hans_Reichenbach&oldid=1293666863 " Categories : 1891 births 1953 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American physicists 20th-century American educators 20th-century American essayists 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century German physicists American logicians American male essayists American male non-fiction writers Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States American socialists Analytic philosophers Philosophers of probability Empiricists German epistemologists 20th-century German educators German logicians German male essayists German male non-fiction writers German physicists German socialists History of logic Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin German expatriates in Turkey Expatriate academics in Turkey Academic staff of Istanbul University Logical positivism German philosophers of education 20th-century German educational theorists German philosophers of language Philosophers of logic Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of time German philosophy academics Probability theorists German quantum physicists UCLA Department of Philosophy faculty University of California, Los Angeles faculty Vienna Circle Writers from Hamburg Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hans Reichenbach 32 languages Add topic

