Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theologians of the Pontifical Household 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 5.1 Acknowledgment Toggle the table of contents Theologian of the Pontifical Household 6 languages Deutsch Español Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Curial office of the Roman Catholic Church In the Roman Catholic Church , Theologian of the Pontifical Household ( Latin : Pontificalis Domus Doctor Theologus ) is a Roman Curial office which has always been entrusted to a Friar Preacher of the Dominican Order and may be described as the pope's theologian. The title was formerly known as the Master of the Sacred Apostolic Palace ( Latin : Magister Sacri Palatii Apostolici ) before the changes implemented in Pope Paul VI 's 1968 apostolic letter Pontificalis Domus .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Theologian of the Pontifical Household" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In 1218 St. Dominic was the first papal theologian to be given the title "Master of the Sacred Palace". Eighty-four Dominicans succeeded him until the early 20th century.  Eighteen of them were later named Cardinals , twenty-four archbishops or bishops (including some of the cardinals), and six were elected Superiors general of the order. Several are famous for their works on theology, e.g.

Durandus of Saint-Pourçain , Juan de Torquemada , Sylvester Mazzolini 'Prierias', Thomas Maria Mamachi and Giuseppe Agostino Orsi . The majority were Italians, but there were also 10 Spaniards, 10 Frenchmen, one German, and one from England ( William de Boderisham , or Bonderish, 1263–1270?).

The chronicles of the churches of San Domenico at Perugia and San Domenico at Orvieto attest that the studium at the convent of Santa Sabina , which is the forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum , played the special role of frequently providing papal theologians from among its members.

[ 2 ] The post is now held by Fr.

Wojciech Giertych , a Polish Dominican, a former student of and professor of theology at the Angelicum , who was appointed by Pope Benedict XVI in 2005 to replace the Swiss Cardinal Georges Cottier .

It has sometimes been asserted that St. Thomas Aquinas was a Master of the Sacred Palace. This is due to a misconception: he was Lector of the Sacred Palace , but these offices were not identical. (See Bullarium O. P., III, 18.) Though he and two other contemporary Dominicans, his teacher St.

Albert the Great and his fellow pupil Bl.

Ambrose Sansedonico (about both of whom the same assertion has been made) held successively the office of Lecturer on Scripture or Lecturer on Theology in the papal palace school , not one of them was Master of the Sacred Palace. Their names do not occur in the official lists. While all Masters of the Sacred Palace were Dominicans, several members of other orders were Lectors of the Sacred Palace (e.g. Peckham O.S.F.

, who became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1279).

St. Dominic's work as Master of the Sacred Palace consisted partly at least in expounding the Epistles of St. Paul .

[ 3 ] These exegetical lectures were delivered to prelates and to the clerical attendants of cardinals who, as the saint observed, had been accustomed to gather in the antechamber and to spend the time in gossip while their masters were having audiences with the pope. According to Renazzi (I, 25), St. Dominic may be regarded as the founder of the papal palace school, since his Biblical lectures were the occasion of its being established. The liturgist Josephus Catalanus , who, however, is not guilty of the confusion alluded to above, says he was the first Lector of the Sacred Palace as well as the first Master of the Sacred Palace.

In the thirteenth century the chief duty of the Master of the Sacred Palace was to lecture on Scripture and to preside over the theological school in Vatican: "in scholae Romanae et Pontificiae regimine et in publica sacrae scripturae expositione" (Echard). The Lectores or Magistri scholarum S. Palatii taught under him. It became customary for the Master of the Sacred Palace, according to Cardinal de Luca, to preach before the pope and his court in Advent and Lent. This had probably been sometimes done by St. Dominic. Up to the sixteenth century the Master of the Sacred Palace preached, but after it this work was permanently entrusted to his companion (another Dominican). A further division of labour was made by Benedict XIV (Decree, "Inclyta Fratrum", 1743); since the companion preaches to the papal household , and a Capuchin preaches to the pope and to the cardinals.

But the work of the Master of the Sacred Palace as papal theologian continues to the present. As it has assumed its actual form by centuries of development, we may give a summary of the legislation respecting it and the various functions it comprises and also of the honours attaching to it. The "Acta" (or "Calenda") of the Palatine officials in 1409 (under Alexander V ) show that on certain days, the Master of the Sacred Palace was bound to deliver lectures, and on other days he was expected, if called upon, either to propose or to answer questions at the theological conference which was held in the pope's presence. On 30 October 1439, Eugene IV decreed that the Master of the Sacred Palace should rank next to the dean of the Sacred Rota , that no one should preach before the pope whose sermon had not been previously approved of by him, and that in accordance with ancient usage no one could be made a doctor of theology in Rome but by him (Bullarium O. P., III, 81). Callistus III (13 November 1455) confirmed and amplified the second part of this decree, but at the same time exempted cardinals from its operation (ibid., p. 356). It has fallen into disuse.

In the Fifth Lateran Council (sess. x, 4 May 1513) Leo X ordained that no book should be printed either in Rome or in its district without leave from the cardinal vicar and the Master of the Sacred Palace (ibid., IV, 318).

Paul V (11 June 1620) and Urban VIII added to the obligations imposed by this decree. So did Alexander VII in 1663 (Bullarium, passim). All these later enactments regard the inhabitants of the Roman Province or of the Papal States . They were renewed by Benedict XIV (1 September 1744). And the permission of the Master of the Sacred Palace must be got not only to print, but to publish, and before the second permission is granted, three printed copies must be deposited with him: for himself, for his companion and for the cardinal vicar.

The Roman Vicariate never examines work intended for publication. For centuries the imprimatur of the Master of the Sacred Palace who always examined them followed the Si videbitur Reverendissimo Magistro Sacri Palatii of the cardinal vicar; in virtue of custom but not of any ascertained law, since about the year 1825 the cardinal vicar gives an imprimatur, and it follows that of the Master of the Sacred Palace. The obligation once incumbent on cardinals of presenting their work to the Master of the Sacred Palace for his imprimatur has fallen into disuse, but through courtesy many cardinals do present their works.

In the Constitution " Officiorum ac Munerum " (25 January 1897), Leo XIII declared that all persons residing in Rome may get leave from the Master of the Sacred Palace to read forbidden books, and that if authors who live in Rome intend to get their works published elsewhere, the joint imprimatur of the cardinal vicar and the Master of the Sacred Palace renders it unnecessary to ask any other approbation. As is well known, if an author not resident in Rome desires to have his work published there, provided that an agreement with the author's Ordinary has been made and that the Master of the Sacred Palace judges favourably of the work, the imprimatur will be given. In this case the book is known by its having two title pages: the one bearing the name of the domiciliary, the other that of the Roman publisher.

Before the establishment of the Congregation of the Inquisition (in 1542) and Congregation of the Index (1587), the Master of the Sacred Palace condemned books and forbade reading them under censure. Instances of his so doing occur regularly till about the middle of the sixteenth century; one occurred as late as 1604, but by degrees this task has been appropriated to the above-mentioned congregations of which he is an ex officio member. The Master of the Sacred Palace was made by Pius V (29 July 1570; see "Bullarium", V, 245) canon theologian of St. Peter's Basilica , but this Bull was revoked by his successor Gregory XIII (11 March 1575).

From the time when Leo X recognized the Roman University " Sapienza " (5 November 1513, by the decree "Dum suavissimos") he transferred to it the old theological school of the papal palace. The Master of the Sacred Palace became the president of the new theological faculty. The other members were the pope's grand sacristan (an Augustinian), the commissary of the Holy Office (a Dominican), the procurators general of the five Mendicant Orders , i.e. Dominican, Franciscan ( Conventual ), Augustinian , Carmelite and Servite , and the professors who succeeded to the ancient Lectors of the Sacred Palace.

Sixtus V is by some regarded as the founder of this college or faculty, but he may have only given its definite form. He is said to have confirmed the prerogative enjoyed by the Master of the Sacred Palace of conferring all degrees of philosophy and theology. Instances of papal diplomas implying this power of the Master of the Sacred Palace occur in the "Bullarium" passim (e.g. of Innocent IV on 6 June 1406). The presidential authority of the Master of the Sacred Palace over this, the greatest theological faculty in Rome, was confirmed by Leo XII in 1824.

Since the occupation of Rome in 1870 by Italy, the Sapienza has been laicized and turned into a state university, so that on the special occasions when the Master of the Sacred Palace held an examination, e.g. for the purpose of examining all that are to be appointed to episcopal sees in Italy, or again of conferring the title of S.T.D.

, he did so, with the assistance of the high dignitaries just mentioned, in his apartment in the Vatican. He is also examiner in the concursus for parishes in Rome which are held in the Roman Vicariate. Before Eugene IV issued the Bull referred to above, the Master of the Sacred Palace was in processions etc., the dignitary immediately under the Apostolic subdeacons , but when this pope raised the auditors of the Rota to the rank of Apostolic subdeacons, he gave the Master of the Sacred Palace the place immediately next to the dean who was in charge of the papal mitre. In 1655, Alexander VII put the other auditors of the Sacra Romana Rota above the Master of the Sacred Palace. This was done, according to Cardinal De Luca , solely because one white and black habit looked badly among several violet soutanes . One of the occasional duties of the Master of the Sacred Palace is performed in conjunction with the auditors of the Rota; namely to watch over the three apertures or "drums" through which the cardinals receive all communications during a conclave . In papal processions, the Master of the Sacred Palace walks next to the auditors, immediately behind the bearer of the papal tiara .

Though the office has gradually lost some of its traditional authority and rank, the Master of the Sacred Palace is a very high official. He is one of the three Palatine prelates (the others being the papal Maggiordomo and the Grand Almoner ) to whom, as to bishops, the papal guards present arms. He is always addressed, even by cardinals, as "Most Reverend". In the Dominican Order he ranks next to the general, ex-general and vicar-general. He is ex officio consultor of the Holy Office, prelate-consultor of Rites, and perpetual assistant of the Index. He is consultor of the Biblical Commission and is frequently consulted by the pope. His official audience occurs once a fortnight. The official apartment of the Master of the Sacred Palace was in the Quirinal , which long contained a complete series of portraits in fresco of the Masters of the Sacred Palace, beginning with St. Dominic. These were effaced when the Italian kingdom occupied the Quirinal, but copies of them were put in the temporary apartment of the Master of the Sacred Palace in the Vatican.

Theologians of the Pontifical Household [ edit ] Masters of the Sacred Apostolic Palace Saint Dominic Mario Cordovani (–1951) [ 4 ] Michael Browne (1951–1955) [ 4 ] Theologians of the Pontifical Household Mario Luigi Ciappi (1955–1989; 1955–1968 as Master of the Sacred Palace) Georges Cottier (1990–2005) Wojciech Giertych (2005–present) See also [ edit ] Preacher of the Papal Household References [ edit ] ^ See Pontificalis Domus 7, §4: Magister Sacri Palatii Apostolici munera sua servat; appellabitur autem Pontificalis Domus Doctor Theologus.

("The Master of the Sacred Apostolic Palace keeps his functions; he will be called, however, the Doctor Theologian to the Pontifical Household." ^ For example: "Frater Iacobus Raynucii sacerdos, fuit graciosus predicator et lector arectinus et castellanus, lucanus, urbevetanus, in Tuscia provintialis vicarius, et perusinus ac etiam romanus in Sancta Sabina tempore quo curia erat in Urbe. Qui et fuit in pluribus capitulis diffinitor, postmodum prior perusinus; demum factus prior in Sancta Sabina, per papam Honorium de Sabello residentem ibidem, propter suam laudabilem vitam et celebrem opinionem que de ipso erat in romana curia, factus est [1286] episcopus florentinus" (Cr Pg 29v).  "Fuit magister eximius in theologia et multum famosus in romana curia; qui actu existens lector apud Sanctam Sabinam" (Cr Ov 28) https://www.e-theca.net/emiliopanella/lector12.htm Accessed May 9, 201; "(1988 Emilio Panella) Iacopo di Ranuccio da Castelbuono OP testimone dell??alia lectura fratris Thome?" . Archived from the original on 2013-05-23 . Retrieved 2013-02-07 .

Accessed Feb. 1, 2013; Emilio Panella, "Iacopo di Ranuccio da Castelbuono OP, testimone dell’“alia lectura fratris Thome”, «Memorie domenicane» 19 (1988) 369–95; "Frater Hugo de Bidiliomo provincie Francie, magister fuit egregius in theologia et mul<tum> famosus in romana curia; qui actu lector existens apud Sanctam Sabinam, per papam Nicolaum quartum eiusdem ecclesie factus cardinalis" [16.V.1288]; postmodum per Celestinum papain [1294] est ordinatus in episcopum ostiensem (Cr Pg 3r).

https://www.e-theca.net/emiliopanella/lector12.htm Accessed Feb. 7, 2013; See also Rome Across Time and Space: Cultural Transmission and the Exchange of Ideas , 2011, p. 275.

https://books.google.com/books?id=xGiHbiqknLgC&dq=%22&pg=PA275 Accessed 2-7-2013; "Frater Nicolaus Brunatii [† 1322] sacerdos et predicator gratiosus, fuit lector castellanus, arectinus, perusinus, urbevetanus et romanus apud Sanctam Sabinam tempore quo papa erat in Urbe, viterbiensis et florentinus in studio generali legens ibidem annis tribus (Cr Pg 37v). Cuius sollicita procuratione conventus perusinus meruit habere gratiam a summo pontifice papa Benedicto XI ecclesiam scilicet et parrochiam Sancti Stephani tempore quo [maggio 13041 ipse prior actu in Perusio erat (Cr Pg 38r).

https://www.e-theca.net/emiliopanella/lector12.htm Accessed 2–7, 2013 ^ Colonna, O.P., c: 1255, who says that the commentary was then extant; Flaminius; S. Antonius; Thomas Malvenda , in whose time the MS. of the Epistles used by the Saint as Master of the Sacred Palace was preserved in Toulouse; Echard; Renazzi; Mortier, etc.

^ a b Dominicana 1955 , p. 115 Sources [ edit ] Creytens, Raymond, “Le Studium Romanae Curiae et le maître du Sacré Palais," Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum 12 (1942): 5–83.

Catalano, Josephus (1751).

De magistro sacri palatii apostolici libri duo quorum alter originem, praerogativas, ac munia, alter eorum seriem continet, qui eo munere ad hanc usque diem donati fuere ad reverendissimum patrem fr. Antoninum Bremond ... auctore Josepho Catalano .

(in Latin). Roma: typis Antonii Fulgoni apud S. Eustachium.

"The Most Reverend Michael Browne, O.P., Eighty-First Master General" (PDF) .

Dominicana .

40 (2): 115– 116. June 1955.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 24, 2020 . Retrieved June 16, 2023 .

Acknowledgment [ edit ] Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Master of the Sacred Palace" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the Holy See Orders of the Holy See Supreme Order of Christ Order of the Golden Spur Order of Pope Pius IX Order of St. Gregory the Great Order of St. Sylvester Orders under protection of the Holy See (with distinctions) Order of the Holy Sepulchre Palm of Jerusalem Pilgrim Shell Cross of Merit Sovereign Military Order of Malta Order pro Merito Melitensi Medal of the Order pro Merito Melitensi Other distinctions Golden Rose Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice Benemerenti medal Jerusalem Pilgrim's Cross Defunct/dormant distinctions (selection) Order of Saint John of the Lateran Order of Saint Cecilia (1870) Order of the Moor (1870) Order of Saint Sylvester and the Militia Aurata (1905) Advocates of Saint Peter (1909) Blessed sword and hat (1823) Pro Petri Sede (1860) Fidei et Virtuti (1867) Lauretan Cross ( c.

1980s ) Papal Lateran Cross (1977) See also Papal household Papal nobility Black nobility Pontifical academies Swiss Guard Other Catholic orders of chivaly Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Holy See Apostolic see of Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome Sovereignty of Vatican City Legal status of the Holy See History Apostolic see Primacy of Peter History of papal primacy Patrimony of Saint Peter Old St. Peter's Basilica Lateran Palace Museum Duchy of Rome Donation of Sutri Donation of Pepin Avignon Papacy Papal States Temporal power Investiture Controversy Age of Revolution " Prisoner in the Vatican " Savoyard era Vatican City Lateran Treaty World War II Warsaw Pact Sovereign judicial entity under international law ( Legal status ) Officials Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin Cardinals List Advisers Governance Secretariat of State College of Cardinals Conclave Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Foreign affairs ( Multilateral policy ) Section for Relations with States To the Holy See Of the Holy See Heads Italy United Nations Permanent Observer in Geneva European Union Permanent Observer to the Council of Europe Apostolic nunciature Nuncio Treaties Concordats Diocese of Rome with universal full communion ( Papal primacy ) Synods Ordinary general assemblies Extraordinary general assemblies Special assemblies Ecclesiastical province of Rome ( Vicariate : Rome , Vatican City ) Suburbicarian sees Ostia Velletri–Segni Porto–Santa Rufina Frascati Palestrina Albano Sabina–Poggio Mirteto Territorial abbeys Monte Cassino Subiaco Suffragan dioceses Gaeta Anagni-Alatri Civita Castellana Civitavecchia-Tarquinia Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino Latina-Terracina-Sezze-Priverno Rieti Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo Tivoli Viterbo Properties including extra- territoriality Inside Rome Major basilicas St. Peter's Basilica Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Lateran Palace Lateran University Scala Sancta Sancta Sanctorum Adjoining buildings Palace of Saint Callixtus Gianicolo Hill area Pontifical Urban University Pontifical North American College Bambino Gesù Hospital Palazzo della Cancelleria Palace of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Palace of the Holy Office Palace of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches Palazzo Pio Palazzo Maffei Marescotti (Palace of the Vicariate} Pontifical Roman Minor Seminary Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Benedictine monastery Pontifical Oratory of San Paolo Beda College Paul VI Audience Hall St. Peter's Square Non- extraterritorial Palace of the Holy Apostles Palace of San Carlo ai Catinari Collegio Bellarmino Archaeological Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Pontifical Lombard Seminary Russian College Two Palaces of Sant'Apollinare House of Retreat for the Clergy of Saints John and Paul Nympheum of Nero Outside Rome Palace of Castel Gandolfo Papal farm Gardens of the Villa Cybo Villa Barberini Adjacent gardens Pontifical College Josephinum Summer estate of Pontificio Collegio Urbano de Propaganda Fide Vatican Radio antennae area of Santa Maria di Galeria Non- extraterritorial Basilica della Santa Casa Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua See also Acta Apostolicae Sedis Awards Papal household Peter's Pence Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Swiss Guard Vatican.va Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theologian_of_the_Pontifical_Household&oldid=1295182845 " Categories : Catholic ecclesiastical titles History of censorship Officials of the Roman Curia Papal household Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 06:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theologian of the Pontifical Household 6 languages Add topic

