Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 See also 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Dühring 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1878 book by Friedrich Engels Anti-Dühring The German edition Author Friedrich Engels Original title Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft Language German Subject Philosophy Published 1878 Published in English 1907 Media type Print Text Anti-Dühring at Wikisource Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Anti-Dühring ( German : Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft , "Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science") is a book by Friedrich Engels , first published in German in 1877 in parts and then in 1878 in book form. It had previously been serialised in the newspaper Vorwärts .

[ 1 ] There were two further German editions in Engels' lifetime.

Anti-Dühring was first published in English translation in 1907.

[ 2 ] Contents [ edit ] This work was one of Engels's major contributions to the exposition and development of Marxist theory . Its full title translates as Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science : this is meant ironically and polemically. The short title recalls Julius Caesar 's polemic Anti-Cato .

[ citation needed ] Eugen Dühring had produced his own version of socialism , intended as a replacement for Marxism . Since Karl Marx was busy at the time with writing Das Kapital , it was left to Engels to write a general defence.  The sections are Philosophy , Political Economy and Socialism .

[ citation needed ] Among communists , it is a popular and enduring work which, as Engels wrote to Marx, was an attempt "to produce an encyclopaedic survey of our conception of the philosophical, natural-science and historical problems." [ citation needed ] Part of it was published separately in 1880 in France as Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

[ 3 ] An English translation was published in 1892. This work also influenced Materialism and Empirio-criticism [ 4 ] by Vladimir Lenin .

In the book, Engels articulated one of the classic definitions of the term political economy : "Political economy, in the widest sense, is the science of the laws governing the production and exchange of the material means of subsistence in human society ... Political economy is therefore essentially a historical science. It deals with material which is historical, that is, constantly changing." [ 5 ] In his biography of Marx, Isaiah Berlin found the most readable section to be that subsequently published separately under the title Socialism: Utopian and Scientific which he described as "the best brief autobiographical appreciation of Marxism by one of its creators. ... Written in Engels's best vein [it] had a decisive influence on both Russian and German Socialism." [ 6 ] This work is also the source of a widely quoted aphorism:  "The state is not abolished, it withers away ." [ 7 ] Another well-known sentence refers approvingly to Hegel : "To him, freedom is the insight into necessity ( die Einsicht in die Notwendigkeit )." See also [ edit ] Dialectics of Nature Notes [ edit ] ^ Engels, Friedrich (13 September 2017).

Herrn Eugen Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft . BoD – Books on Demand.

ISBN 9783843026062 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 – via Google Books.

^ "1877: Anti-Duhring" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2024-04-30 .

^ Tucker, Robert C. "Introduction" in The Marx–Engels Reader , Second Edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1978, p. xxxviii.

^ Materialism and Empirio-criticism , Chapter 4, 7 ^ "1877: Anti-Duhring – Part II: Political Economy" .

www.marxists.org .

^ Berlin, I. (1963).

Karl Marx, his life and environment (3rd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 221 ^ "Withering Away of the State." In The Encyclopedia of Political Science , edited by George Thomas Kurian. Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2011.

http://library.cqpress.com/teps/encyps_1775.1 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Anti-Dühring Full HTML text online Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dühring’s Revolution in Science , full text published by Progress Publishers in PDF format v t e Works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Marx Das Kapital Das Kapital, Volume I (1867) Das Kapital, Volume II (1885, posthumous) Das Kapital, Volume III (1894, posthumous) Other works Scorpion and Felix (1837) Oulanem (1839) The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature (1841) " The Philosophical Manifesto of the Historical School of Law " (1842) Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (1843, published 1927) " On the Jewish Question " (1843) " Notes on James Mill " (1844) Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (1844, published 1932) " Theses on Feuerbach " (1845, published 1888) The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) " Wage Labour and Capital " (1847) The Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850 (1850) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) Grundrisse (1857, published 1939) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) Theories of Surplus Value (three volumes, 1862) " Value, Price and Profit " (1865) " The Belgian Massacres " (1869) " The Civil War in France " (1871) Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875) Mathematical manuscripts (1968) Notebooks on the history of technology Marx and Engels The Holy Family (1844) The German Ideology (1845, published 1932) The Communist Manifesto (1848) The Civil War in the United States (1861) Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) Principles of Communism (1847) The Peasant War in Germany (1850) " The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man " (1876) Anti-Dühring (1878) Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) Dialectics of Nature (1883) The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886) A Contribution to the History of Primitive Christianity (1894) Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (1896, posthumous) Collections Marx/Engels Collected Works (1975–2004) Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (1975–today) Karl Marx Library (1971–1977) Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Dühring&oldid=1294742213 " Categories : 1878 books Marxist books Works originally published in German periodicals Books by Friedrich Engels Historical materialism Dialectical materialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that link to Wikisource Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 14:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Dühring 24 languages Add topic

