Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Research 3 Industry 4 Honors and awards 5 Notable students 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Tomaso Poggio 4 languages Deutsch Français Italiano مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian physicist and computational neuroscientist Tomaso A. Poggio Poggio in 2015 Born Tomaso Armando Poggio ( 1947-09-11 ) 11 September 1947 (age 77) Genoa, Italy Alma mater Istituto Arecco (BA) University of Genoa (PhD) Known for Biophysical and behavioral studies of the visual system Computational analyses of vision and learning in humans and machines Deep learning Visuo-motor control system in the fly Awards Otto Hahn Medal , 1979.

Honorary degree, University of Pavia , 2000.

2003 Gabor Award .

2009 Okawa Prize [1] .

Swartz Prize For Theoretical and Computational Neuroscience, The Society for Neuroscience , 2014.

Scientific career Fields Machine learning Neural networks Artificial intelligence Cognitive science Visual systems Institutions Massachusetts Institute of Technology Doctoral advisor Prof. A. Borsellino Notable students Anya Hurlbert Christof Koch Partha Niyogi Gabriel Kreiman Tomaso Armando Poggio (born 11 September 1947 in Genoa , Italy ), is the Eugene McDermott professor in the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences , an investigator at the McGovern Institute for Brain Research , a member of the MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory (CSAIL) and director of both the Center for Biological and Computational Learning at MIT and the Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines , a multi-institutional collaboration headquartered at the McGovern Institute since 2013.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Born in Genoa, Italy , and educated at Istituto Arecco, Tomaso Poggio completed his doctorate in physics at the University of Genoa and received his degree in Theoretical Physics under professor A. Borsellino.

Research [ edit ] His interdisciplinary research on the problem of intelligence , between brains and computers, started at the Max Planck Institute in Tübingen , Germany in collaborations with Werner E. Reichardt , David C. Marr and Francis H.C. Crick , among others. He has made contributions to learning theory, to the computational theory of vision, to the understanding of the fly's visual system, and to the biophysics of computation. His recent work is focused on computational neuroscience in close collaboration with several physiology labs, trying to answer the questions of how our visual system learns to see and recognize scenes and objects.

[ 2 ] He is one of the most cited computational neuroscientists.

[ 3 ] with contributions ranging from the biophysical and behavioral studies of the visual system to the computational analyses of vision and learning in humans and machines. With Werner E. Reichardt he characterized quantitatively the visuo-motor control system in the fly.  With David Marr (neuroscientist) , he introduced the seminal idea of levels of analysis in computational neuroscience. He and Torre introduced regularization as a mathematical framework to approach the ill-posed problems of vision and the key problem of learning from data.

[ 4 ] The citation for the 2009 Okawa prize mentions his  “…outstanding contributions to the establishment of computational neuroscience, and pioneering researches ranging from the biophysical and behavioral studies of the visual system to the computational analysis of vision and learning in humans and machines.”  His research has always been interdisciplinary, between brains and computers. It is now focused on the mathematics of deep learning and on the computational neuroscience of the visual cortex.

Industry [ edit ] Poggio is a former Corporate Fellow of Thinking Machines Corporation and a former director of PHZ Capital Partners, Inc., is a director of Mobileye and was involved in starting, or investing in, several other high tech companies including Arris Pharmaceutical, nFX, Imagen , Digital Persona and DeepMind . Among his PhD students and post-docs are some of the today's leaders in the Science and in the Engineering of Intelligence,  from Christof Koch (President and Chief Scientific Officer, Allen Institute) to Amnon Shashua (CEO and founder, Mobileye) and Demis Hassabis (CEO and founder, Deep Mind, and Nobel Prize for Chemistry 2024).

Honors and awards [ edit ] Poggio is an honorary member of the Neuroscience Research Program, a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and a founding fellow of AAAI and a founding member of the McGovern Institute for Brain Research . He received the Laurea Honoris Causa in Computer Engineering from the University of Pavia for the Volta Bicentennial in 2000, the 2003 Gabor Award , the 2009 Okawa Prize [2] , and named in 2009 a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) for “distinguished contributions to computational neuroscience, in particular, computational vision learning and regularization theory, biophysics of computation and models of recognition in the visual cortex”, the 2014 Swartz Prize for Theoretical and Computational Neuroscience, in 2020 won the first edition of the international scientific award "Ratio et spes", [ 5 ] the ICCV 2021 Helmholtz Prize, [ 6 ] and the Kampe’ de F’eriet Award and Plenary Lecture, IMPU 2022, Milan, Italy.

[ 7 ] Notable students [ edit ] Christof Koch , President and Chief Scientific Officer, Allen Institute for Brain Science Partha Niyogi See also [ edit ] Center for Brains, Minds, and Machines Center for Biological and Computational Learning at MIT .

References [ edit ] ^ "MIT Sloan CIO Symposium: Tomaso Poggio" .

MIT Sloan CIO Symposium . 18 May 2015 . Retrieved 30 May 2015 .

^ A feedforward architecture accounts for rapid categorization. Serre T, Oliva A, Poggio T.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America . 2007 Apr 10;104(15):6424-9.

^ "1360 Highly Cited Researchers (h>100) according to their Google Scholar Citations public profiles" .

Ranking Web of Universities .

^ "Ill-Posed Problems and Regularization Analysis in Early Vision" .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 August 2021 .

^ "Conferenza Stampa di presentazione delle iniziative della Fondazione Vaticana Joseph Ratzinger – Benedetto XVI" .

press.vatican.va . Retrieved 19 January 2023 .

^ "ICCV Helmholtz Prize - IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence -IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence" .

tc.computer.org . Retrieved 19 January 2023 .

^ "Tomaso Poggio presented with the 2022 Kampe de Feriet award | The Center for Brains, Minds & Machines" .

cbmm.mit.edu . Retrieved 19 January 2023 .

External links [ edit ] The Center for Biological and Computational Learning (CBCL) at MIT McGovern Institute for Brain Research at MIT Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Association for Computing Machinery Scopus zbMATH Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tomaso_Poggio&oldid=1294972411 " Categories : Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Science faculty Artificial intelligence researchers Italian cognitive neuroscientists Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Living people 1947 births University of Genoa alumni Italian computer scientists American computer scientists Computer vision researchers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 22:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tomaso Poggio 4 languages Add topic

