Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nuclide vs. isotope 2 Types of nuclides 3 Origins of naturally occurring radionuclides 4 Summary table for each class of nuclides 5 Nuclear properties and stability 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Nuclide 51 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Atomic species Nuclear physics Nucleus Nucleons p n Nuclear matter Nuclear force Nuclear structure Nuclear reaction Models of the nucleus Liquid drop Nuclear shell model Interacting boson model Ab initio Nuclides ' classification Isotopes – equal Z Isobars – equal A Isotones – equal N Isodiaphers – equal N − Z Isomers – equal all the above Mirror nuclei – Z ↔ N Stable Magic Even/odd Halo Borromean Nuclear stability Binding energy p–n ratio Drip line Island of stability Valley of stability Stable nuclide Radioactive decay Alpha α Beta β 2β 0v β + K/L capture Isomeric Gamma γ Internal conversion Spontaneous fission Cluster decay Neutron emission Proton emission Decay energy Decay chain Decay product Radiogenic nuclide Nuclear fission Spontaneous Products pair breaking Photofission Capturing processes electron 2× neutron s r proton p rp High-energy processes Spallation by cosmic ray Photodisintegration Nucleosynthesis and nuclear astrophysics Nuclear fusion Processes: Stellar Big Bang Supernova Nuclides: Primordial Cosmogenic Artificial High-energy nuclear physics Quark–gluon plasma RHIC LHC Scientists Alvarez Becquerel Bethe A. Bohr N. Bohr Chadwick Cockcroft Ir. Curie Fr. Curie Pi. Curie Skłodowska-Curie Davisson Fermi Hahn Jensen Lawrence Mayer Meitner Oliphant Oppenheimer Proca Purcell Rabi Rutherford Soddy Strassmann Świątecki Szilárd Teller Thomson Walton Wigner Physics portal Category v t e Nuclides (or nucleides , from nucleus , also known as nuclear species) are a class of atoms characterized by their number of protons , Z , their number of neutrons , N , and their nuclear energy state .

[ 1 ] The word nuclide was coined by the American nuclear physicist Truman P. Kohman in 1947.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Kohman defined nuclide as a "species of atom characterized by the constitution of its nucleus" containing a certain number of neutrons and protons. The term thus originally focused on the nucleus.

Nuclide vs. isotope [ edit ] A nuclide is an atom with a specific number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus, for example carbon-13 with 6 protons and 7 neutrons. The term was coined deliberately in distinction from isotope in order to consider the nuclear properties independently of the chemical properties, though isotope is still used for that purpose especially where nuclide might be unfamiliar as in nuclear technology and nuclear medicine . For nuclear properties, the number of neutrons can be practically as important as that of protons , as is never the case for chemical properties: even in the case of the very lightest elements, where the ratio of neutron number to atomic number varies the most between isotopes, it is a relatively small effect, and only substantial for hydrogen and helium (the latter of which has no chemistry proper). For hydrogen the isotope effect is large enough to affect biological systems strongly. In helium, helium-4 obeys Bose–Einstein statistics , while helium-3 obeys Fermi–Dirac statistics , which is responsible for sharp differences in physical properties at low temperature.

Types of nuclides [ edit ] Although the words nuclide and isotope are often used interchangeably, being isotopes is actually only one relation between nuclides. The following table names some other relations.

Designation Characteristics Example Remarks Isotopes equal proton number ( Z 1 = Z 2 ) 12 6 C , 13 6 C , 14 6 C see neutron capture Isotones equal neutron number ( N 1 = N 2 ) 13 6 C , 14 7 N , 15 8 O see proton capture Isobars equal mass number (Z 1 + N 1 = Z 2 + N 2 ) 17 7 N , 17 8 O , 17 9 F see beta decay Isodiaphers equal neutron excess (N 1 − Z 1 = N 2 − Z 2 ) 13 6 C , 15 7 N , 17 8 O Examples are isodiaphers with neutron excess 1.

A nuclide and its alpha decay product are isodiaphers.

[ 4 ] Mirror nuclei neutron and proton number exchanged (Z 1 = N 2 and Z 2 = N 1 ) 3 1 H , 3 2 He see positron emission Nuclear isomers same proton number and mass number, but with different energy states 99 43 Tc , 99m 43 Tc m=metastable (long-lived excited state) A set of nuclides with equal proton number ( atomic number ), i.e., of the same chemical element but different neutron numbers , are called isotopes of the element. Particular nuclides are still often loosely called "isotopes", but the term "nuclide" is the correct one in general (i.e., when Z is not fixed). In similar manner, a set of nuclides with equal mass number A , but different atomic number , are called isobars (isobar = equal in weight), and isotones are nuclides of equal neutron number but different proton numbers. Likewise, nuclides with the same neutron excess ( N − Z ) are called isodiaphers.

[ 4 ] The name isoto n e was derived from the name isoto p e to emphasize that in the first group of nuclides it is the number of neutrons (n) that is constant, whereas in the second the number of protons (p).

[ 5 ] See Isotope#Notation for an explanation of the notation used for different nuclide or isotope types.

Nuclear isomers are members of a set of nuclides with equal proton number and equal mass number (thus making them by definition the same isotope), but different states of excitation. An example is the two states of the single isotope 99 43 Tc shown among the decay schemes . Each of these two states (technetium-99m and technetium-99) qualifies as a different nuclide, illustrating one way that nuclides may differ from isotopes (an isotope may consist of several different nuclides of different excitation states).

The longest-lived non- ground state nuclear isomer is the nuclide tantalum-180m ( 180m 73 Ta ), which has a half-life in excess of 10 17 years. This nuclide occurs primordially, and has never been observed to decay to the ground state. (In contrast, the ground state nuclide tantalum-180 does not occur primordially, since it decays with a half-life of only 8 hours to 180 Hf (86%) or 180 W (14%).) There are 251 nuclides in nature that have never been observed to decay. They occur among the 80 different elements that have one or more stable isotopes. See stable nuclide and primordial nuclide . Unstable nuclides are radioactive and are called radionuclides . Their decay products ('daughter' products) are called radiogenic nuclides .

Origins of naturally occurring radionuclides [ edit ] Natural radionuclides may be conveniently subdivided into three types.

[ 6 ] First, those whose half-lives t 1/2 are at least 2-10% as long as the age of the Earth (there are in fact none within that range) ( 4.6 × 10 9 years ) survive from its formation and are remnants of nucleosynthesis that occurred in stars before the formation of the Solar System . For example, the isotope 238 U (t 1/2 = 4.5 × 10 9 years ) of uranium is still fairly abundant in nature, but the shorter-lived isotope 235 U (t 1/2 = 0.7 × 10 9 years ) is now 138 times rarer. 35 of these nuclides have been identified (see List of nuclides and Primordial nuclide for details).

The second group of radionuclides that exist naturally consists of radiogenic nuclides (such as 226 Ra (t 1/2 = 1600 years ), an isotope of radium ) that are formed by radioactive decay . They occur in the decay chains of primordial isotopes of uranium or thorium. Some of these nuclides are very short-lived, such as isotopes of francium . There exist about 51 of these daughter nuclides that have half-lives too short to be primordial, and which exist in nature solely due to decay from longer lived radioactive primordial nuclides.

The third group consists of nuclides that are continuously being made in another fashion that is not simple spontaneous radioactive decay (i.e., only one atom involved with no incoming particle) but instead involves a natural nuclear reaction . These occur when atoms react with natural neutrons (from cosmic rays, spontaneous fission , or other sources), or are bombarded directly with cosmic rays . The latter, if non-primordial, are called cosmogenic nuclides . Other types of natural nuclear reactions produce nuclides that are said to be nucleogenic nuclides.

Examples of nuclides made by nuclear reactions are cosmogenic 14 C ( radiocarbon ) that is made by cosmic ray bombardment of other elements and nucleogenic 239 Pu still being created by neutron bombardment of natural 238 U as a result of natural fission in uranium ores. Cosmogenic nuclides may be either stable or radioactive. If they are stable, their existence must be deduced against a background of stable nuclides, since every known stable nuclide is present on Earth primordially.

Summary table for each class of nuclides [ edit ] This is a summary table [ 7 ] for the 986 nuclides with half-lives longer than one hour, given in list of nuclides . Note that that number, while exact to present knowledge, will likely change slightly in the future, as some "stable" nuclides are observed to be radioactive with very long half-lives, and some half-lives or known radioactive ones are revised.

Stability class Number of nuclides Running total Notes on running total Theoretically stable to all but proton decay 90 90 Includes first 40 elements. Proton decay yet to be observed.

Energetically unstable to one or more known decay modes, but no decay yet seen.

Spontaneous fission possible for "stable" nuclides from niobium-93 onward; other mechanisms possible for heavier nuclides. All considered "stable" until decay detected.

161 251 Total of classically stable nuclides .

Radioactive primordial nuclides .

35 286 Total primordial elements include bismuth , thorium , and uranium , as well as all having stable nuclides.

Radioactive (half-life > 1 hour). Includes most useful radioactive tracers .

700 986 Carbon-14 (and other cosmogenic nuclides generated by cosmic rays ), daughters of radioactive primordials, nucleogenic nuclides from natural nuclear reactions that are other than those from cosmic rays (such as neutron absorption from spontaneous nuclear fission or neutron emission ), and many synthetic nuclides.

Radioactive synthetic (half-life < 1 hour).

>2400 >3300 Includes all other well-characterized synthetic nuclides.

Nuclear properties and stability [ edit ] The main discussion of this topic is at Isotopes#Nuclear properties and stablity .

See also: Stable nuclide Stability of nuclides by ( Z , N ) , an example of a table of nuclides : Black – stable (all are primordial) Red – primordial radioactive Other – radioactive, with decreasing stability from orange to white Atomic nuclei other than 1 1 H , a lone proton, consist of protons and neutrons bound together by the residual strong force , overcoming electrical repulsion between protons, and for that reason neutrons are required by bind protons together; as the number of protons increases, so does the ratio of neutrons to protons necessary for stability, as the graph illustrates. For example, although light elements up through calcium have stable nuclides with the same number of neutrons as protons, lead requires about 3 neutrons for 2 protons.

See also [ edit ] Isotope List of elements by stability of isotopes List of nuclides (sorted by half-life) Table of nuclides Alpha nuclide Monoisotopic element Mononuclidic element Primordial element Radionuclide Hypernucleus References [ edit ] ^ IUPAC (1997).

"Nuclide" . In A. D. McNaught; A. Wilkinson (eds.).

Compendium of Chemical Terminology .

Blackwell Scientific Publications .

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.N04257 .

ISBN 978-0-632-01765-2 .

^ Kohman, Truman P. (1947). "Proposed New Word: Nuclide ".

American Journal of Physics .

15 (4): 356– 7.

Bibcode : 1947AmJPh..15..356K .

doi : 10.1119/1.1990965 .

^ Belko, Mark (1 May 2010).

"Obituary: Truman P. Kohman / Chemistry professor with eyes always on stars" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 .

^ a b Sharma, B.K. (2001).

Nuclear and Radiation Chemistry (7th ed.). Krishna Prakashan Media. p. 78.

ISBN 978-81-85842-63-9 .

^ Cohen, E. R.; Giacomo, P. (1987). "Symbols, units, nomenclature and fundamental constants in physics".

Physica A .

146 (1): 1– 68.

Bibcode : 1987PhyA..146....1.

.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.1012.880 .

doi : 10.1016/0378-4371(87)90216-0 .

^ "Types of Isotopes: Radioactive" . SAHRA. Archived from the original on 17 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 November 2016 .

^ Table data is derived by counting members of the list; references for the list data itself are given below in the reference section in list of nuclides .

External links [ edit ] Livechart - Table of Nuclides at The International Atomic Energy Agency v t e Charts of nuclides Representations List of nuclides , Table of nuclides segmented, wide segmented, narrow Images Nuclide map (segmented) , Nuclide map (complete) , Table of isotopes Articles on isotopes of an element Isotope index by periodic table Various tables and lists of the nuclides Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nuclide&oldid=1301423160 " Categories : Isotopes Nuclear physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 19:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nuclide 51 languages Add topic

