Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Works 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents George Montagu (naturalist) 15 languages Aragonés Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Español Français Galego Italiano Malagasy Nederlands Português Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British military officer and ornithologist (175?–1815) For other people named George Montagu, see George Montagu (disambiguation) .

George Montagu Born 1753 Lackham House, Wiltshire Died 20 June 1815 Kingsbridge , Devon Known for Ornithological Dictionary Montagu's harrier Spouse Ann Courtenay Scientific career Fields Ornithology George Montagu (1753 – 20 June 1815) was a British military officer and ornithologist. He was known for his pioneering Ornithological Dictionary of 1802, which for the first time accurately defined the status of Britain's birds. He is remembered today for species such as the Montagu's harrier , named after him.

Life and work [ edit ] George Montagu was born to James Montagu (1713–1790), who was great-great-grandson of Lord James Montagu (d. 1665), who was younger son of Henry Montagu, 1st Earl of Manchester .

[ citation needed ] Montagu is best known for his Ornithological Dictionary (1802) and his contributions to early knowledge of British birds. He showed that many previously accepted species were invalid, either because they were birds in summer or winter plumage or males and females of the same species. His study of harriers resulted in the discovery that the Montagu's harrier was breeding in southern England. He was also involved in the first British records of cirl bunting , whose breeding range in England is around his home in Devon, [ 1 ] as well as of cattle egret , little gull and gull-billed tern , and the discovery and description of the roseate tern .

[ 2 ] He was born at the family home of Lackham House in Wiltshire , some three miles south of Chippenham in the northwest of that county, and baptised at Lacock Church on 9 July 1753. In 1770 he joined the army as an Ensign in the 15th Regiment of Foot . He resigned his commission as a captain in 1777, but eventually rose to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel in the Wiltshire Militia . In August 1773 he married Ann Courtenay, niece of John Stuart, 3rd Earl of Bute .

[ 3 ] They settled at Alderton House in Wiltshire. In 1798 Montagu left his wife and moved to Prospect House, near Kingsbridge in Devon . It was here that he wrote his two-volume Ornithological Dictionary; or Alphabetical Synopsis of British Birds .

[ 2 ] He subsequently entered a relationship with Elizabeth Dorville (daughter of Georg Wolff ), who worked with him illustrating several of his scientific articles.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] They went on to have four children together.

[ 4 ] Montagu had an interest in marine and freshwater natural history, and in 1803 published his Testacea Britannica, a History of British Marine, Land and Freshwater Shells . This described 470 species of molluscs , 100 of which were new to the British list, and many of which would later be classified as foraminifera . He supplied some new species of crustacean to William Elford Leach at the British Museum , and recorded some species of fish for the first time in English waters, as well as discovering new species including Montagu's blenny and Montagu's snapper ( Lutjanidae ). He also described the lesser horseshoe bat for the first time.

[ 2 ] Montagu's ray, Montagu's sucker and Montagu's sea snail are also named after him.

[ 6 ] He died of tetanus after stepping on a nail at Knowle House. He was buried at Kingsbridge Parish Church. Montagu's collection of birds was bought by the British Museum, about 200 of which are now housed at the Tring Museum. His annotated copies of the Dictionary and Testacea were bequeathed to the Linnean Society .

[ 2 ] Montagu's shell collection is held by the Royal Albert Memorial Museum & Art Gallery in Exeter and the Natural History Museum in London.

Works [ edit ] Ornithological Dictionary; or Alphabetical Synopsis of British Birds , J. White, 1802.

Supplement to the Ornithological Dictionary, or, Synopsis of British birds , S. Woolmer, 1813.

References [ edit ] ^ Moss, 2005. p. 18 ^ a b c d Mearns, 1988.

^ Mearns, Richard; Mearns, Barbara (April 2023).

"George Montagu (1753–1815): travels in Scotland and his Scottish bird specimens" .

Archives of Natural History .

50 (1): 35– 48.

doi : 10.3366/anh.2023.0826 .

ISSN 0260-9541 .

^ a b "Biography of G. Montagu" .

conchology.be . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ "DSI - Database of Scientific Illustrators" .

uni-stuttgart.de . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ Cleevely, R. J. (1978). "Some background to the life and publications of Colonel George Montagu (1753–1815)".

Journal of the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History .

8 (4): 445– 480.

doi : 10.3366/jsbnh.1978.8.4.445 .

Sources [ edit ] Mearns, Barbara ; Mearns, Richard (1988).

Biographies for Birdwatchers . Academic Press.

ISBN 0-12-487422-3 Moss, Stephen (2005).

A Bird in the Bush: A Social History of Birdwatching.

Aurum.

ISBN 1-84513-085-5 (First published 2004) External links [ edit ] Archive.org: Montagu's Ornithological Dictionary v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Artists Scientific illustrators People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Montagu_(naturalist)&oldid=1292691251 " Categories : 1753 births 1815 deaths People from Chippenham East Yorkshire Regiment officers Wiltshire Militia officers English zoologists English ornithologists Infectious disease deaths in England Deaths from tetanus Montagu family Military personnel from Wiltshire 18th-century British Army personnel Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 08:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Montagu (naturalist) 15 languages Add topic

