Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historicity 2 Philosophical views 3 Legends 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Hermotimus of Clazomenae 7 languages Català Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher Not to be confused with Hermotimus of Colophon .

Hermotimus of Clazomenae ( Greek : Ἑρμότιμος ; fl. c. 8th or 7th century BCE), was a possibly historic or legendary Presocratic philosopher about whom many legendary feats were ascribed in antiquity, including the ability for his soul to leave his body and travel around. Some ancient sources also considered him a previous reincarnation of Pythagoras .

[ 1 ] Aristotle also credited him with some of the metaphysical doctrines on Nous that were more commonly attributed to Anaxagoras .

Historicity [ edit ] The best evidence for Hermotimus' potential historical existence is a tradition that the people of Clazomenae erected a temple for him, which is related by Pliny the Elder , [ 2 ] Lucian , [ 3 ] Apollonius , and Plutarch .

[ 1 ] Philosophical views [ edit ] According to Aristotle , [ 4 ] prior to Anaxagoras ' idea of mind being fundamental in the cause of change, Hermotimus proposed that physical entities are static, while reason causes the change.

[ 5 ] Sextus Empiricus places him with Hesiod , Parmenides , and Empedocles , as belonging to the class of philosophers who held a dualistic theory of a material and an active principle being together the origin of the universe.

[ 6 ] Lucian called him a Pythagorean .

Legends [ edit ] Diogenes Laërtius records a story that Pythagoras remembered his earlier lives, one being Hermotimus, who had validated his own claim to recall earlier lives by recognizing the decaying shield of Menelaus in the temple of Apollo at Didyma .

[ 7 ] Tertullian relates a story about Hermotimus, [ 8 ] in which Hermotimus' soul would depart his body during sleep, as if on a trip. His wife betrayed the oddity and his enemies came and burned his body while he was asleep, his soul returning too late.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Curnow 2006 , p. 147.

^ Pliny, Hist. Nat.

vii. 42 ^ Lucian, Encom. Musc.

7 ^ Aristotle.

The Metaphysics 984b20 ^ Curd 2007 , p. 205.

^ Sextus Empiricus, adv. Math.

ix., ad Phys.

i. 7 ^ Lives of the Eminent Philosophers, Bk.8: Pythagoras ^ Tertullian.

De Anima ( On the Soul ) (Chapter 44), trans. by Peter Holmes, D.D., Anti-Nicene Fathers Vol. 3, 1885.

References [ edit ] Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Pythagoreans: Pythagoras" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:8. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Curd, Patricia (1 January 2007).

Anaxagoras of Clazomenae: Fragments and Testimonia : a Text and Translation with Notes and Essays . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-0-8020-9325-7 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

Cornelli, Gabriele; McKirahan, Richard; Macris, Constantinos (29 October 2013).

On Pythagoreanism . Walter de Gruyter. p. 167.

ISBN 978-3-11-031850-0 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

Smith, William , ed. (1870).

"Hermotimus of Clazomenae" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

Curnow, Trevor (22 June 2006).

The Philosophers of the Ancient World: An A-Z Guide . A&C Black. p. 147.

ISBN 978-1-84966-770-8 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hermotimus_of_Clazomenae&oldid=1289847344 " Categories : Ancient Greek metaphysicians 6th-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek shamans Presocratic philosophers People from Clazomenae Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 06:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hermotimus of Clazomenae 7 languages Add topic

