Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Research 4 Awards and honors 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ellen Sidransky 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American pediatrician and clinical geneticist Ellen Sidransky Alma mater Brandeis University (B.A.) Tulane University School of Medicine (M.D.) Scientific career Fields Pediatrics, clinical genetics Institutions National Human Genome Research Institute Ellen Sidransky is an American pediatrician and clinical geneticist in the Medical Genetics Branch of the National Human Genome Research Institute . She is chief of the Molecular Neurogenetics Section.

Education [ edit ] Sidransky graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University in 1977 with a B.A. in biology, and received a M.D. in 1981 from Tulane University School of Medicine . She then trained in pediatrics at Lurie Children's Hospital , and completed fellowship training in clinical genetics at the National Institutes of Health Genetics Training Program.

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] From left to right: Jenny Do, Ellen Sidransky and Bahafta Berhe in May 2019.

Sidransky came to the National Institutes of Health in the late 1980s to learn molecular biology techniques and train in Medical Genetics, where she studied patients with Gaucher disease .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Sidransky has been a tenured investigator at NIH and a section chief since 2000. She is chief of the Molecular Neurogenetics Section and a pediatrician and clinical geneticist in the Medical Genetics Branch of the National Human Genome Research Institute .

[ 1 ] Research [ edit ] Sidransky's research includes both clinical and basic research aspects of Gaucher disease and Parkinson's disease, and her group first identified glucocerebrosidase as a risk factor for parkinsonism. She led two large international collaborative studies regarding the genetics of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Her current work also focuses on understanding the complexity encountered in "simple" Mendelian disorders, the association between Gaucher disease and parkinsonism and the development of small molecule chaperones as therapy for Gaucher disease and potentially parkinsonism. Sidransky directs two NIH clinical protocols, one evaluating patients with lysosomal storage disorders and the second prospectively studying patients and relatives with parkinsonism who carry mutations in GBA . The Sidransky group uses a translational approach, integrating both clinical and basic sciences.

[ 1 ] Over the past two decades, the Sidransky group has established a bank of clinical data, samples and ongoing clinical protocols on GD, to enable a better understanding of the natural history, the correlation of genotype with phenotype, and the contribution of factors modifying this disorder. Focusing on GD, the group is poised to investigate the intricate relationships between clinical manifestations, metabolic defects and molecular mechanisms, and to tackle the challenge of identifying genetic modifiers. Although GD is classically divided into three types, the section's research has shown that there is actually a continuum of manifestation, and they have uncovered several unexpected phenotypes.

[ 1 ] Awards and honors [ edit ] In April 2019, Parkinson's awareness month, Van Andel Institute honored Sidransky with the Jay Van Andel Award for Outstanding Achievement in Parkinson's Disease Research.

[ 2 ] In September 2023, Breakthrough Prize in Life Sciences (2024) awarded to her with Thomas Gasser and Andrew Singleton .

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Ellen Sidransky, M.D." Genome.gov . Retrieved 2019-07-03 .

^ a b Carey, Teresa (2019-05-13).

"Dr. Ellen Sidransky recognized for unique insight in Parkinson's research" .

Genome.gov . Retrieved 2019-07-03 .

^ "Breakthrough Prizes 2024 - Interview with Andy Singleton, Thomas Gasser, and Ellen Sidransky" .

GP2 . 2023-12-29 . Retrieved 2025-05-11 .

^ "BREAKTHROUGH PRIZE ANNOUNCES 2024 LAUREATES IN LIFE SCIENCES, FUNDAMENTAL PHYSICS, AND MATHEMATICS" .

BREAKTHROUGH PRIZE . September 14, 2023 . Retrieved September 14, 2023 .

This article incorporates public domain material from Courtesy: National Human Genome Research Institute .

National Institutes of Health .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Academics ORCID Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ellen_Sidransky&oldid=1296625371 " Categories : Living people Brandeis University alumni Tulane University School of Medicine alumni National Institutes of Health people 20th-century American physicians 21st-century American physicians American pediatricians American women pediatricians 20th-century American scientists 21st-century American scientists 20th-century American women scientists 21st-century American women scientists American women geneticists American geneticists 20th-century American women physicians 21st-century American women physicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles incorporating material from the National Institutes of Health Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 05:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ellen Sidransky 2 languages Add topic

