Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Beginnings (15th century–19th century) 1.2 Phase I (1900s–1940s) 1.3 Phase II (1950s–1970s) 1.4 Present (1980s–2000s) 2 Subjects of inquiry Toggle Subjects of inquiry subsection 2.1 Usage 2.2 Taxonomy 2.3 Cosmological, moral and spiritual significance 2.4 Traditional ecological knowledge 2.5 Cross-cultural ethnobiology 3 Subdisciplines Toggle Subdisciplines subsection 3.1 Ethnobotany 3.2 Ethnozoology 3.3 Ethnoecology 4 Other disciplines 5 Ethics 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethnobiology 18 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia עברית Norsk bokmål Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of how living things are used by human cultures Logo for the Society of Ethnobiology Ethnobiology is the multidisciplinary field of study of relationships among peoples, biota , and environments integrating  many perspectives, from the social , biological , and medical sciences; along with application to conservation and sustainable development . The diversity of perspectives in ethnobiology allows for examining complex, dynamic interactions between human and natural systems.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Beginnings (15th century–19th century) [ edit ] The Wright – Molyneux map of the world, showing the extent of English geographic knowledge c.

1600 Biologists have been interested in local biological knowledge since the time Europeans started colonising the world, from the 15th century onwards. Paul Sillitoe wrote that: [ 2 ] Europeans not only sought to understand the new regions they intruded into but also were on the look-out for resources that they might profitably exploit, engaging in practices that today we should consider tantamount to biopiracy . Many new crops ... entered into Europe during this period, such as the potato, tomato, pumpkin, maize, and tobacco.

[ 3 ] Local biological knowledge, collected and sampled over these early centuries significantly informed the early development of modern biology : [ 4 ] during the 17th century, Georg Eberhard Rumphius benefited from local biological knowledge in producing his catalogue, "Herbarium Amboinense" , covering more than 1,200 species of the plants in Indonesia ; during the 18th century, Carl Linnaeus relied upon Rumphius's work, and also corresponded with other people all around the world when developing the biological classification scheme that now underlies the arrangement of much of the accumulated knowledge of the biological sciences.

during the 19th century, Charles Darwin , the 'father' of evolutionary theory , on his Voyage of the Beagle took interest in the local biological knowledge of peoples he encountered.

[ citation needed ] Phase I (1900s–1940s) [ edit ] Ethnobiology itself, as a distinctive practice, only emerged during the 20th century as part of the records then being made about other peoples , and other cultures. As a practice, it was nearly always ancillary to other pursuits when documenting others' languages, folklore , and natural resource use. Roy Ellen commented that: At its earliest and most rudimentary, this comprised listing the names and uses of plants and animals in native non-Western or 'traditional' populations often in the context of salvage ethnography ...[ie] ethno -biology as the descriptive biological knowledge of 'primitive' peoples.

[ 5 ] This 'first phase' in the development of ethnobiology as a practice has been described as still having an essentially utilitarian purpose, often focusing on identifying those 'native' plants, animals and technologies of some potential use and value within increasingly dominant western economic systems [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Phase II (1950s–1970s) [ edit ] Arising out of practices in Phase I (above) came a 'second phase' in the development of 'ethnobiology', with researchers now striving to better document and better understand how other peoples' themselves "conceptualize and categorize" the natural world around them.

[ 5 ] In Sillitoe's words: By the mid-20th century ... utilitarian-focussed studies started to give way to more cognitively framed ones, notably studies that centred on elucidating classificatory schemes.

[ 7 ] Some Mangyan (who count the Hanunóo among their members) men, on Mindoro island, Philippines , where Harold Conklin did his ethnobiological work This 'second' phase is marked: [ 5 ] in Northern America (mid 1950s) with Harold Conklin 's completing his doctorate entitled "The relation of Hanunóo [1] culture to the plant world" [ 8 ] in Britain (mid 1960s) with the publication of Claude Lévi-Strauss ' book The Savage Mind [ 9 ] legitimating "folk biological classification" as a worthy cross-cultural research endeavour in France (mid 1970s) with André-Georges Haudricourt 's linguistic studies of botanical nomenclature [ 10 ] and R. Porteres' and others work in economic biology.

[ 11 ] Present (1980s–2000s) [ edit ] By the turn of the 21st century, ethnobiological practices, research, and findings have had a significant impact and influence across a number of fields of biological inquiry including ecology , [ 12 ] conservation biology , [ 13 ] [ 14 ] development studies , [ 15 ] and political ecology .

[ 16 ] The Society of Ethnobiology advises on its web page: Ethnobiology is a rapidly growing field of research, gaining professional, student, and public interest ... internationally Ethnobiology has come out from its place as an ancillary practice in the shadows of other core pursuits, to arise as a whole field of inquiry and research in its own right: taught within many tertiary institutions and educational programs around the world; [ 5 ] with its own methods manuals, [ 17 ] its own readers, [ 18 ] and its own textbooks [ 19 ] Subjects of inquiry [ edit ] Usage [ edit ] All societies make use of the biological world in which they are situated, but there are wide differences in use, informed by perceived need, available technology, and the culture's sense of morality and sustainability.

[ citation needed ] Ethnobiologists investigate what lifeforms are used for what purposes, the particular techniques of use, the reasons for these choices, and symbolic and spiritual implications of them.

Taxonomy [ edit ] Different societies divide the living world up in different ways. Ethnobiologists attempt to record the words used in particular cultures for living things, from the most specific terms (analogous to species names in Linnean biology) to more general terms (such as 'tree' and even more generally 'plant'). They also try to understand the overall structure or hierarchy of the classification system (if there is one; there is ongoing debate as to whether there must always be an implied hierarchy.

[ 20 ] Cosmological, moral and spiritual significance [ edit ] Societies invest themselves and their world with meaning partly through their answers to questions like "how did the world happen?", "how and why did people come to be?", "what are proper practices, and why?", and "what realities exist beyond or behind our physical experience?" Understanding these elements of a societies' perspective is important to cultural research in general, and ethnobiologists investigate how a societies' view of the natural world informs and is informed by them.

Traditional ecological knowledge [ edit ] In order to live effectively in a given place, a people needs to understand the particulars of their environment, and many traditional societies have complex and subtle understandings of the places in which they live.

[ citation needed ] Ethnobiologists seek to share in these understandings, subject to ethical concerns regarding intellectual property and cultural appropriation .

Cross-cultural ethnobiology [ edit ] In cross cultural ethnobiology research, two or more communities participate simultaneously. This enables the researcher to compare how a bio-resource is used by different communities.

[ 21 ] Subdisciplines [ edit ] Ethnobotany [ edit ] Main article: Ethnobotany Ethnobotany investigates the relationship between human societies and plants: how humans use plants – as food, technology, medicine, and in ritual contexts; how they view and understand them; and their symbolic and spiritual role in a culture.

Ethnozoology [ edit ] Main article: Ethnozoology Further information: Birds in culture and Insects in culture The subfield ethnozoology focuses on the relationship between humans and other animals throughout human history. It studies human practices such as hunting, fishing and animal husbandry in space and time, and human perspectives about animals such as their place in the moral and spiritual realms.

[ citation needed ] Ethnoecology [ edit ] Main article: Ethnoecology Ethnoecology refers to an increasingly dominant 'ethnobiological' research paradigm focused, primarily, on documenting, describing, and understanding how other peoples perceive, manage, and use whole ecosystems .

Other disciplines [ edit ] Studies and writings within ethnobiology draw upon research from fields including archaeology , geography , linguistics , systematics , population biology , ecology , cultural anthropology , ethnography , pharmacology , nutrition , conservation , and sustainable development .

[ 1 ] Ethics [ edit ] Through much of the history of ethnobiology, its practitioners were primarily from dominant cultures, and the benefit of their work often accrued to the dominant culture, with little control or benefit invested in the indigenous peoples whose practice and knowledge they recorded.

Just as many of those indigenous societies work to assert legitimate control over physical resources such as traditional lands or artistic and ritual objects, many work to assert legitimate control over their intellectual property .

In an age when the potential exists for large profits from the discovery of, for example, new food crops or medicinal plants, modern ethnobiologists must consider intellectual property rights , the need for informed consent, the potential for harm to informants, and their "debt to the societies in which they work".

[ 22 ] Furthermore, these questions must be considered not only in light of western industrialized nations' common understanding of ethics and law, but also in light of the ethical and legal standards of the societies from which the ethnobiologist draws information.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Anthropology Biocultural diversity Cultural landscapes Darrell A. Posey Declaration of Belém Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Human interactions with insects Ethnoichthyology Ethnomedicine Ethnomycology Hawaiian Ethnobiology Indigenous intellectual property Historical ecology Traditional knowledge Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b "What is Ethnobiology?" .

Society of Ethnobiology . Retrieved 2024-09-26 .

^ Sillitoe 2006.

^ Sillitoe 2006, p. 121.

^ Sillitoe 2006.

^ a b c d e Ellen, Roy (2006) ^ Examples of studies from this 'first' phase in the development of ethnobiology include Stevenson (1915), Castetter (1944) and Harrington (1947) ^ Sillitoe 2006, p. 121.

^ Conklin, H.C. (1954) ^ Lévi-Strauss, Claude (1966) ^ Haudricourt, Andre-Georges (1973) ^ Porteres, R. (1977) ^ for instances of ethnobiology's influence on ecology, see Balée (1998); Plotkin (1995); Schultes & von Reis (1995) ^ O'Neill, Alexander; et al. (2017-03-29).

"Integrating ethnobiological knowledge into biodiversity conservation in the Eastern Himalayas" .

Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine .

13 (21): 21.

doi : 10.1186/s13002-017-0148-9 .

PMC 5372287 .

PMID 28356115 .

^ for instances of ethnobiology's influence on conservation biology see Cunningham (2001); Johannes (1989); Laird (2002); Tuxill & Nabhan (2001) ^ for an instancing of ethnobiology's influence on development studies, see Warren, Slikkerveer & Brokensha (1995) ^ for an instancing of ethnobiology's influence on political ecology see Zerner (2000) ^ Ethnbiology methods manuals include Alexiades (1996) and Martin (1995) ^ one Ethnobiology reader is Minnis (2000) ^ one Ethnobiology textbook is Cotton (1996) ^ Ellen, Roy (1993) pages 216 forward ^ Franco, F.M. and Narasimhan, D. (2012).

Ethnobotany of the Kondh, Poraja, Gadaba and Bonda of the Koraput region of Odisha, India . D.K. Printworld, New Delhi ^ Code of Ethics of the American Anthropological Association, section A ^ Dodson (2007) References [ edit ] ALEXIADES, M.N. (1996) Selected guidelines for ethnobotanical research: a field manual.

The New York Botanical Garden. New York.

BALLEE, W (1998) (ed.) Advances in historical ecology.

New York: Columbia University Press.

BERLIN, Brent (1992) Ethnobiological Classification - Principles of Categorization of Plants and Animals in Traditional Societies . Princeton University Press, 1992.

CASTETTER, E.F.

(1944) "The domain of ethnobiology".

The American Naturalist . Volume 78. Number 774. Pages 158-170.

CONKLIN, H.C. (1954) The relation of Hanunóo culture to the plant world.

PhD dissertation, Yale University.

COTTON, C.M (1996) Ethnobotany: principles and applications.

John Wiley. London.

CUNNINGHAM, A.B (2001) Applied ethnobotany: people, wild plant use and conservation.

Earthscan. London DODSON, Michael (2007).

"Report of the Secretariat on Indigenous traditional knowledge" (PDF) .

Report to the United Nations Economic and Social Council's Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, Sixth Session, New York, 14–25 May . United Nations Economic and Social Council. New York . Retrieved 2007-11-28 .

ELLEN, Roy (1993) The Cultural Relations of Classification, an Analysis of Nuaulu Animal Categories from Central Seram.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ELLEN, Roy (2006).

"Introduction" (PDF) .

Special Edition of the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute. S1-S22 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

[ permanent dead link ] HARRINGTON, J.P (1947) "Ethnobiology".

Acta Americana . Number 5. Pages 244-247 HAUDRICOURT, Andre-Georges (1973) "Botanical nomenclature and its translation." In M. Teich & R Young (Eds) Changing perspectives in the history of science: Essays in honour of Joseph Needham Heinemann. London. Pages 265-273.

Hunn, Eugene (2007).

"Ethnobiology in Four Phases" .

Journal of Ethnobiology .

27 (1): 1– 10.

doi : 10.2993/0278-0771(2007)27[1:EIFP]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0278-0771 .

S2CID 26309207 .

JOHANNES, R.E (Ed)(1989) Traditional ecological knowledge.

IUCN, The World Conservation Union. Cambridge LAIRD, S.A. (Ed) (2002) Biodiversity and traditional knowledge: equitable partnerships in practice.

Earthscan. London.

LEVI-STRAUSS, Claude (1966).

The savage mind.

Weidenfeld & Nicolson. London.

MARTIN, G.J (1995) Ethnobotany: a methods manual.

Chapman & Hall. London.

MINNIS, P (Ed) (2000) Ethnobotany: a reader.

University of Oklahoma Press. Norman.

PLOTKIN, M.J (1995) "The importance of ethnobotany for tropical forest conservation." in R.E. Schultes & Siri von Reis (Eds) Ethnobotany: evolution of a discipline (eds) Chapman & Hall. London. Pages 147-156.

PORTERES, R. (1977)."Ethnobotanique." Encyclopaedia Universalis Organum Number 17. Pages 326-330.

POSEY, D.A & W. L. Overal (Eds.), 1990) Ethnobiology: Implications and Applications . Proceedings of the First International Congress of Ethnobiology. Belém: Museu Paraense Emílio Goeldi.

POSEY, D. A.

(Ed.), (1999) Cultural and Spiritual Values of Biodiversity . London: United Nations Environmental Programme & Intermediate Technology Publications.

SCHULTES, R.E.

& VON REIS, S (1995) (Eds) Ethnobotany: evolution of a discipline (eds) Chapman & Hall. London. Part 6.

SILLITOE, Paul (2006) "Ethnobiology and applied anthropology: rapprochement of the academic with the practical". Special Edition of the Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute S119-S142 STEVENSON, M.C. (1914) "Ethnobotany of the Zuni Indians." Bureau of American Ethnology Annual Report.

Volume 30. Number 31102, Government Printing Office. Washington, D.C.

TUXILL, J & NABHAN, G.P (2001) People, plants and protected area.

Earthscan. London.

WARREN, D.M; SLIKKERVEER, L; & BROKENSHA, D. (Eds) (1995) The cultural dimension of development: indigenous knowledge systems.

Intermediate Technology Publications. London.

ZERNER, C (Ed) (2000) People, plants and justice: the politics of nature conservation.

Columbia University Press. New York.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ethnobiology .

Biology on-line "Ethnobiology" articles Ethnobiology — Traditional Biological Knowledge in Contemporary Global Context. (Athabasca University Course Resource List) Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine International Society of Ethnobiology Journal of Ethnobiology Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine Society of Ethnobiology Tsammalex: A lexical database on plants and animals Languages of hunter-gatherers and their neighbors : contains many flora and fauna names in languages spoken by hunter-gatherers and their neighbors.

v t e Ethnobiology Primary subdisciplines Ethnobotany Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnoecology Other subdisciplines Ethnoentomology Ethnoherpetology Ethnoichthyology Ethnolichenology Ethnoornithology Ethnoprimatology Correlated fields Cultural ecology Ecological anthropology Ethnoarchaeology Ethnomedicine Ethnopsychopharmacology Historical ecology Human ecology Paleoethnobotany Traditional ecological knowledge Zooarchaeology Notable ethnobiologists William Balée Brent Berlin Harold C. Conklin Wade Davis Roy Ellen Robin Wall Kimmerer Gary Paul Nabhan Andrew Pawley Darrell A. Posey Richard Evans Schultes Constantino Manuel Torres Nancy Turner List of paleoethnobotanists Category Project v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐nnhrm
Cached time: 20250812022013
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.492 seconds
Real time usage: 0.667 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2677/1000000
Revision size: 19225/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85722/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5933/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61561/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.270/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5668876/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  513.873      1 -total
 22.07%  113.388      4 Template:Navbox
 19.15%   98.403      1 Template:Reflist
 18.38%   94.448      1 Template:Ethnobiology
 17.14%   88.074      3 Template:Cite_web
 14.72%   75.653      1 Template:Short_description
 11.04%   56.744      4 Template:Citation_needed
 10.84%   55.695      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.39%   53.410      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.06%   51.673      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2355918:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022013 and revision id 1286155814. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnobiology&oldid=1286155814 " Categories : Ethnobiology Ethnology Anthropology Branches of biology Traditional knowledge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethnobiology 18 languages Add topic

