Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 History 2 Dissemination 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Space climate 5 languages العربية Aragonés Hausa Македонски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of solar physics and aeronomy Reconstruction of solar activity over 11,400 years. Period of equally high activity over 8,000 years ago marked.

Space climate is the long-term variation in solar activity within the heliosphere , including the solar wind , the Interplanetary magnetic field (IMF), and their effects in the near-Earth environment, including the magnetosphere of Earth and the ionosphere , the upper and lower atmosphere, climate , and other related systems. The scientific study of space climate is an interdisciplinary field of space physics , solar physics , heliophysics , and geophysics . It is thus conceptually related to terrestrial climatology , and its effects on the atmosphere of Earth are considered in climate science.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Background [ edit ] Space climatology considers long-term (longer than the latitudinally variable 27-day solar rotation period, through the 11-year solar cycle and beyond, up to and 
exceeding millennia) variability of solar indices, cosmic ray , heliospheric parameters, and the induced geomagnetic, ionospheric, atmospheric, and climate effects.

[ 1 ] It studies mechanisms and physical processes responsible for their variability in the past with projections onto future.

[ 2 ] It is a broader and more general concept than space weather , to which it is related like the conventional climate and weather .

[ 1 ] In addition to real-time solar observations , the field of research also covers analysis of historical space climate data. This has included analysis and reconstruction that has allowed solar wind and heliospheric magnetic field strengths to be determined from back to 1611.

[ 3 ] Artist's rendering of Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) The importance of space climate research has been recognized, in particular, by NASA which launched a special space mission Deep Space Climate Observatory (DSCOVR) [ 4 ] dedicated to monitoring of space climate.

[ 5 ] New results, ideas and discoveries in the field of Space Climate are published in a focused peer-review research Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate (JSWSC).

[ 6 ] Since 2013, research awards and medals in space weather and space climate are annually awarded by the European Space Weather Week.

[ 7 ] Another recent space observatory platform is the Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment (SORCE).

Space climate research has three main aims: [ 1 ] to better understand the long-term solar variability , including also the observed extremes and features of this variability in the solar wind and in the heliospheric magnetic field to better understand the physical relationships between the Sun , the heliosphere, and various related proxies (geomagnetic fields, cosmic rays, etc.) to better understand the long-term effect of solar variability on the near- Earth environment, including the different atmospheric layers, and ultimately on Earth's global climate History [ edit ] In the early 2000s, when the concept of space weather became common, a small initiative group, led by Kalevi Mursula and Ilya G. Usoskin the University of Oulu in Finland had realized that physical drivers of solar variability and its terrestrial effects can be better understood with a more general and broader view. The concept of Space Climate had been developed, and the corresponding research community formed, which presently includes a few hundred active members around the world. In particular, a series of International Space Climate Symposia (biennial since 2004) was organized, [ 8 ] with the first inaugural symposium being held in Oulu (Finland) in 2004, followed by those in Romania (2006), Finland (2009), India (2011), Finland (2013), Finland (2016), Canada (2019), Poland (2022) and Japan (2024) as well as topical space climate sessions are regularly held at the General Assemblies of the Committee on Space Research and Earth Science.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Dissemination [ edit ] Research results related to Space Climate are published in a bunch of peer-reviewed journals, such as Astronomy & Astrophysics , Journal of Geophysical Research , Geophysical Research Letters , Solar Physics (journal) , Advances in Space Research .

See also [ edit ] Aeronomy Planetary science , atmospheric sciences , and atmospheric physics Solar activity and climate Solar irradiance Space weather Space weathering Stellar astronomy References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Mursula, K.; Usoskin, I.G.; Maris, G. (January 2007).

"Introduction to Space Climate" (PDF) .

Advances in Space Research .

40 (7): 885– 887.

Bibcode : 2007AdSpR..40..885M .

doi : 10.1016/j.asr.2007.07.046 .

ISSN 0273-1177 .

^ a b González Hernández, I.; Komm, R.; Pevstsov, A.; Leibacher, J (2014).

"Solar Origins of Space Weather and Space Climate: Preface" .

Solar Physics .

289 (2): 437– 439.

Bibcode : 2014SoPh..289..437G .

doi : 10.1007/s11207-013-0454-x .

^ a b Lockwood, M.; et al. (2017). "Space climate and space weather over the past 400 years: 1. The power input to the magnetosphere".

J. Space Weather Space Climate .

7 : A25.

arXiv : 1708.04904 .

Bibcode : 2017JSWSC...7A..25L .

doi : 10.1051/swsc/2017019 .

S2CID 37433045 .

^ "DSCOVR: Deep Space Climate Observatory" .

NOAA . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "Space Climate Observatory Homepage" . SCO . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate – homepage" . SWSC . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "European Space Weather Week Medals" . STCE . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ "Space Climate Symposia" . Retrieved 29 December 2018 .

^ Corrado Ruscica (1 August 2014).

"40° Cospar Scientific Assembly" . astronomicamens . Retrieved 30 December 2018 .

^ "42nd COSPAR Scientific Assembly: Nanosatellites and Space Climate Observatory share centre stage" . Office for Science & Technology of the Embassy of France in the United States. 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 30 December 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate (JSWSC) United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs ' Space and Climate Change program v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal v t e The Sun Internal structure Core Radiative zone Tachocline Convection zone Atmosphere Photosphere Supergranulation Granule Faculae Sunspot Ellerman bomb Chromosphere Plage Spicule Moreton wave Corona Transition region Coronal hole Coronal loop Coronal mass ejection Nanoflare Prominence Helmet streamer Supra-arcade downflows Alfvén surface Moss Variation Solar cycle List of solar cycles Active region Solar maximum Solar minimum Sunspot number Solar wind Solar wind turbulence Magnetic switchback Flare Helioseismology Heliosphere Corotating interaction region Current sheet Termination shock Heliosheath Heliopause Bow shock Related Eclipse In mythology and culture Lunar eclipse Heliophysics In culture Solar deity List Sun in fiction Solar activity Solar astronomy Solar dynamo Solar energy Solar neutrino Solar observation Solar phenomena Solar physics Solar radio emission Solar System Solar telescope Solar time Space climate Space weather Standard solar model Star Sunlight radiation Spectral class G-type main-sequence star Exploration Solar observatory List of heliophysics missions Category:Missions to the Sun Category v t e Magnetospherics Submagnetosphere Atmospheric circulation Aurora Earth's magnetic field Geosphere Jet stream Polar wind Earth's magnetosphere Birkeland current Bow shock Ionosphere Magnetopause Magnetosheath Magnetosphere Magnetosphere chronology Magnetosphere particle motion Plasmasphere Ring current Van Allen radiation belt Solar wind Magnetic cloud Coronal mass ejection Solar flare Geomagnetic storm Heliosphere Interplanetary magnetic field Heliospheric current sheet Heliopause Solar particle event Space climate Space weather Satellites Full list Arase (2016) Cluster II Double Star Geotail IMAGE MMS (2015) Polar THEMIS Van Allen Probes Wind Research projects EISCAT HAARP SHARE Unwin Radar SuperDARN Sura Ionospheric Heating Facility Other magnetospheres Hermian Venusian Lunar Martian Jovian Ganymedian Saturnian Uranian Neptunian Related topics Flux tube Gas torus Lunar swirls Ring systems Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_climate&oldid=1228353060 " Categories : Space weather Space physics Space science Geophysics Climate Solar System Sun Climatology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2024, at 19:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space climate 5 languages Add topic

