Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Existentialism 3 Substantial motion 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Transcendent theosophy 6 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی پنجابی Српски / srpski اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Primacy of existence" redirects here. For the idea in Objectivism, see Objectivism § Philosophy .

Doctrine and philosophy developed by Mulla Sadra Transcendent theosophy or al-hikmat al-muta’āliyah (حكمت متعاليه), the doctrine and philosophy developed by Persian philosopher Mulla Sadra (d.1635 CE), is one of two main disciplines of Islamic philosophy that are currently live and active.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] The expression al-hikmat al-muta’āliyah comprises two terms: al-hikmat (meaning literally, wisdom ; and technically, philosophy , and by contextual extension theosophy ) and muta’āliyah (meaning exalted or transcendent ). This school of Mulla Sadra in Islamic philosophy is usually called al-hikmat al-muta’āliyah. It is a most appropriate name for his school, not only for historical reasons, but also because the doctrines of Mulla Sadra are both hikmah or theosophy in its original sense and an intellectual vision of the transcendent which leads to the Transcendent Itself. So Mulla Sadra’s school is transcendent for both historical and metaphysical reasons .

When Mulla Sadra talked about hikmah or theosophy in his words, he usually meant the transcendent philosophy. He gave many definitions to the term hikmah, the most famous one defining hikmah as a vehicle through which “man becomes an intelligible world resembling the objective world and similar to the order of universal existence”.

[ 2 ] Mulla Sadra's philosophy and ontology is considered to be just as important to Islamic philosophy as Martin Heidegger 's philosophy later was to Western philosophy in the 20th century. Mulla Sadra brought "a new philosophical insight in dealing with the nature of reality " and created "a major transition from essentialism to existentialism " in Islamic philosophy.

[ 3 ] Existentialism [ edit ] A concept that lies at the heart of Mulla Sadra's philosophy is the idea of " existence precedes essence ", a key foundational concept of existentialism . This was the opposite of the idea of " essence precedes existence " previously supported by Avicenna and his school of Avicennism [ 4 ] as well as Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi and his school of Illuminationism . Sayyid Jalal Ashtiyani later summarized Mulla Sadra's concept as follows: [ 5 ] "The existent being that has an essence must then be caused and existence that is pure existence ... is therefore a Necessary Being." For Mulla Sadra, "existence precedes the essence and is thus principle since something has to exist first and then have an essence." This is primarily the argument that lies at the heart of Mulla Sadra's philosophy.

[ 6 ] Mulla Sadra substituted a metaphysics of existence for the traditional metaphysics of essences, and giving priority Ab initio to existence over quiddity .

[ 7 ] Mulla Sadra effected a revolution in the metaphysics of being by his thesis that there are no immutable essences, but that each essence is determined and variable according to the degree of intensity of its act of existence.

[ 8 ] In his view, reality is existence, in a variety of ways, and these different ways look to us like essences. What first affects us are things that exist and we form ideas of essences afterward, so existence precedes essence. This position referred to as primacy of existence ( Arabic : Isalat al-Wujud ).

[ 9 ] Mulla Sadra's existentialism is therefore fundamentally different from Western existentialism of Jean-Paul Sartre . Sartre said that human beings have no essence before their existence because, there is no Creator, no God.  This is the meaning of "existence precedes essence" in Sartre's existentialism.

[ 10 ] Substantial motion [ edit ] Another central concept of Mulla Sadra's philosophy is the theory of "substantial motion" ( al-harakat al-jawhariyyah ), which is "based on the premise that everything in the order of nature, including celestial spheres , undergoes substantial change and transformation as a result of the self- flow ( fayd ) and penetration of being ( sarayan al-wujud ) which gives every concrete individual entity its share of being. In contrast to Aristotle and Ibn Sina who had accepted change only in four categories , i.e., quantity ( kamm ), quality ( kayf ), position ( wad’ ) and place ( ‘ayn ), Sadra defines change as an all-pervasive reality running through the entire cosmos including the category of substance ( jawhar )." [ 11 ] Heraclitus described a similar concept centuries earlier ( Πάντα ῥεῖ - panta rhei - "everything is in a state of flux"), while Gottfried Leibniz described a similar concept a century after Mulla Sadra's work.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Transcendence (philosophy) Hikmah Ma'rifa Islamic philosophy Iranian philosophy Existentialism Martin Heidegger Notes [ edit ] ^ S.H. Nasr, Islamic Philosophy from its Origin to the Present: Philosophy in the Land of Prophecy (2006), SUNY Press, passim.

^ Seyyed Hossein Nasr (2006).

Islamic Philosophy from Its Origin to the Present . SUNY. p. 37.

ISBN 9780791481554 .

^ Kamal, Muhammad (2006), Mulla Sadra's Transcendent Philosophy , Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., pp. 9 & 39, ISBN 0-7546-5271-8 ^ Irwin, Jones (Autumn 2002), "Averroes' Reason: A Medieval Tale of Christianity and Islam" , The Philosopher , LXXXX (2) ^ ( Razavi 1997 , pp. 129–30) ^ ( Razavi 1997 , p. 130) ^ Corbin (1993), pp. 342 and 343 ^ Corbin (1993), pp. 342-3 ^ Leaman (2007), p. 35 ^ Existentialism and Humanism , page 27 ^ Kalin, Ibrahim (March 2001), "Sadr al-Din Shirazi (Mulla Sadra) (b. 1571-1640)", in Iqbal, Muzaffar ; Kalin, Ibrahim (eds.), Resources on Islam & Science , retrieved 2008-02-04 ^ Brown, Keven; Von Kitzing, Eberhard (2001), Evolution and Bahá'í Belief: ʻAbduʼl-Bahá's Response to Nineteenth-century Darwinism , Kalimat Press, pp.

222– 3, ISBN 1-890688-08-8 References [ edit ] Razavi, Mehdi Amin (1997).

Suhrawardi and the School of Illumination . Routledge.

ISBN 0-7007-0412-4 .

Seyyed Hossein Nasr (1997).

Sadr al-Din Shirazi and Transcendent Theosophy . Tehran: Institute for Humanities and Cultural Studies.

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transcendent_theosophy&oldid=1293981748 " Categories : Persian philosophy Iranian philosophy Islamic philosophy Theosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transcendent theosophy 6 languages Add topic

