Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Author 2 Background 3 Contents 4 Reception 5 Commentaries on the treatise 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah 8 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Français עברית മലയാളം Svenska ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical dissertation attributed to Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah Arabic ٱلرِّسَالَة ٱلذَّهَبِيَّة Romanization Risālah az-Zahabīyah Literal meaning The Golden Treatise Part of a series on Shia Islam Beliefs and practices Monotheism Holy Books Prophethood Succession to Muhammad Imamate Ismaili Twelver Zaydi Angels Judgment Day Mourning of Muharram Intercession Clergy The Four Companions Arbaʽeen Pilgrimage Days of remembrance Ashura Arba'een Mawlid Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Eid al-Ghadir Mourning of Muharram Omar Koshan History Verse of purification Two weighty things Mubahala Khumm Fatimah's house First Fitna Second Fitna Battle of Karbala Origin Persecution Branches and sects Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhi Zaydi Isma'ili Musta'li Tayyibi Dawoodi Bohra Progressive Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Qutbi Bohra Hafizi Nizari Khoja Satpanth Ghulat Alawi Alevi Bektashi Bektashism and folk religion Qizilbash Ishiki Extinct Shi'a sects Ahl al-Kisa Muhammad Ali Fatima Hasan Husayn Holy women Fatima Khadija bint Khuwaylid Umm Salama Zaynab bint Ali Umm Kulthum bint Ali Umm al-Banin Fatima bint Hasan Ruqayya bint Husayn Rubab Shahrbanu Fatima bint Musa Hakimah Khātūn Narjis Fatimah bint Asad Umm Farwah bint al-Qasim Ruqayya bint Ali Sayyida Nafisa Shia Islam portal v t e Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah ( Arabic : ٱلرِّسَالَة ٱلذَّهَبِيَّة , Arabic pronunciation: ['rɪsælætæ 'ðæhæ'biæ] ; "The Golden Treatise") is a medical dissertation on health and remedies attributed to Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha (765–818), the eighth Imam of Shia Islam . He wrote this dissertation in accordance with the demand of Ma'mun , the caliph of the time.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is revered as the most precious Islamic literature in the science of medicine, and was entitled "the golden treatise" as Ma'mun had ordered it written in gold ink.

[ 2 ] The chain of narrators is said to reach Muhammad ibn Jumhoor or al-Hassan ibn Muhammad al-Nawfali who is described as "highly esteemed and trustworthy" by al-Najjashi.

[ 3 ] The treatise of Ali al-Ridha includes scientific branches such as Anatomy , Physiology , Chemistry and Pathology when medical science was still primitive. According to the treatise, one's health is determined by four humors of blood , yellow bile , black bile and phlegm , the suitable proportion of which maintains the health. The liver plays an important role in producing and maintaining the required proportions in the body. Ali al-Ridha describes the body as a kingdom whose king is the heart while the (blood) vessels, the limbs, and the brain are the laborers. The issue of the authorship and the transmission of the text has been critically analysed in the studies by Speziale (2004) and Speziale - Giurini (2009).

Author [ edit ] Main article: Ali al-Ridha The treatise is authored by Ali al-Ridha who was the seventh descendant of the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the eighth of the Twelve Imams . His given name was 'Alī ibn Mūsā ibn Ja'far. He was born in the house of Imam Musa al-Kadhim (the seventh Imam of Twelver Shia Islam) in Medina on the eleventh of Dhu al-Qi'dah , 148 AH (December 29, 765 CE). Ali al-Ridha was summoned to Khurasan and reluctantly accepted the role of successor to Ma'mun that was forced on him.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] He did not outlive Ma'mun, having been given poisoned grapes by him while accompanying him in Persia , and died at Tus on May 26, 818. Ali al-Ridha is buried within Imam Ridha Mosque , in Mashhad , Iran .

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] Background [ edit ] The Ma'mun's palace was a center for philosophical and scientific researches in which many scientific seminars were held.

[ 4 ] One of the mentioned seminars was on man's body which included the greatest scholars and leaders.   Ali al-Ridha, Ma'mun, Gabriel b. Bakhtishu (the physician), Masawaiyh (the physician) and Salih ibn Salhama (the Indian philosopher) were some participants of that medical seminar. The participants were involved in a lengthy discussion about the body makeup and various types of foods, while Ali al-Ridha kept silent. Afterwards, Ma'mun asked him to demonstrate his knowledge of physiology and nutrition and Imam replied: [ 1 ] I have of it knowledge of what I have personally tested and came to know about its accuracy by experience and by the passage of time in addition to what I was told by my ancestors of what no body afford to be ignorant of, nor excused for leaving it. I shall compile it with an equal portion of what everyone should know.

[ 1 ] Soon after that, Ma'mun departed for Balkh, and wrote to Imam asking him to fulfill his promise and write a treatise on the body and its health, hence Imam authored "The Golden Treatise" at the request of Ma'mun.

[ 1 ] Contents [ edit ] A manuscript of " Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah ". The text says:"Golden dissertation in medicine which is sent by Imam Ali ibn Musa al-Ridha, peace be upon him, to al-Ma'mun .

The dissertation of Ali al-Ridha includes scientific branches such as Anatomy , Physiology , Chemistry and Pathology when medical science was still primitive.

[ 6 ] it begins as follows: In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful. Know, when Allah tries a servant with a disease, he appoints for him a medicine in order to cure himself with it, and for every kind of disease there is a kind of medicine, conduct, and prescription.

[ 7 ] Ali al-Ridha writes in his treatise that one's health is in accordance with the balance of phlegm, yellow bile, blood and black bile; an individual becomes sick when this proportion is unbalanced. Nutrition and traditional medicine may be used to cure imbalances. The liver plays an important role in producing and maintaining the required proportions in the body.

[ 7 ] Ali al-Ridha describes the body as a kingdom whose king is the heart while the (blood) vessels, the limbs, and the brain are workers. He then continues as such: The house of the king is his heart; the body is his land; his hands, his legs, eyes, lips,  tongues, and his ears are the helpers; his storekeepers are his stomach; and his chamberlain is his chest. Therefore, the hands are two helpers which bring (things) near, take (them) away, and work as the king reveals to them. The legs are king's vehicle and carry him wherever he likes. The eyes lead the king to that which disappears from him [ 7 ] Imam al-Rida names the main organs of the human body as the heart, the nerves, the brain, the hands and the Legs the ear and the eye. He discusses their characteristics and functions in detail. Regarding the human body containing systems and cells he said: Do you think that you are a small body, while the greatest world has folded itself in you.

[ 7 ] In another part of the treatise, he discusses what kind of foods are suitable according to season, time of the day and the age of an individual. He says: eat cold (foods) in summer, hot (foods) in winter, and moderate (foods) in the two seasons according to your strength and appetite; and start with the lightest food on which your body feed according to your material, your ability, your activity, and your time in which you must have food every eight hours or three meals every two days...

[ 8 ] In other parts, he discusses body disease, months and seasons of the year.

[ 3 ] Reception [ edit ] Ali ibn Musa al-Rida sent his dissertation to Ma'mun who was very pleased to receive it and showed his great interest by ordering that the treatise be written down in gold ink, hence it came to be known as the "Gold Treatise".

[ 1 ] Ma'mun praised it and said: I have reviewed the dissertation of my learned cousin, the loved and virtuous one, the logical physician, which deals with the betterment of the body, the conduct of bathing, the balance of nutrition, and I found it very well organized and one of the best blessings. I carefully studied it, reviewed and contemplated upon it, till its wisdom manifested itself to me, and its benefits became obvious, and it found its place in my heart, so I learned it by heart and I understood it by my mind, for I found it to be a most precious item to post, a great treasure, and a most useful item, so I ordered it to be written in gold due to its being precious, and I deposited it at the depository of wisdom after I had it copied down by the descendants of Hashim, the youths of the nation. Bodies become healthy by balanced diets, and life becomes possible by overcoming disease, and through life wisdom is achieved, and through wisdom Paradise is won, and it is worthy of being safeguarded and treasured, and an object of value and esteem and a reliable physician and a counselor to refer to and a substance of knowledge in its injunctions and prohibitions.
Because it came out of the house of those who derive their knowledge from the knowledge of the Chosen One (S), the missive of the prophets, the proofs of successors to the prophets, the manners of scholars, the cure to the hearts and the sick from among the people of ignorance and blindness..., may God be pleased with them, bless and be merciful to them, the first of them and the last, the young and the old, I showed it to the elite among my closest train who are known for their wisdom, knowledge of medicine, authors of books, those who are counted among the people of knowledge and described with wisdom, and each one of them lauded it and thought highly of it, elevated it with esteem and appreciated it in order to be fair to its author, submitting to him, believing in the wisdom he included therein.

[ 9 ] Commentaries on the treatise [ edit ] Various commentaries have been written on this dissertation some of which are as follows: [ 1 ] Tarjamat al-Alawi lil Tibb al-Radawi by Sayyid Diaud-Din Abul-Rida Fadlallah ibn Ali al-Rawandi (548 AH) Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya by mawla Faydallah 'Usarah al-Shushtari Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya by Muhammad Baqir Majlisi . (Available at the private library of the late Sayyid Hassan al-Sadr, Kazimiyya, Iraq) Afiyat al-Bariyya fi Sharh al-Dhahabiyya by Mirza Muhammad Hadi son of Mirza Muhammad Salih al-Shirazi Sharh Tibb al-Rida by mawla Muhammad Sharif al-Khatoonabadi. (around 1120 AH) Tarjamat al-Dhahabiyya by Sayyid Shamsud-Din Muhammad ibn Muhammad Badi' al-Radawi al-Mashhadi.

Sharh Tibb al-Rida by mawla Nawrooz Ali al-Bastami.

See also [ edit ] Shia Islam portal Al-Risalah al-Huquq Nahj al-Balagha Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya Al-Sahifat al-Ridha List of Shia books References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Muhammad Jawad Fadlallah (27 September 2012).

Imam ar-Ridha', A Historical and Biographical Research . Yasin T. Al-Jibouri . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b c d W. Madelung (1 August 2011).

"ALĪ AL-REŻĀ, the eighth Imam of the Emāmī Shiʿites" .

Iranicaonline.org . Retrieved 18 June 2014 .

^ a b Derakhshan, Mahdi (July 1362).

"al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah (in medicine) attributed to Hazrat Reza (a.s)" .

Literature and Human Science Department of Tehran University .

101– 104 (25): 87– 112 . Retrieved 27 June 2014 .

^ a b Tabatabaei, Sayyid Mohammad Hosayn (1975).

Shi'ite Islam . Translated by Sayyid Hossein Nasr . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-87395-390-8 .

^ Chittick, William C. (1980).

A Shi'ite Anthology . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-87395-510-2 .

^ Dungersi, Mohammed Raza (1996).

A Brief Biography of Imam Ali bin Musa (a.s.): al-Ridha . Bilal Muslim Mission of Tanzania. pp. 34–.

ISBN 978-9976-956-94-8 .

^ a b c d al-Qarashi, Ba`qir Sharïf.

The life of Ima'm 'Ali Bin Mu'sa' al-Rida . Ja`sim al-Rasheed. Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2014-07-08 .

^ Staff writers.

Tebbol Reza, Medicine and hygiene from Imam Ali ibn Mousa al-Ridha (PDF) . Isfahan: Ghaemieh Isfahan research center. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-02-11.

^ A'yan al-Shi'a . Vol. 4. pp. 2, 143 and 144.

External links [ edit ] Mohammad Mahdi Najafi.

"Al-Risala al-Dahabiyya, known as Tibb al-Imam Rida (a.s)" .

Rafed.net (in Arabic). Archived from the original on 16 December 2014 . Retrieved 20 June 2014 .

Fabrizio Speziale, “ La Risāla al-dahabiyya , traité médical attribué à l'imām ‘Alī al-Riżā’ ”.

Luqman. Annales des Presses Universitaires d'Iran , vol. XX, n. 2 (40), 2004 (2005), pp. 7–34, [ISSN 0259-904X].

Fabrizio Speziale - Giorgio Giurini, 2009, Il Trattato aureo sulla medicina attribuito a l’imām ‘Alī al-Riḍā , Palermo, Officina di Studi Medievali (series Machina Philosophorum ).

v t e Shia hadith literature Kutub Al-Arb'ah Kitab al-Kafi Man La Yahduruhu al-Faqih Tahdhib al-Ahkam Al-Istibsar Other primary hadith collections Nahj al-Balagha Al-Sahifa al-Sajjadiyya Risalah al-Huquq Sahifah of al-Ridha Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah Uyoun Akhbar Al-Ridha Da'a'im al-Islam The Book of Sulaym ibn Qays al-Ghayba (al-Nu'mani) al-Ghayba (al-Tusi) Tuhaf al-Uqul Khasais of Al Aemmah Kamil al-Ziyarat Al Saqib Fi al-Manâqib Basa'ir ad-Darajat Al-Amali (of Shaykh Saduq) Al-Amali (of Shaykh Mufid) Al-Khisal Tafsir Al-Qummi Tafsir Ayyashi Tafsir Furat Kufi Secondary books of Hadith Al-Wafi Bihar al-Anwar Wasā'il al-Shīʿa Nahj-al feṣāḥa Al-Ihtijaj Ghurar al-Hikam Haqq al-Yaqeen Ain Al-Hayat Al-Ghadir Mafatih al-Janan Muntahi al-Amal Biographical evaluation Ikhtiyar ma'rifat al-rijal Qamus al-Rijal v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Al-Risalah_al-Dhahabiah&oldid=1288860093 " Categories : 9th-century Arabic-language books Medical works of the medieval Islamic world Scientific works of the Abbasid Caliphate Shia literature Shia hadith collections Treatises Ali al-Ridha Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with Arabic IPA CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah 8 languages Add topic

