Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Component and focus 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Phase (archaeology) 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process to reveal former land use This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Phase" archaeology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A three-phased sequence In archaeology , a phase refers to the logical reduction of contexts recorded during excavation to nearly contemporary archaeological horizons that represent a distinct "phase" of previous land use. These often but not always will be a representation of a former land surface or occupation level and all associated features that were created into or from this point in time. A simplified description of phase would be that "a phase is a view of a given archaeological site as it would have been at time X".

Examples of phases that would have no associated occupation surfaces are phases of a site that have been horizontally truncated by later phases and only elements surviving of the truncated phase are those that were below ground level and the subsequent truncation at that time. Subsequent or earlier phases are representations in changing occupation patterns and land use over time. Phase is an extremely important concept in archeological excavation and post-excavation work. Phasing is achieved by compiling smaller groups of contexts together through the use of stratification and stratigraphic excavation into ever larger units of understanding. The terminology of these sub-units or collections of contexts varies depending on practitioner, but the terms interface, sub-group, group, and feature are common.

Phasing a site has a slightly different meaning from "digging in phase". Digging in phase is the process of stratigraphic removal of archaeological remains not to avoid removing contexts that are earlier in time lower in the sequence before other contexts that have a latter physical stratigraphic relationship to them. Digging a site "in phase" is considered good practice and can be thought of as the process of removing the deposits on site in the reverse order that they arrived. Phasing is achieved on site by many methods including intuition and experience, but the main analytical tool post excavation is the Harris matrix . Phase is sometimes termed differently depending on practitioner, examples include the term period but in the main phase is universal.

Component and focus [ edit ] The less rigorous term "phase" is sometimes used to denote a wider period represented by the contexts that lie stratigraphically between two archaeological horizons , representing the start and end of a particular culture typology. Sometimes the term Locus is used to equate finds from excavated spits, but component can also be used for such a grouping of stratigraphy or for groups of spatially related features.

An example of phase use would be all the contexts between two horizons may represent the entirety of all Saxon occupation on a given site and could be termed as the Saxon phase of the site. However, the block of stratigraphy may have many phases within it as defined by the more rigorous definition of phase.

See also [ edit ] Archaeological association Archaeological context Archaeological section Chronological dating Cut (archaeology) Excavation (archaeology) Feature (archaeology) Fill (archaeology) Harris matrix Relationship (archaeology) References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy. 40 figs. 1 pl. 136 pp. London & New York: Academic Press.

ISBN 0-12-326650-5 A quick Guide to Preliminary Phasing.

https://ucl.academia.edu/ReubenThorpe/Papers/189559/A-Quick-Guide-to-Preliminary-Phasing Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phase_(archaeology)&oldid=1300076555 " Category : Methods in archaeology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2016 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles that are too technical from August 2016 All articles that are too technical Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 04:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phase (archaeology) 1 language Add topic

