Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Overview 1.2 Dreams and the experiment 1.3 The theory of Serialism 2 Publishing history 3 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 3.1 Academic 3.2 Popular 4 Sequels 5 Literary influence 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Bibliography 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents An Experiment with Time 6 languages Català Español Français Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1927 book by J. W. Dunne For Serialism in music, see Serialism .

An Experiment with Time 1934 Faber & Faber edition Author J. W. Dunne Language English Subjects Precognitive dreams and Time Publisher A. & C. Black Faber & Faber Publication date 1927 Publication place United Kingdom Media type Print ( Hardcover and Paperback ) Pages 208pp ISBN 1-57174-234-4 OCLC 46396413 LC Class MLCM 2004/02936 (B) An Experiment with Time is a book by the British soldier, aeronautical engineer and philosopher J. W. Dunne (1875–1949) about his precognitive dreams and a theory of time which he later called "Serialism". First published in March 1927, the book was widely read. Although never accepted by mainstream scientists or philosophers, it has influenced imaginative literature ever since. Dunne published four sequels: The Serial Universe (1934), The New Immortality (1938), Nothing Dies (1940) and Intrusions?

(1955).

Description [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] An Experiment with Time discusses two main topics.

The first half of the book describes a number of precognitive dreams, most of which Dunne himself had experienced. His key conclusion was that such precognitive visions foresee future personal experiences by the dreamer and not mere general events.

The second half develops a theory to try to explain them. Dunne's starting point is the observation that the moment of "now" is not described by science. Contemporary science described physical time as a fourth dimension and Dunne's argument led to an endless sequence of higher dimensions of time to measure our passage through the dimension below. Accompanying each level was a higher level of consciousness. At the end of the chain was a supreme ultimate observer.

According to Dunne, our wakeful attention prevents us from seeing beyond the present moment, whilst when dreaming that attention fades and we gain the ability to recall more of our timeline. This allows fragments of our future to appear in pre-cognitive dreams, mixed in with fragments or memories of our past. Other consequences include the phenomenon known as deja vu and the existence of life after death .

[ 1 ] Dreams and the experiment [ edit ] Following a discussion of brain function in which Dunne expounds mind-brain parallelism and highlights the problem of subjective experience, he gives anecdotal accounts of precognitive dreams which, for the most part, he himself had experienced.

The first he records occurred in 1898, in which he dreamed of his watch stopping at an exact time before waking up and finding that it had in fact done so.

[ 2 ] Later dreams appeared to foretell several major disasters; a volcanic eruption in Martinique , a factory fire in Paris, and the derailing of the Flying Scotsman express train from the embankment approaching the Forth Railway Bridge in Scotland.

Dunne tells how he sought to make sense of these dreams, coming slowly to the conclusion that they foresaw events from his own future, such as reading a newspaper account of a disaster rather than foreseeing the disaster itself. In order to try and prove this to his satisfaction, he developed the experiment which gives the book its title. He kept a notepad by his bedside and wrote down details of any dreams immediately on waking, then later went back and compared them to subsequent events in his life. He also persuaded some friends to try the same experiment, as well as experimenting on himself with waking reveries approaching a hypnagogic state.

Based on the results, he claimed that they demonstrated that such precognitive fragments were common in dreams, even that they were mixed up in equal occurrence with past memories, and therefore they were difficult to identify until after the event they foresaw. He believed that the dreaming mind was not drawn wholly to the present, as it was during wakefulness, but was able to perceive events in its past and future with equal facility.

[ 1 ] The theory of Serialism [ edit ] Having presented Dunne's evidence for precognition, the book moves on to a possible theory in explanation which he called Serialism.

[ 3 ] The theory harks back to an experience with his nurse when he was nine years old. Already thinking about the problem, the boy asked her if Time was the moments like yesterday, today and tomorrow, or was it the travelling between them that we experience as the present moment? Any answer was beyond her, but the observation formed the basis of Serialism.

Within the fixed spacetime landscape described by the recently published theory of general relativity , an observer travels along a timeline running in the direction of physical time, t 1 .

Quantum mechanics was also a newly emerging science, though in a less-developed state. Neither relativity nor quantum mechanics offered any explanation of the observer's place in spacetime, but both required it in order to develop the physical theory around it. The philosophical problems raised by this lack of rigorous foundation were already beginning to be recognised.

[ 4 ] The theory resolves the issue by proposing a higher dimension of Time, t 2 , in which our consciousness experiences its travelling along the timeline in t 1 . The physical brain itself inhabits only t 1 , requiring a second level of mind to inhabit t 2 and it is at this level that the observer experiences consciousness.

However, Dunne found that his logic led to a similar difficulty with t 2 in that the passage between successive events in t 2 was not included in the model. This led to an even higher t 3 in which a third-level observer could experience not just the mass of events in t 2 but the passage of those experiences in t 2 , and so on in the infinite regress of time dimensions and observers which gives the theory its name.

Dunne suggested that when we die, it is only our physical selves in t 1 who die and that our higher selves are outside of mundane time. Our conscious selves therefore have no mechanism to die in the same kind of way and are effectively immortal.

[ 1 ] At the end of the chain he proposed a "superlative general observer, the fount of all ... consciousness".

[ 5 ] Publishing history [ edit ] An Experiment with Time was first published by A & C Black in March 1927. Dunne continued to update it and many new editions and impressions were published over his lifetime. Black brought out a 1929 second edition, prefaced with editorial notes and an extract from a 1928 letter from Arthur Eddington .

[ 6 ] Dunne then changed publisher to Faber & Faber , with whom he would remain. The third edition incorporated major new material and was published by Faber's in 1932; this and subsequent editions were published in the US by Macmillan . The final version which he had a hand in was published as a "reprint" in 1948.

Faber continued printing paperback editions until at least 1973, and others have appeared since.

Reception [ edit ] Academic [ edit ] Initial reactions from the scientific and scientifically-minded community were broadly positive.

Nature carried a review by the philosopher and mathematician Hyman Levy . They accepted that Dunne was a sober and rational investigator who was doing his best to take a scientific approach. They acknowledged that if his ideas about time and consciousness were true then his book would be truly revolutionary.

[ 7 ] However opinions differed over the existence of dream precognition, while his infinite regress was almost universally judged to be logically flawed and incorrect.

[ 3 ] Philosophers who criticised An Experiment with Time on much the same basis included J. A. Gunn , C. D. Broad and M. F. Cleugh .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The physicist and parapsychologist G. N. M. Tyrrell explained: Mr. J. W. Dunne, in his book, An Experiment with Time , introduces a multidimensional scheme in an attempt to explain precognition and he has further developed this scheme in later publications. But, as Professor Broad has shown, these unlimited dimensions are unnecessary, ... and the true problem of time—the problem of becoming, or the passage of events from future through present to past, is not explained by them but is still left on the author's hands at the end.

[ 11 ] Later editions continued to receive attention. In 1981 a new impression of the 1934 (third) edition was published with an introduction by the writer and broadcaster Brian Inglis . The last (1948) edition was reprinted in 1981 with an introduction by the physicist and parapsychologist Russell Targ . A review of it in New Scientist described it as a "definitive classic".

[ 12 ] Mainstream scientific opinion remains that, while Dunne was an entertaining writer, there is no scientific evidence for either dream precognition or more than one time dimension and his arguments do not convince.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Popular [ edit ] An Experiment with Time became well known and was widely discussed. Not to have read him became a "mark of singularity" in society.

[ 15 ] Critical essays on Serialism—some positive, some negative—appeared in popular works. Among others, H. G. Wells wrote an essay, "New Light on Mental Life: Mr. J.W. Dunne’s Experiments with Dreaming" in 1927, [ 16 ] Jorge Luis Borges wrote a short essay, "El Tiempo y J. W. Dunne" (Time and J. W. Dunne) in 1940.

[ 17 ] and J. B. Priestley gave an accessible account in his study Man and Time (1964). Interest remains today, with for example Gary Lachman discussing Dunne's Serialism in 2022.

[ 18 ] Sequels [ edit ] Besides issuing new editions of An Experiment with Time , Dunne published sequels exploring different aspects of Serialism.

The Serial Universe (1934) examined its relation to contemporary physics in relativity and quantum mechanics .

The New Immortality (1938) and Nothing Dies (1940) explored the metaphysical aspect of Serialism, especially in relation to immortality.

Intrusions?

(1955) contained autobiographical accounts of the angelic visions and voices which had accompanied many of his precognitive dreams. It was incomplete at the time of his death in 1949; it was completed with the help of his family and finally published some years later. It revealed that he believed himself to be a spiritual medium . He had deliberately chosen to leave this material out of An Experiment with Time as he judged that it would have affected the scientific reception of his theory.

[ 19 ] Literary influence [ edit ] The popularity of An Experiment with Time was reflected in the many authors who subsequently referenced him and his ideas in literary works of fiction. He "undoubtedly helped to form something of the imaginative climate of those [interwar] years".

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] One of the first and most significant writers was J. B. Priestley , who used Dunne's ideas in three of his " Time plays ": Time and the Conways , Dangerous Corner , and An Inspector Calls .

[ 20 ] Dunne's theory strongly influenced the unfinished novels The Notion Club Papers by J. R. R. Tolkien and The Dark Tower by C. S. Lewis . Tolkien and Lewis were both members of the Inklings literary circle. Tolkien used Dunne's ideas about parallel time dimensions in developing the differing natures of time in The Lord of the Rings between " Lórien time" and time in the rest of Middle-earth .

[ 15 ] Lewis used the imagery of serialism in the afterlife he depicted at the end of The Last Battle , the closing tale in the Chronicles of Narnia .

[ 22 ] Other important contemporary writers who used his ideas, whether as a narrative or literary device, included John Buchan ( The Gap in the Curtain ), James Hilton ( Random Harvest ), his old friend H. G. Wells ( The Queer Story of Brownlow’s Newspaper and The Shape of Things to Come ), Graham Greene ( The Bear Fell Free ) and Rumer Godden ( A Fugue in Time ).

[ 20 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Literary figures less overtly influenced included T. S. Eliot , James Joyce and Flann O'Brien .

[ 7 ] Following Dunne's death in 1949, the popularity of his themes continued.

Philippa Pearce 's 1958 childhood fantasy Tom's Midnight Garden makes use of Dunne's theory of time and won the British literary Carnegie Medal .

[ 25 ] The writer Vladimir Nabokov undertook his own dream experiment in 1964, following Dunne's instructions, and it strongly influenced his subsequent novels, especially Ada or Ardor: A Family Chronicle .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In the 1970s, at least two novels featured Dunne's time travel technique: Jack Finney 's Time and Again (1970), [ citation needed ] and Richard Matheson 's Bid Time Return (1975).

[ citation needed ] Matheson's novel formed the basis for the film Somewhere in Time (1980) starring Christopher Reeve .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Dreamtime , an Australian aboriginal merging of past, present and future.

C. H. Hinton , an early proponent of time as the fourth dimension who influenced Dunne.

P. D. Ouspensky , who proposed an alternative theory of cyclic time.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Priestley (1989) ^ Dunne, J. W.

(2001) [1927].

An Experiment with Time . Hampton Roads.

ISBN 978-1-57174-234-6 .

OCLC 46396413 .

^ a b Levy, Hyman (11 June 1927). "Time and Perception (review of An Experiment with Time )".

Nature .

119 (3006): 847– 848.

doi : 10.1038/119847a0 .

S2CID 4123898 .

^ Eddington, Arthur ; The Nature of the Physical World , 1928 (delivered as the Gifford lectures in 1927).

[1] ^ Dunne, J. W.

An Experiment with Time , First Edition, A.C. Black, 1927, Page 207.

^ Dunne, J. W.

An Experiment with Time , 2nd Edition, A.C. Black, 1929, p. viii "I agree with you about ' serialism ' ; the ' going on of time ' is not in Minkowski's world as it stands. My own feeling is that the ' becoming' is really there in the physical world,* but is not formulated in the description of it in classical physics (and is, in fact, useless to a scheme of laws which is fully deterministic). . . Yours truly, A. S. EDDINGTON. OBSERVATORY, CAMBRIDGE,  1928, Feb.1." ^ a b Jones (2020) ^ Gunn, J. A.; The Problem of Time , Unwin, 1929.

^ Broad, C. D.; "Mr. Dunne's Theory of Time in 'An Experiment with Time'" , Philosophy , Vol. 10, No. 38, April, 1935, pp. 168-185.

^ Cleugh, M. F.; Time: And its Importance in Modern Thought , Methuen, 1937.

^ Tyrrell, G. N. M.; Science and Psychical Phenomena . New York: Harper, 1938, p. 135.

^ Gribbin, John ; Book Review of An Experiment with Time , New Scientist , 27 August 1981, p. 548 ^ Evans, Christopher; Landscapes of the Night: How and Why We Dream , Viking, 1983.

^ Davies, Paul ; About Time: Einstein's Unfinished Revolution , Viking, 1995.

[2] ^ a b Flieger (2001) ^ Included in his 1928 book The Way the World Is Going .

^ Translated for his 1952 anthology Other Inquisitions: 1937-1952 , ^ Lachman, Gary.

Dreaming Ahead of Time . Floris. 2022. pp.106-110.

^ Brandon, Ruth (16 June 1983). "Scientists and the supernormal".

New Scientist . p. 786.

^ a b c Stewart (2008) ^ Anon; "Obituary: Mr. J. W. Dunne, Philosopher and Airman", The Times , August 27, 1949, Page 7.

^ Inchbald, Guy (2019).

"The Last Serialist: C. S. Lewis and J. W. Dunne" .

Mythlore .

37 (2, Spring/Summer 2019): 75– 88.

^ Gilvary, Dermot; Dangerous Edges of Graham Greene: Journeys with Saints and Sinners , Continuum, 2011, p.101.

^ Stewart, Victoria; "An Experiment with Narrative?  Rumer Godden's A Fugue in Time", in (ed. Lucy Le-Guilcher and Phyllis B. Lassner) Rumer Godden: International and Intermodern Storyteller , Routledge, 2010, pp. 81-93.

^ "Pearce, Philippa" , Science Fiction Encyclopedia (accessed 15 January 2016) ^ Nabokov, Vladimir (ed. Gennady Barabtarlo); Insomniac Dreams: Experiments with Time , Princeton University Press, 2018 (sic).

^ Lanchester, John; "Nabokov’s Dreams" , London Review of Books , Vol. 40, Nr. 9, 10 May 2018, p. 18.

Bibliography [ edit ] Flieger, Verlyn (2001).

A Question of Time: J.R.R. Tolkien's Road to Faërie . Kent State University Press. pp.

38– 47.

ISBN 978-0-87338-699-9 .

Jones, Darryl. (2020) "J. W. Dunne: The Time Traveller". In: Ferguson, T. (ed) Literature and Modern Time . Palgrave Macmillan. DOI 10.1007/978-3-030-29278-2_9 Priestley, J. B.

(1989) [1964 (Aldus)].

Man and Time . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1870630672 .

OCLC 796254114 .

Stewart, Victoria (2008). "J. W. Dunne and literary culture in the 1930s and 1940s".

Literature and History .

17 (2, Autumn 2008): 62– 81.

doi : 10.7227/LH.17.2.5 .

S2CID 192883327 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ernest Nagel . (1927).

An Experiment with Time .

The Journal of Philosophy 24 (25): 690-692.

Samuel Soal . (1927).

Review: An Experiment with Time .

Journal of the Society for Psychical Research 24: 119-123.

External links [ edit ] An Experiment with Time at Faded Page (Canada) An Experiment with Time at Internet Archive An Experiment with Time at HathiTrust v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Parapsychology Outline Topics Apparitional experience Astral projection Auras Bilocation Clairvoyance Deathbed phenomena Dermo-optical perception Dream telepathy Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Extrasensory perception Ganzfeld experiment Ghosts Kirlian photography Levitation Materialization Mediumship Near-death experience Orb Out-of-body experience Pam Reynolds case Paranormal Parapsychology research at SRI Past life regression Plant perception (paranormal) Poltergeist Precognition Psychic Psychic detective Psychic reading Psychic surgery Psychometry Pyrokinesis Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Second sight Sensory leakage Spoon bending Superconscious Telekinesis Telepathy Thoughtography Xenoglossy Zener cards Active organizations American Society for Psychical Research Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena College of Psychic Studies Institut Métapsychique International Institute of Noetic Sciences International Association for Near-Death Studies Koestler Parapsychology Unit Parapsychological Association Parapsychology Foundation Rhine Research Center Society for Psychical Research The Ghost Club Defunct organizations American Psychical Institute British College of Psychic Science Cambridge Ghost Society International Institute for Psychical Research London Dialectical Society Metropolitan Psychical Society National Laboratory of Psychical Research Oxford Phasmatological Society Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory Society for the Study of Supernormal Pictures People List of parapsychologists Skeptics of parapsychology Publications An Experiment with Time Extrasensory Perception Irreducible Mind Journal of Near-Death Studies Journal of Parapsychology Journal of Scientific Exploration Life After Life Life Before Life Mental Radio Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence for Past Lives Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind The Roots of Coincidence Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation Varieties of Anomalous Experience Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=An_Experiment_with_Time&oldid=1305681464 " Categories : J. W. Dunne 1927 non-fiction books Books about the paranormal English-language non-fiction books English non-fiction books Philosophy of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 13:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents An Experiment with Time 6 languages Add topic

