Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Astronaut career Toggle Astronaut career subsection 2.1 Expedition 66/67 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Matthias Maurer 16 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latviešu Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German astronaut (born 1970) Matthias Maurer Official portrait, 2020 Born ( 1970-03-18 ) 18 March 1970 (age 55) St. Wendel , Saarland , West Germany Status Active Nationality Germany Occupations Astronaut Materials scientist Space career ESA astronaut Time in space 1342 days, 9 hours and 12 minutes Total EVAs 1 Total EVA time 6 hours, 54 minutes Missions SpaceX Crew-3 ( Expedition 66 / 67 ) Mission insignia Website matthiasmaurer .esa .int Matthias Josef Maurer (born 18 March 1970) is a German ESA astronaut and materials scientist , who was selected in 2015 to take part in space training.

Biography [ edit ] This section of a biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Matthias Maurer" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Maurer graduated from Gymnasium Wendalinum [ de ] in Sankt Wendel , Saarland , in 1989.) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] He then began his compulsory civilian service as a paramedic with the Malteser Emergency Service. Afterwards he studied materials science and technology at Saarland University in Saarbrücken, Germany, the EEIGM ( École européenne d'ingénieurs en génie des matériaux , "European School for Materials Technology", part of the Université de Lorraine) in Nancy, France, the University of Leeds , UK, and at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya) in Barcelona, Spain. From 1999 to 2004, Maurer completed his doctorate at the Institute of Materials Sciences of the RWTH Aachen University , Germany, where he received his engineering doctorate (Dr.-Ing.). His dissertation titled "Lightweight composites made of aluminium foam with thermally sprayed coatings" won him several scientific prizes. After completing his doctorate, Maurer undertook a long-term trip around the world. In 2006, Maurer successfully completed an additional course of study in economics at the University of Hagen with an MBA management degree.

[ 3 ] Maurer holds several patents in the field of materials science and materials engineering. He is fluent in four languages ( German , English , Spanish , French ) and as part of his astronaut training, he is also taking intensive language training in Russian and Chinese .

Astronaut career [ edit ] Maurer applied to the European Space Agency as an astronaut in 2008 with almost 8500 other candidates and was one of ten to pass the selection procedure, but was not initially appointed to the European Astronaut Corps. In 2010 he started working for the European Space Agency as a crew support engineer and eurocom for the Columbus flight control team at the European Astronaut Centre (EAC) in Cologne, Germany. Before he formally joined the European Astronaut Corps in July 2015, Maurer took a lead role in ESA Astronaut Centre projects to prepare for future spaceflight and lunar operations with new international partners and extend the Agency's human exploration expertise beyond the International Space Station .

[ 4 ] In 2014, he took part in the ESA Cooperative Adventure for Valuing and Exercising Human Behaviour and Performance Skills program and in 2016 he was part of the NASA Extreme Environment Mission Operations 21 analog mission, an underwater training programme for future ISS crews in Florida [ 5 ] as well as the first ESA PANGAEA mission, a field geology and astrobiology training programme by the European Space Agency . In March 2018, he gained certification to perform International Space Station-related spacewalks in the American spacesuit EMU . In 2018 he also graduated from both basic astronaut training and pre-assignment training and thus became fully certified to go to space.

[ 6 ] On 12 May 2020 he arrived at the Johnson Space Center in Texas alongside ESA astronaut Thomas Pesquet and Russian cosmonauts Sergey Ryzhikov , Sergey Kud-Sverchkov , Oleg Novitsky and Pyotr Dubrov for training amidst the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 7 ] Expedition 66/67 [ edit ] On 28 July 2020, Maurer was announced as a backup crew member for Thomas Pesquet on SpaceX Crew-2 .
On 14 December 2020, ESA announced a competition to name Maurer's mission; the winner would be announced in summer 2020 and will receive a signed mission patch flown to the ISS by Matthias. Prior to his mission assignment, Matthias was based at ESA’s Astronaut Centre in Cologne, Germany where he was project managing the development of a new ESA Moon simulation facility known as Luna.

[ 8 ] Image taken during ESA astronaut Matthias Maurer's first spacewalk, EVA 80. He posted it to his social media on 5 April 2022.

On 14 December 2020, Maurer was officially assigned to the SpaceX Crew-3 mission, which launched on 10 November 2021.

[ 9 ] A few hours before the announcement, Maurer revealed his second mission name as Cosmic Kiss , after the Nebra sky disk , the oldest known realistic illustration of the night sky. He traveled to the International Space Station alongside NASA astronauts Raja Chari , who commanded the Crew Dragon , Thomas Marshburn , as the pilot, and mission specialist Kayla Barron . Once on board the station, they joined Expedition 66. This mission made him the twelfth German astronaut after Alexander Gerst in 2018.

As part of Expedition 66, Maurer and Chari installed ammonia jumpers on the P1 Truss and repositioned a radiator beam valve module which had been giving them trouble returning the unit to operation. The astronauts routed cables, installed cable clamps on the Bartolomeo platform, tied back thermal insulation on the Kibo Exposed Facility Berthing Mechanism, replaced Camera 8 on the truss which has a bad filter and light, outfitted the radiator grapple bars for a future spacewalk, and also did other maintenance task outside the station. Because of time the task to break torque on the P4 electronics boxes was moved to a later spacewalk along with the truss cable routing.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Crew-3 landed in the Gulf of Mexico on 6 May 2022, after 176 days in space.

[ 13 ] For this expedition Maurer along with the other crewmembers were awarded the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal and the Space Exploration Medal .

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Биография М. Маурера" . EKA.

^ "Матиас Йозеф Маурер. Биография" . Сайт «Космическая энциклопедия» . Retrieved 17 May 2021 .

^ "Matthias Maurer" .

www.esa.int . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ ESA (20 August 2020).

"Matthias Maurer" .

ESA .

^ ESA (25 January 2017).

"Biography of Matthias Maurer (in German)" . ESA . Retrieved 28 January 2017 .

^ "Matthias Maurer" . ESA.

^ @ShuttleAlmanac (12 May 2020).

".@NASA gave a lift to the upcoming..." ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ "Matthias Maurer" .

www.esa.int . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ "NASA assigns astronauts for third SpaceX commercial crew mission" .

SpaceNews . 15 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 October 2021 .

^ Dodson, Gerelle (10 March 2022).

"NASA to Air Briefing, Spacewalks to Upgrade Space Station" .

NASA . Retrieved 13 March 2022 .

^ Lavelle, Heidi.

"Astronauts Begin Spacewalk to Install Station Upgrades" .

blogs.nasa.gov . Retrieved 24 March 2022 .

^ Lavelle, Heidi.

"Astronauts Complete Spacewalk to Install Station Upgrades" .

blogs.nasa.gov . Retrieved 24 March 2022 .

^ Grush, Loren (6 May 2022).

"SpaceX successfully returns four astronauts from the International Space Station" .

The Verge . Retrieved 6 May 2022 .

^ Johnson, NASA (13 October 2022), jsc2022e080753 , retrieved 30 November 2022 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Matthias Maurer .

Official website v t e European Space Agency Astronaut Corps General European Astronaut Corps European Astronaut Centre Columbus Control Centre Oberpfaffenhofen ISS contribution Groups 2022 Sophie Adenot Pablo Álvarez Fernández Rosemary Coogan Raphaël Liégeois Marco Alain Sieber Marcus Wandt 2015 Matthias Maurer 2009 Samantha Cristoforetti Alexander Gerst Andreas Mogensen Luca Parmitano Timothy Peake Thomas Pesquet 1998 Frank De Winne Léopold Eyharts André Kuipers Paolo Nespoli Hans Schlegel Roberto Vittori 1992 Maurizio Cheli Jean-François Clervoy Pedro Duque Christer Fuglesang Marianne Merchez Thomas Reiter Older Reinhold Ewald Umberto Guidoni Claudie Haigneré Jean-Pierre Haigneré Ulf Merbold Marianne Merchez Claude Nicollier Wubbo Ockels Philippe Perrin Thomas Reiter Michel Tognini Gerhard Thiele Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Czech Republic People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Matthias_Maurer&oldid=1300642676 " Categories : 1970 births Living people Crew members of the International Space Station Aquanauts German astronauts German materials scientists People from Sankt Wendel (district) Saarland University alumni RWTH Aachen University alumni ESA astronauts SpaceX astronauts Spacewalkers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 Articles with hCards BLP articles lacking sources from November 2021 All BLP articles lacking sources Commons category link from Wikidata Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 15:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Matthias Maurer 16 languages Add topic

