Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family and career Toggle Family and career subsection 1.1 Family 1.2 Early life 1.3 Courtship, marriage, and premature death of his wife 1.4 Political career 1.5 In controversy and debate 1.6 Later years 1.7 Death and legacy 1.8 Hobbies 2 Writing Toggle Writing subsection 2.1 Essays and travel writing 2.2 Poetry 2.3 History, politics, and economics 3 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 3.1 On Islam 3.2 Accusations of antisemitism 4 Sussex 5 In the media 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Hilaire Belloc 32 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French-English writer (1870–1953) Hilaire Belloc Portrait by E. O. Hoppé , 1910 Born Joseph Hilaire Pierre René Belloc ( 1870-07-27 ) 27 July 1870 La Celle-Saint-Cloud , Seine-et-Oise , French Empire Died 16 July 1953 (1953-07-16) (aged 82) Guildford , Surrey, England Resting place Shrine of Our Lady of Consolation , West Grinstead Occupation Writer historian politician Alma mater Balliol College, Oxford Period 1896–1953 Genre Poetry history essays politics economics travel literature Literary movement Catholic literary revival Spouse Elodie Hogan ​ ​ ( m.

1896; died 1914) ​ Children 5 Relatives Bessie Rayner Parkes (mother) Marie Belloc Lowndes (sister) Member of Parliament for Salford South In office 1906 – 1910 Preceded by James Grimble Groves Succeeded by Anderson Montague-Barlow Personal details Political party Liberal Signature This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Joseph Hilaire Pierre René Belloc ( / h ɪ ˈ l ɛər ˈ b ɛ l ə k / also US : / b ɛ l ˈ ɑː k / ; French: [ilɛːʁ bɛlɔk] ; 27 July 1870 [ 1 ] – 16 July 1953) was a French-English writer, politician, and historian. Belloc was also an orator, poet, sailor, satirist, writer of letters, soldier, and political activist.

Belloc was considered one of the most versatile authors of the 20th century.

[ 2 ] His Catholic faith had a strong effect on his works.

[ 3 ] Belloc became a naturalised British subject in 1902 while retaining his French citizenship.

[ 4 ] While attending Oxford University , he served as President of the Oxford Union . From 1906 to 1910, he served as one of the few Catholic members of the British Parliament .

Belloc was a noted disputant, with a number of long-running feuds. He was also a close friend and collaborator of G. K. Chesterton .

George Bernard Shaw , a friend and frequent debate opponent of both Belloc and Chesterton, dubbed the pair the " Chesterbelloc ".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Belloc's writings encompassed religious poetry and comic verse for children. His widely sold Cautionary Tales for Children included "Jim, who ran away from his nurse, and was eaten by a lion" and "Matilda, who told lies and was burned to death".

[ 8 ] He wrote historical biographies and numerous travel works, including The Path to Rome (1902).

[ 9 ] Family and career [ edit ] Hilaire Belloc portrait, c.

1903 Family [ edit ] Belloc was born in La Celle-Saint-Cloud , France to a French father, Louis Belloc (1830–1872) and an English mother. His sister Marie Adelaide Belloc Lowndes also became a writer.

Belloc's mother Bessie Rayner Parkes (1829–1925) was a writer, activist and an advocate for women's equality, a co-founder of the English Woman's Journal and the Langham Place Group . As an adult, Belloc campaigned against women's suffrage as a member of the Women's National Anti-Suffrage League .

Belloc's maternal grandfather was Joseph Parkes (1796–1865). Belloc's grandmother, Elizabeth Rayner Priestley (1797–1877), was born in the United States, a granddaughter of Joseph Priestley .

In 1867, Bessie Rayner Parkes married attorney Louis Belloc, son of Jean-Hilaire Belloc . In 1872, five years after they wed, Louis died but not before being wiped out financially in a stock market crash. The young widow then brought her children from France back to England.

Early life [ edit ] Belloc grew up in England; his boyhood was spent in Slindon , West Sussex. He wrote about his home in poems such as "West Sussex Drinking Song", "The South Country", and "Ha'nacker Mill"; after graduating from John Henry Newman 's Oratory School in Edgbaston , Birmingham.

Courtship, marriage, and premature death of his wife [ edit ] In September 1889, Belloc's sister Marie made the accidental acquaintance of a Catholic widow, Mrs. Ellen Hogan, who was travelling from California on a European tour with two of her children, her daughters Elizabeth and Elodie. The travellers were both devoutly Catholic and keenly interested in literature, and Marie arranged a visit with her mother, Bessie, who in turn arranged an audience with Henry Cardinal Manning . These acts of generosity cemented a strong friendship, further deepened when Marie and Bessie accompanied the Hogans on their tour of France, visiting Paris with them. Hilaire was absent touring the French provinces as a correspondent for The Pall Mall Gazette , but when the Hogans stopped back in London on their return from another European trip the following year, Belloc met Elodie for the first time, and was smitten.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] Shortly after this meeting, Ellen Hogan was called back to California prematurely to take care of another of her children who was stricken with illness. She left her two daughters, who wished to remain in London, under the care of the Belloc family, and, Bessie asked her own son to squire the Hogan daughters around London. Belloc's interest in Elodie grew more fervid by the day. This was the beginning of a long, intercontinental, and star-crossed courtship, made all the more difficult by the opposition of Elodie's mother, who wished Elodie to enter the convent, and Hilaire's mother, who thought her son was too young to marry. Belloc pursued Elodie with letters, and, after her return to the United States, in 1891, he pursued her in person.

The impoverished Belloc, still only twenty years old, sold nearly everything he had to purchase a steamship ticket to New York, ostensibly to visit relatives in Philadelphia . Belloc's true reason for the trek to America became apparent when, after spending a few days in Philadelphia, he began to make his way across the American continent.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] Part of his journey was by train, but when the money ran out, Belloc just walked. An athletic man who hiked extensively in Britain and Europe, Belloc made his way on foot for a significant part of the 2870 miles from Philadelphia to San Francisco. While walking, he paid for lodging at remote farm houses and ranches by sketching the owners and reciting poetry.

Hilaire's first letter on his arrival in San Francisco is effervescent, happy to see Elodie and full of hopes for their future, but his manifestly zealous courtship was to go unrewarded. The joy he felt at seeing Elodie soon gave way to disappointment when the apparently insurmountable opposition of her mother to the marriage manifested itself. After a stay of only a few weeks, far shorter than the time he had spent in his journey to California, the crestfallen Belloc made his way back across the United States, after a fruitless journey of thousands of miles. His biographer Joseph Pearce compares the return to Napoleon's long winter retreat from Moscow.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] When Belloc finally reached the East Coast at Montclair , New Jersey, he received a letter from Elodie on 30 April 1891, definitively rejecting him in favour of a religious vocation; the steamship trip home was tainted with despair.

The gloomy Belloc threw himself into restless activity. Determined to fulfill the obligation of military service necessary to retain his French citizenship, Belloc served his term with an artillery regiment near Toul in 1891.

[ 11 ] While he was serving in France, Elodie's mother Ellen died, removing a significant obstacle to Belloc's hopes, but Elodie, although torn between her affection for Hilaire and her desire to serve God in the religious life, was unwilling to cross her mother's wishes so soon after her mother's untimely death and persisted in refusing Belloc's advances.

After his year of service was concluded, still pining for and writing to Elodie, he took the entrance exam to Oxford University , and matriculated to Balliol College in January 1893. Belloc later wrote in a poem: Balliol made me, Balliol fed me, Whatever I had she gave me again; And the best of Balliol loved and led me, God be with you, Balliol men.

[ 12 ] While at Oxford he was bestowed by his fellow students with a great honour: he was elected and served as President of the Oxford Union, the University debating society. He and another undergraduate, Anthony Henley, also achieved the record-breaking and athletic feat of walking from Carfax Tower in Oxford, to Marble Arch in London, a distance of some 55 miles, more than double that of a marathon, in only 11½ hours.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] He was awarded a first-class honours degree in history in June 1895.

That autumn, Elodie entered religious life and joined the Sisters of Charity at Emmitsburg, Maryland, as a postulant . She left a month later, writing to Belloc that she had failed in her religious vocation. In March 1896, having secured financing as an Oxford Extension lecturer in Philadelphia , Germantown , Baltimore and New Orleans , Belloc took a steamship to New York, and started making his way to Elodie in California. He expected to receive letters from her on his journey, but received none. To his shock and dismay, when he finally arrived in California in May, he discovered Elodie was deathly ill, worn out by the stress of the previous year. Belloc, thinking that after all their suffering, he and his beloved would be denied one another by her death, also collapsed. Over the next few weeks, however, Elodie recovered and after a tumultuous six-year courtship, Belloc and Elodie were married at St. John the Baptist Catholic church in Napa , California, on 15 June 1896. They settled initially in Oxford.

[ 13 ] In 1906, Belloc purchased land and a house called King's Land at Shipley , West Sussex in the United Kingdom. The couple had five children before Elodie's untimely death on the Feast of the Purification , 2 February 1914, likely from cancer.

[ 10 ] [ page needed ] She was age 45, and Belloc, at age 43, had more than 40 years of life ahead of him. He wore mourning garb for the rest of his life and kept her room as she had left it.

[ 14 ] Nearly five years later, his son Louis was killed in 1918 while serving in the Royal Flying Corps in northern France. Belloc placed a memorial tablet at the nearby Cambrai Cathedral . It is in the same side chapel as the icon of Our Lady of Cambrai.

Political career [ edit ] At Oxford University, Belloc served as president of the Oxford Union. He went into politics after he became a naturalised British subject. A great disappointment in his life was his failure to gain a fellowship of All Souls College , Oxford in 1895. This failure may have been caused in part by his producing a small statue of the Virgin Mary and placing it before him on the table during the interview for the fellowship.

From 1906 to 1910, Belloc was a Liberal Party Member of Parliament for Salford South . During one campaign speech, he was asked by a heckler if he was a "papist". He responded: Gentlemen, I am a Catholic. As far as possible, I go to Mass every day. This [taking a rosary out of his pocket] is a rosary. As far as possible, I kneel down and tell these beads every day. If you reject me on account of my religion, I shall thank God that He has spared me the indignity of being your representative.

[ 15 ] The crowd cheered and Belloc won the election, despite his Catholic faith. He retained his seat in the first 1910 election but did not stand in December 1910.

Belloc's only period of steady employment after that was from 1914 to 1920 as editor of Land and Water . Otherwise, he lived by his writing and was often financially insecure.

In controversy and debate [ edit ] Belloc first came to public attention shortly after arriving at Balliol College, Oxford as a recent French army veteran. Attending his first debate of the Oxford Union Debating Society, he saw that the affirmative position was wretchedly and half-heartedly defended. As the debate drew to its conclusion and the division of the house was called, he rose from his seat in the audience, and delivered a vigorous, impromptu defence of the proposition. Belloc won that debate from the audience, as the division of the house then showed, and his reputation as a debater was established. He was later elected president of the Union. He held his own in debates there with F. E. Smith and John Buchan , the latter a friend.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In the 1920s, Belloc attacked H. G. Wells 's The Outline of History . Belloc criticised what he termed Wells's secular bias and his belief in evolution by means of natural selection , a theory that Belloc asserted had been completely discredited. Wells remarked that "Debating Mr. Belloc is like arguing with a hailstorm". Belloc's review of Outline of History observed that Wells's book was a powerful and well-written volume "up until the appearance of Man, that is, somewhere around page seven". Wells responded with the small book Mr. Belloc Objects .

[ 18 ] Not to be outdone, Belloc followed with Mr. Belloc Still Objects .

G. G. Coulton wrote Mr. Belloc on Medieval History in a 1920 article. After a long-simmering feud, Belloc replied with a booklet, The Case of Dr. Coulton , in 1938.

Belloc's style during later life fulfilled the nickname he received in childhood, Old Thunder . Belloc's friend Lord Sheffield described his provocative personality in a preface to The Cruise of the Nona .

[ 19 ] Later years [ edit ] In 1937, Belloc was invited to be a visiting professor at Fordham University in New York City by university president Robert Gannon. Belloc delivered a series of lectures at Fordham which he completed in May of that year. The experience ended up leaving him physically exhausted, and he considered stopping the lectures early.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] On 2 April 1941, Belloc's son Peter Gilbert Marie Sebastian Belloc died at the age of 36 of pneumonia. He fell ill while on active service with the 5th Battalion, Royal Marines in Scotland. He is buried in West Grinstead at Our Lady of Consolation and St. Francis churchyard.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] In 1942, Belloc suffered a stroke and never recovered from its effects. On the 12 July 1953, he also suffered burns and shock after falling on his fireplace. He died on 16 July 1953 at Mount Alvernia Nursing Home in Guildford, Surrey.

[ 25 ] Belloc was buried at the Shrine Church of Our Lady of Consolation and St Francis at West Grinstead, where he had regularly attended Mass as a parishioner. His estate was probated at £ 7,451. At his funeral Mass, homilist Monsignor Ronald Knox said "No man of his time fought so hard for the good things". Boys from the Choir and Sacristy of Worth Preparatory School sang and served at the Mass.

Recent biographies of Belloc have been written by A. N. Wilson and Joseph Pearce .

Jesuit political philosopher James Schall 's Remembering Belloc was published by St. Augustine Press in September 2013. A memoir [ 26 ] of Belloc was written by Henry Edward George Rope .

Hobbies [ edit ] During his later years, Belloc sailed when he could afford to do so and became a well-known yachtsman. He won many races and was on the French sailing team.

In the early 1930s, he was given an old pilot cutter named Jersey . He sailed this for some years around the coasts of England, with the help of younger men. One sailor, Dermod MacCarthy, wrote a book about it, called Sailing with Mr Belloc .

[ 27 ] Writing [ edit ] See also: Hilaire Belloc bibliography Belloc wrote more than 150 books, [ 28 ] [ 29 ] the subjects ranging from warfare to poetry to the many current topics of his day. He has been called one of the Big Four of Edwardian Letters, [ 30 ] along with H. G. Wells , George Bernard Shaw, and G. K. Chesterton , all of whom debated with each other into the 1930s. Belloc was closely associated with Chesterton, and Shaw coined the term "Chesterbelloc" for their partnership. Belloc was co-editor with Cecil Chesterton of the literary periodical the Eye-Witness .

Asked once why he wrote so much, [ 31 ] Belloc responded: "Because my children are howling for pearls and caviar." Belloc observed that "The first job of letters is to get a canon", that is, to identify those works a writer sees as exemplary of the best of prose and verse. For his own prose style, he said he aspired to be as clear and concise as " Mary had a little lamb ." Essays and travel writing [ edit ] A Punch caricature lampooning Belloc, 27 June 1917 In 1902, Belloc published The Path to Rome , an account of a walking pilgrimage from Central France across the Alps to Rome.

The Path to Rome contains descriptions of the people and places he encountered, his drawings in pencil and in ink of the route, humour, poesy. In 1909, Belloc published The Pyrenees , providing many details of that region. As an essayist he was one of a small group (with Chesterton, E. V. Lucas and Robert Lynd ) of popular writers.

During World War I , Belloc was perceived by soldiers as a "kept correspondent" for the Entente leadership.

The Wipers Times mocked him as "Belary Helloc," a satirical persona who advanced foolish suggestions for winning the war.

[ 32 ] Poetry [ edit ] Original cover for Cautionary Tales for Children , illustrated by Basil T. Blackwood His 1907 Cautionary Tales for Children , humorous poems with implausible morals, illustrated by Basil Temple Blackwood (signing as "B.T.B.") and later by Edward Gorey , are the most widely known of his writings.

[ 33 ] Supposedly for children, they, like Lewis Carroll 's works, are more to adult and satirical tastes: "Henry King, Who chewed bits of string and was early cut off in dreadful agonies".

[ 34 ] A similar poem tells the story of "Rebecca, who slammed doors for fun and perished miserably".

The tale of "Matilda who told lies and was burned to death" was adapted into the play Matilda Liar!

by Debbie Isitt .

Quentin Blake , the illustrator, described Belloc as at one and the same time the overbearing adult and mischievous child.

Roald Dahl was a follower. But Belloc has broader if sourer scope. For example, with Lord Lundy (who was "far too freely moved to Tears"): It happened to Lord Lundy then as happens to so many men about the age of 26 they shoved him into politics[...] leading up to "we had intended you to be the next Prime Minister but three...

instead, Lundy is condemned to the ultimate political wilderness: ...The stocks were sold; the Press was squared: The Middle Class was quite prepared.

But as it is! . . . My language fails!

Go out and govern New South Wales!" The Aged Patriot groaned and died: And gracious! how Lord Lundy cried!

Of more weight is Belloc's Sonnets and Verse , a volume that deploys the same singing and rhyming techniques of his children's verses. Belloc's poetry is often religious, often romantic; throughout The Path to Rome he writes in spontaneous song.

History, politics, and economics [ edit ] Hilaire Belloc portrait by Emil Otto Hoppé, 1915 Three of his best-known non-fiction works are The Servile State (1912), [ 35 ] Europe and the Faith (1920) and The Jews (1922).

He authored the 1924 book Economics for Helen , which has lessons about economics for a 16-year old Helen. Economists criticized the book, with one writing, "for example, he defines wealth as a sum of values rather than valuable things; he fails to distinguish between interest and profit; he says that there is no such thing as interest on money, that the intention of using wealth for further production is the essential feature of capital, and that taxes should fall proportionately to the wealth of the taxed, in order that the sacrifice should be equally felt by all." [ 36 ] Another economist wrote, "On the whole this very readable book is interesting as affording some insight into an original mind rather than useful as an introduction to Economics." [ 37 ] From an early age Belloc knew Cardinal Henry Edward Manning , who was responsible for the conversion of his mother to Catholicism. In The Cruise of the "Nona" (1925), he mentions a "profound thing" that Manning said to him when he was just twenty years old: "All human conflict is ultimately theological." What Manning meant, Belloc said, is "that all wars and revolutions, and all decisive struggles between parties of men arise from a difference in moral and transcendental doctrine." [ 38 ] Belloc adds that he never met any man, "arguing for what should be among men, but took for granted as he argued that the doctrine he consciously or unconsciously accepted was or should be a similar foundation for all mankind. Hence battle." [ 39 ] Manning's involvement in the London Dock Strike of 1889 made a major impression on Belloc and his view of politics, according to biographer Robert Speaight . He became a trenchant critic both of capitalism [ 40 ] and of many aspects of socialism .

[ 41 ] With others (G. K. Chesterton, Cecil Chesterton , Arthur Penty ) Belloc envisioned the socioeconomic system of distributism , which advocates for a market economy with state regulation favoring cooperatives and small to medium enterprises against the concentrated economic power of large firms, finance-owned trusts , and monopolies . In The Servile State , written after his party-political career, and in other works, he criticised the modern economic order and parliamentary system, advocating distributism in opposition to both capitalism and socialism. Belloc made the historical argument that distributism was not a fresh perspective or program of economics but rather a return to the economics of widely distributed property that prevailed in Europe for the thousand years when it was Catholic. He called for the dissolution of Parliament and its replacement with committees of representatives for the various sectors of society, similar to medieval guilds , an idea that was popular under the name of corporatism at the time.

He contributed an article on "Land-Tenure in the Christian Era" to the Catholic Encyclopedia .

[ 42 ] Belloc held republican views, but became increasingly sympathetic to monarchism as he grew older. In his youth, he had initially been loyal to the French idea of republicanism, seeing it as a patriotic duty. Michael Hennessy, Chairman of the Hilaire Belloc Society, wrote that "In some respects, Belloc remained a republican until his death, but increasingly realized that there were not enough republicans to make a republic function effectively. Belloc thus felt that monarchy was the most practicable, superior form of government." [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Belloc explores some of these ideas in his work Monarchy: A Study of Louis XIV . Within it, Belloc also wrote that democracy "is possible only in small states, and even these must enjoy exceptional defences, moral or material, if they are to survive." [ 45 ] With these linked themes in the background, he wrote a long series of contentious biographies of historical figures, including Oliver Cromwell , James II , and Napoleon . They show him as an ardent proponent of orthodox Catholicism and a critic of many elements of the modern world.

Outside academe, Belloc was impatient with what he considered axe-grinding histories, especially what he called "official history." [ 46 ] Joseph Pearce notes also Belloc's attack on the secularism of H. G. Wells's popular Outline of History : Belloc objected to his adversary's tacitly anti-Christian stance, epitomized by the fact that Wells had devoted more space in his "history" to the Persian campaign against the Greeks than he had given to the figure of Christ.

He wrote also substantial amounts of military history. He also contributed to the 1931 alternative history collection If It Had Happened Otherwise edited by Sir John Squire .

Religion [ edit ] One of Belloc's more famous statements was "the faith is Europe and Europe is the faith"; [ 47 ] those views were expressed in many of his works from the period 1920 to 1940. These are still cited as exemplary of Catholic apologetics . They have also been criticised, for instance by comparison with the work of Christopher Dawson during the same period.

As a young man, Belloc moved away from Catholicism . However, he later stated that a spiritual event, which he never discussed publicly, prompted his return to it.

[ 48 ] Belloc alludes to this return to Catholicism in a passage in The Cruise of the Nona .

According to his biographer A. N. Wilson ( Hilaire Belloc , Hamish Hamilton), Belloc never wholly apostatised from the faith (ibid p. 105). The momentous event is fully described by Belloc in The Path to Rome (pp. 158–61). It took place in the Swiss village of Undervelier at the time of Vespers . Belloc said of it, "not without tears", "I considered the nature of Belief" and "it is a good thing not to have to return to the Faith". (See Hilaire Belloc by Wilson at pp. 105–06.) Belloc believed that the Catholic Church provided hearth and home for the human spirit.

[ 49 ] More humorously, his tribute to Catholic culture can be understood from his well-known saying, "Wherever the Catholic sun does shine, there's always laughter and good red wine." [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Belloc had a disparaging view of the Church of England , and used sharp words to describe heretics, such as, "Heretics all, whoever you may be/ In Tarbes or Nîmes or over the sea/ You never shall have good words from me/ Caritas non-conturbat me". Indeed, in his "Song of the Pelagian Heresy" he described how the Bishop of Auxerre , "with his stout Episcopal staff/ So thoroughly thwacked and banged/ The heretics all, both short and tall/ They rather had been hanged".

Belloc sent his son Louis to Downside School (1911–1915). Louis's biography and death in August 1918 is recorded in "Downside and the War".

On Islam [ edit ] Belloc's 1937 book The Crusades: the World's Debate , he wrote The story must not be neglected by any modern, who may think in error that the East has finally fallen before the West, that Islam is now enslaved – to our political and economic power at any rate if not to our philosophy. It is not so. Islam essentially survives, and Islam would not have survived had the Crusade made good its hold upon the essential point of Damascus. Islam survives. Its religion is intact; therefore its material strength may return.

Our religion is in peril, and who can be confident in the continued skill, let alone the continued obedience, of those who make and work our machines? ... There is with us a complete chaos in religious doctrine...We worship ourselves, we worship the nation; or we worship (some few of us) a particular economic arrangement believed to be the satisfaction of social justice...Islam has not suffered this spiritual decline; and in the contrast between [our religious chaos and Islam's] religious certitudes still strong throughout the Mohammedan world lies our peril.

[ 52 ] In The Great Heresies (1938), Belloc argued that although "Muslim culture happens to have fallen back in material applications; there is no reason whatever why it should not learn its new lesson and become our equal in all those temporal things which now alone give us our superiority over it—whereas in Faith we have fallen inferior to it." [ 53 ] Belloc continued: It has always seemed to me possible, and even probable, that there would be a resurrection of Islam and that our sons or our grandsons would see the renewal of that tremendous struggle between the Christian culture and what has been for more than a thousand years its greatest opponent.

[ 54 ] There is no reason why its recent inferiority in mechanical construction, whether military or civilian, should continue indefinitely. Even a slight accession of material power would make the further control of Islam by an alien culture difficult. A little more and there will cease that which our time has taken for granted, the physical domination of Islam by the disintegrated Christendom we know.

Belloc considered that Islam was permanently intent on destroying the Christian faith, as well as the West, which Christendom had built. In The Great Heresies , Belloc grouped the Protestant Reformation together with Islam as one of the major heresies threatening the " Universal Church ".

Accusations of antisemitism [ edit ] Further information: G. K.'s Weekly Belloc's writings were at times supportive of anti-Semitism and other times condemnatory of it.

[ 55 ] Belloc took a leading role in denouncing the Marconi scandal of 1912. Belloc emphasized that key players in both the government and the Marconi corporation had been Jewish. American historian Todd Endelman identifies Catholic writers as central critics. In his opinion: The most virulent attacks in the Marconi affair were launched by Hilaire Belloc and the brothers Cecil and G. K. Chesterton, whose hostility to Jews was linked to their opposition to liberalism , their backward-looking Catholicism, and the nostalgia for a medieval Catholic Europe that they imagined was ordered, harmonious, and homogeneous. The Jew baiting at the time of the Boer War and the Marconi scandal was linked to a broader protest, mounted in the main by the Radical wing of the Liberal Party, against the growing visibility of successful businessmen in national life and their challenges to what were seen as traditional English values.

[ 56 ] A. N. Wilson's biography expresses the belief that Belloc tended to allude to Jews negatively in conversation, sometimes obsessively.

Anthony Powell mentions in his review of that biography that in his view Belloc was thoroughly anti-Semitic, at all but a personal level.
In The Cruise of the Nona , Belloc reflected equivocally on the Dreyfus Affair after thirty years.

[ 57 ] Norman Rose's book The Cliveden Set (2000) asserts that Belloc 'was moved by a deep vein of hysterical anti-semitism'.

In his 1922 book, The Jews , Belloc argued that "the continued presence of the Jewish nation intermixed with other nations alien to it presents a permanent problem of the gravest character", and that the "Catholic Church is the conservator of an age-long European tradition, and that tradition will never compromise with the fiction that a Jew can be other than a Jew. Wherever the Catholic Church has power, and in proportion to its power, the Jewish problem will be recognized to the full." [ 58 ] Robert Speaight cited a letter by Belloc in which he condemned Nesta Webster because of her accusations against "the Jews". In February 1924, Belloc wrote to an American Jewish friend regarding an anti-Semitic book by Webster. Webster had rejected Christianity, studied Eastern religions , accepted the supposed Hindu concept of the equality of all religions and was fascinated by theories of reincarnation and ancestral memory.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Speaight also points out that when faced with anti-Semitism in practice—as at elitist country clubs in the United States before World War II—he voiced his disapproval. Belloc also condemned Nazi anti-Semitism in The Catholic and the War (1940).

[ 61 ] Sussex [ edit ] Belloc grew up in Slindon and spent most of his life in the part of Sussex that is now West Sussex. He always wrote of Sussex as if it were the crown of England and the western Sussex Downs the jewel in that crown.

[ 62 ] He loved Sussex as the place where he was brought up, considering it his earthly "spiritual home".

[ 62 ] Belloc wrote several works about Sussex including Ha'nacker Mill , The South Country , the travel guide Sussex (1906) and The County of Sussex (1936). One of his best-known works relating to Sussex is The Four Men: A Farrago (1911), in which the four characters, each aspects of Belloc's personality, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] travel on a pilgrimage across the county from Robertsbridge to Harting.

[ 64 ] The work has influenced others including musician Bob Copper , who retraced Belloc's steps in the 1980s.

[ 64 ] Belloc was also a lover of Sussex songs [ 65 ] and wrote lyrics for some songs which have since been put to music.

[ 65 ] Belloc is remembered in an annual celebration in Sussex, known as Belloc Night, that takes place on the writer's birthday, 27 July, in the manner of Burns Night in Scotland.

[ 66 ] The celebration includes reading from Belloc's work and partaking of a bread and cheese supper with pickles.

[ 66 ] In the media [ edit ] Stephen Fry has recorded an audio collection of Belloc's children's poetry.

The composer Peter Warlock set many of Belloc's poems to music.

Peter Ustinov recorded Belloc's The Cautionary Tales in 1968 for the Musical Heritage Society (MHC 9249M).

A well-known parody of Belloc by Sir John Squire , intended as a tribute, is Mr. Belloc's Fancy .

Syd Barrett used Cautionary Tales as the basis for the song " Matilda Mother " from the 1967 album The Piper at the Gates of Dawn .

King's Mill, Shipley , once owned by Belloc, was used in the British TV drama Jonathan Creek .

On the second episode of Monty Python's Flying Circus , in the sketch " The Mouse Problem ", a list of famous people who secretly were mice is concluded with "and, of course, Hilaire Belloc".

See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Hilaire Belloc bibliography Mr. Belloc Objects to "The Outline of History" – H. G. Wells 's dispute with Belloc Hilaire Belloc – Wikiquote Notes [ edit ] ^ Toulmin, Priestley (1 June 1994), "The Descendants of Joseph Priestley, LL.D., F.R.S.", The Northumberland County Historical Society Proceedings , vol. XXXII, Sunbury, Pennsylvania: The Society, p. 21 ^ "Hilaire Belloc | EBSCO Research Starters" .

www.ebsco.com . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

^ "Hilaire Belloc | British Poet, Historian & Essayist | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 23 July 2025 . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

^ "No. 27421" .

The London Gazette . 1 April 1902. p. 2234.

^ Shaw, George Bernard.

"Belloc and Chesterton," The New Age, Vol. II, No. 16, 15 February 1918.

^ Lynd, Robert.

"Mr. G. K. Chesterton and Mr. Hilaire Belloc." In Old and New Masters, T. Fisher Unwin Ltd., 1919.

^ McInerny, Ralph.

"The Chesterbelloc Thing," Archived 18 May 2011 (Date mismatch) at the Wayback Machine The Catholic Thing , 30 September 2008.

^ "Matilda," Archived 22 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine 1907, in the Poetry Archive .

^ Norwich, John Julius (1985–1993).

Oxford illustrated encyclopedia . Judge, Harry George., Toyne, Anthony. Oxford [England]: Oxford University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 0-19-869129-7 .

OCLC 11814265 .

^ a b c d e Pearce, Joseph (2015).

Old Thunder: A Life of Hilaire Belloc . Charlotte, NC: TAN Books.

ISBN 978-1-61890-656-4 .

^ Brickel, Alfred G.

"Hilaire Belloc and Cardinal Newman," The American Catholic Quarterly Review , Vol. XLVII, N°. 185, 1922.

^ Belloc, Hilaire.

"Papers relating to Hilaire Belloc (1870–1953), Belloc A: To the Balliol Men Still in Africa " .

Balliol College Archives & Manuscripts . Balliol College, Oxford, UK . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Speaight, Robert (1957).

The Life of Hilaire Belloc . New York: Farrar, Straus & Cudahy. pp.

100– 102.

^ The Point (August 1958).

^ Hilaire Belloc: Speech to voters of South Salford (1906), quoted in Robert Speaight, The Life of Hilaire Belloc (London: Hollis & Carter, 1957), p. 204 ^ Sir John Simon , who was a contemporary at Oxford, described his "...resonant, deep pitched voice..." as making an "...unforgettable impression".

^ Francis West, Gilbert Murray , p. 107, describes Murray 's impression on an occasion in 1899: "In July [...] [Murray] attended a meeting on the principles of Liberalism, at which Hilaire Belloc spoke brilliantly although Murray could not afterwards remember a word that he had said." ^ Wells, H. G., Mr. Belloc Objects, to the Outline of History , Watts & Company, London, 1926.

^ "Time and again I have seen him throw out a sufficiently outrageous theory in order to stimulate his company, and, be it said, for the pleasure of seeing how slowly he might be dislodged from a position he had purposely taken up knowing it to be untenable...Of course Belloc was prejudiced, but there were few who knew him who did not love his prejudices, who did not love to hear him fight for them, and who did not honour him for the sincerity and passion with which he held to them. Once the battle was joined all his armoury was marshalled and flung into the fray. Dialectic, Scorn, Quip, Epigram, Sarcasm, Historical Evidence, Massive Argument, and Moral Teaching—of all these weapons he was a past master and each was mobilised and made to play its proper part in the attack. Yet he was a courteous and a chivalrous man. A deeply sensitive man, his was the kindest and most understanding nature I have ever known. In spite of a rollicking and bombastic side he was as incapable of the least cruelty as he was capable of the most delicate sympathy with other people's feelings. As he himself used to say of others in a curiously quiet and simple way, 'He is a good man. He will go to Heaven'." ^ "New history describes founding, rise, and secularization of Fordham University | Catholic World Report – Global Church news and views" . Archived from the original on 25 March 2017 . Retrieved 25 March 2017 .

^ " 'A Catholic in the Room' – Commonweal Magazine" .

Commonwealmagazine.org . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .

^ "Casualty Record – Peter Gilbert Marie Sebastian Belloc" .

Commonwealth War Graves Commission .

^ Speaight, Robert (1957).

The Life of Hilaire Belloc . New York: Farrar, Straus & Cudahy. pp.

522 .

^ "The Life of Hilaire Belloc" .

Archive.org . 1957.

^ Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Volume 5 . Oxford University Press. 2004. p. 30.

ISBN 0-19-861355-5 .

Article by Bernard Berganzi.

^ "My Memory of Hilaire Belloc," The Irish Monthly , Vol. 81, No. 962, Oct. 1953 ^ Sailing with Mr Belloc by Dermod MacCarthy: Vintage/Ebury (A Division of Random House Group), 20 October 1986 (reprint): ISBN 9780002727754 ^ Markel, Michael H. (1975), Hilaire Belloc , Twayne Publishers, p. 34.

^ Perkins, David (1976), A History of Modern Poetry: From the 1890s to the High Modernist Mode , Harvard University Press, p. 192.

^ "Hilaire Belloc" .

Poetryarchive.org . Archived from the original on 21 May 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2017 .

^ See Hilaire Belloc's books for a chronological list of work by Belloc ^ Fussell, Paul (2013) [1st pub. 1975].

The Great War and Modern Memory . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-19-997195-4 .

^ Vogel, James.

"Hilaire Belloc, Cautionary Tales and Bad Child's Book of Beasts," Crisis Magazine, 29 March 2012.

^ The Chief Defect of Henry King Was chewing little bits of String.

At last he swallowed some which tied Itself in ugly Knots inside.

Physicians of the Utmost Fame Were called at once; but when they came They answered, as they took their Fees, "There is no Cure for this Disease.

Henry will very soon be dead." His Parents stood about his Bed Lamenting his Untimely Death, When Henry, with his Latest Breath, Cried – "Oh, my Friends, be warned by me, That Breakfast, Dinner, Lunch and Tea Are all the Human Frame Requires..." With that the Wretched Child expires.

^ Belloc, Hilaire (1912).

The Servile State . London and Edinburgh: T. N. Foulis – via Internet Archive .

^ Le Rossignol, J. E. (1925).

"Review of Economics for Helen" .

The American Economic Review .

15 (1): 84– 85.

ISSN 0002-8282 .

JSTOR 1808486 .

^ Reynard, H. (1924).

"Review of Economics for Helen" .

The Economic Journal .

34 (136): 620– 621.

doi : 10.2307/2223389 .

ISSN 0013-0133 .

JSTOR 2223389 .

^ The Cruise of the "Nona" . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1958, p. 48.

^ The Cruise of the "Nona" . Harmondsworth: Penguin, p. 49.

^ Williams, Raymond , Culture and Society , p. 186: "Belloc's argument is that capitalism as a system is breaking down, and that this is to be welcomed. A society in which a minority owns and controls the means of production, while the majority are reduced to proletarian status, is not only wrong but unstable. Belloc sees it breaking down in two ways – on the one hand into State action for welfare (which pure capitalism cannot embody); on the other hand into monopoly and the restraint of trade. There are only two alternatives to this system: socialism, which Belloc calls collectivism; and the redistribution of property on a significant scale, which Belloc calls distributivism." ^ Socialism and the Servile State: A Debate between Hilaire Belloc and J. Ramsay MacDonald , South West London Federation of the Independent Labour, 1911.

^ "The Catholic Encyclopedia and Its Makers" . Encyclopedia [!] Press, Incorporated. 14 June 1917 – via Google Books.

^ Belloc, Hilaire.

Monarchy: A Study of Louis XIV – Foreword by Roger Buck . Arouca Press.

^ "Monarchy" .

aroucapress.com .

^ Belloc, Hilaire (1920).

Monarchy: A Study of Louis XIV . p. 6.

^ "There is an enormous book called volume 1 of A Cambridge History of the Middle Ages. It is 759 pages in length of close print...It does not mention the Mass once. That is as though you were to write a history of the Jewish dispersion without mentioning the synagogue or of the British empire without mentioning the city of London or the Navy" ( Letters from Hilaire Belloc , Hollis and Carter, 75).

^ "Europe and the Faith ... : Hilaire Belloc : Free Download & Streaming : Internet Archive" .

Archive.org . Retrieved 26 February 2017 .

^ Hickson, Dr Robert (4 April 2013).

"Hilaire Belloc and a High Mass" .

^ A. N. Wilson's "Introduction" to Belloc's Complete Verse , Pimlico, 1991.

^ Aglialoro, Todd.

"The Theology of the Bottle" .

Catholic Answers .

^ "The Catholic Sun by Hilaire Belloc • Simple Poetry" .

Simple Poetry .

^ The Crusades: the World's Debate, Bruce Publishing Company, 1937, p. 8.

^ The Great Heresies , Ch. 4 , "The Great and Enduring Heresy of Mohammed." ^ "The Great Heresies by Hilaire Belloc: Chapter Four – The Great and Enduring Heresy of Mohammed" . 17 August 2000. Archived from the original on 17 August 2000 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .

^ "The International Catholic News Weekly" .

The Tablet . 25 June 2024.

^ Todd M. Endelman (2002).

The Jews of Britain, 1656 to 2000 . University of California Press. p. 9.

ISBN 9780520227194 .

^ "I, for my part, pretend to no certain conclusion in the matter...Of my own intimate acquaintance who were on the spot [at Dreyfus' trial] and competent to judge, most were for the innocence of Dreyfus: but the rest, fully competent also, were and are, convinced of his guilt...There are in England to-day two Englishmen whose wide knowledge of Europe and especially of Paris, and the French tongue and society, enable them to judge. They are both close friends of mine. One is for, the other against...I believe that, when the passions have died down, the Dreyfus case will remain for history very much what the Diamond Necklace has remained, or the Tichborne case ; that is, there will be a popular legend, intellectually worth nothing; and, for the historian, the task of criticising that legend, but hardly of solving the problem." ^ Belloc, Hilaire, The Jews , London: Constable, 1922, 3–5, 209–210.

^ Nesta Webster, Spacious Days , London and Bombay, 1950, pp. 103 and 172–75.

^ In my opinion it is a lunatic book. She is one of those people who have got one cause on the brain. It is the good old 'Jewish revolutionary' bogey. But there is a type of unstable mind which cannot rest without morbid imaginings, and the conception of a single cause simplifies thought. With this good woman it is the Jews, with some people it is the Jesuits , with others Freemasons and so on. The world is more complex than that. R. Speaight, The Life Of Hilaire Belloc , 1957, pp. 456–58.

^ The Third Reich has treated its Jewish subjects with a contempt for Justice which even if there had been no other action of the kind in other departments would be a sufficient warranty for determining its elimination from Europe...Cruelty to a Jew is as odious as cruelty to any human being, whether that cruelty be moral in the form of insult, or physical...You may hear men saying on every side, 'However, there is one thing I do agree with and that is the way they (The Nazis) have settled the Jews'. Now that attitude is directly immoral. The more danger there is that it will grow the more necessity there is for denouncing it. The action of the enemy toward the Jewish race has been in morals intolerable. Contracts have been broken on all sides, careers destroyed by the hundred and the thousand, individuals have been treated with the most hideous and disgusting cruelty...If no price is paid for such excesses, our civilisation will certainly suffer and suffer permanently. If the men who have committed them go unpunished (and only defeat in war can punish them) then the decline of Europe, already advanced, will proceed to catastrophe. (pp. 29ff.) ^ a b Brandon, Peter (2006).

Sussex . Phillimore & Co Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7090-6998-0 .

^ "Baptism by Beer: Hilaire Belloc's The Four Men: A Farrago" . Catholic Online . Retrieved 29 March 2012 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c "Review: The Four Men – Hilaire Belloc" . A Common Reader. Archived from the original on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 .

^ a b Hare, Chris (1995).

A History of the Sussex People . Worthing: Southern Heritage Books.

ISBN 978-0-9527097-0-1 .

^ a b "Worthing Downlander Events 2012" . Worthing Downlanders. Archived from the original on 21 July 2012 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 .

References [ edit ] Belloc, Hilaire.

"Europe and the faith" "archive.org" Boyd, Ian.

"Hilaire Belloc: the Myth and the Man," The Tablet, 12 July 2003.

Boyle, David.

"Hilaire Belloc and the Liberal Revival: Distributism: An Alternative Liberal Tradition?" Archived 21 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Liberal History , Issue 40, Autumn 2003.

Braybrooke, Patrick.

Some Thoughts on Hilaire Belloc, Drane's, 1924.

Cooney, Anthony.

Hilaire Belloc: 1870–1953, Third Way Movement Ltd., 1998.

Corrin, Jay P.

G. K. Chesterton & Hilaire Belloc: The Battle Against Modernity, Ohio University Press, 1991.

Coyne, Edward J. "Mr. Belloc on Usury," Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review, Vol. 21, No. 82, Jun. 1932.

Feske, Victor.

From Belloc to Churchill: Private Scholars, Public Culture and the Crisis of British Liberalism 1900–1939, University of North Carolina Press, 1996.

Fytton, Francis. "After Belloc: Who?," The Irish Monthly, Vol. 83, No. 967, Mar. 1954.

Fytton, Francis. "In Defence of Belloc," The Irish Monthly, Vol. 83, No. 973, Sep. 1954.

Gardner, A. G.

"Mr. Hilaire Belloc." In Pillars of Society, James Nisbet, 1913.

Hamilton, Robert.

Hilaire Belloc; An Introduction to his Spirit and Work, Douglas Organ, 1945.

Haynes, Renée.

Hilaire Belloc, British Council and the National Book League, 1953.

Kelly, Hugh. "Hilaire Belloc: Catholic Champion: In Commemoration of His Seventieth Birthday," Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review, Vol. 30, No. 117, Mar. 1941.

Kelly, Hugh. "Centenary of Hilaire Belloc," Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review, Vol. 59, No. 236, Winter, 1970.

Kilmer, Joyce.

"The Poetry of Hilaire Belloc," Prose Works, Vol. 2, George H. Doran Company, 1918.

Leo, Brother.

"Hilaire Belloc, Initiator," The Catholic World, Vol. CXII, March 1921.

Longaker, Mark.

"Bias and Brilliance: Mr. Hilaire Belloc," Contemporary Biography, University of Pennsylvania Press, 1934.

Lowndes, Marie Belloc.

The Young Hilaire Belloc, Some Records of Youth and Middle Age, P. J. Kennedy & Sons, 1956.

McCarthy, John P. "Hilaire Belloc and the French Revolution," Modern Age, Spring 1993.

MacManus, Francis. "Mr. Belloc's England," The Irish Monthly, Vol. 64, No. 757, Jul. 1936.

Mandell, C. Creighton and Shanks, Edward.

Hilaire Belloc, the Man and his Work, Methuen & Co., 1916.

Maynard, Theodore.

"The Chesterbelloc," Part II , Part III , Part IV , The Catholic World, Vol. CX, October 1919/March 1920.

McCarthy, John P.

Hilaire Belloc: Edwardian Radical, Liberty Press, 1978.

Morton, J. B.

Hilaire Belloc: A Memoir, Hollis & Carter, 1955.

Pearce, Joseph.

Old Thunder: A Life of Hilaire Belloc, HarperCollins, 2002.

Rich, Tim. "On a Monkey's Birthday: Belloc and Sussex." In Common Ground: Around Britain in Thirty Writers, Cyan Books, 2006 ISBN 1-904879-93-4 .

Rope, H. E. G. "My Memory of Hilaire Belloc," The Irish Monthly, Vol. 81, No. 962, Oct. 1953.

Schall, James V.

"Belloc's Infamous Phrase," The Catholic Thing , 18 October 2011.

Semper, I. J.

A Study of Four Outstanding Books of Christian Apologetics, Columbia College Library, 1928.

Sherbo, Arthur. "Belated Justice to Hilaire Belloc, Versifier (1870–1953)," Studies in Bibliography, Vol. 45, 1992.

Shuster, George Nauman.

"The Adventures of a Historian: Hilaire Belloc." In The Catholic Spirit in Modern English Literature, The Macmillan Company, 1922.

Speaight, Robert.

The Life of Hilaire Belloc , Farrar, Straus & Cudahy, 1957.

Stove, R. J.

"Why Belloc Still Matters," The American Conservative, 13 January 2003.

Wilhelmsen, Frederick.

Hilaire Belloc: No Alienated Man. A Study in Christian Integration, Sheed and Ward, 1953.

Wilhelmsen, Frederick. "The World of Hilaire Belloc," Modern Age, Spring 1979.

Wilhelmsen, Frederick. "Hilaire Belloc: Old Thunder," Modern Age, Fall 1984.

Wilhelmsen, Frederick. "Hilaire Belloc: Defender of the Faith," The Catholic Writer: The Proceedings of the Wethersfield Institute, Vol. II, 1989 [Rep. by CERC: Catholic Education Resource Center .

Wilson, A. N.

Hilaire Belloc, Atheneum, 1984 [Rep. by Gibson Square Books, 2003].

Woodruff, Douglas, ed., For Hilaire Belloc, Sheed & Ward, 1942 [with contributions by Douglas Jerrold , Ronald Knox , Arnold Lunn , C. A. J. Armstrong , Christopher Hollis , Gervase Matthew, David Mathew , J. B. Morton , W. A. Pantin, David Jones ].

External links [ edit ] Hilaire Belloc at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by Hilaire Belloc in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Hilaire Belloc at Project Gutenberg Works by Hilaire Belloc at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about Hilaire Belloc at the Internet Archive Works by Hilaire Belloc at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Hilaire Belloc at Hathi Trust Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Hilaire Belloc Catholic Authors: Hilaire Belloc Quotidiana: Hilaire Belloc Hilaire Belloc, The rise of the capitalist state (1912) Hilaire Belloc Papers at Boston College Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by James Grimble Groves Member of Parliament for Salford South 1906 – 1910 Succeeded by Anderson Montague-Barlow v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organisations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hilaire_Belloc&oldid=1305014310 " Categories : 1870 births 1953 deaths 19th-century English poets 19th-century French essayists 19th-century French male writers 19th-century French poets 19th-century Roman Catholics 20th-century English male writers 20th-century English poets 20th-century French essayists 20th-century Roman Catholics Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford Belloc family British anti-capitalists British anti-communists British humorous poets Burials in West Sussex British children's poets French children's poets Christian radicals Christian humanists Contributors to the Catholic Encyclopedia Critics of Buddhism Critics of Freemasonry Deaths from fire Distributism English Catholic poets English male essayists English male poets English people of French descent English Roman Catholic writers English travel writers English World War I poets French anti-capitalists French anti-communists French male essayists French male writers French people of English descent French Roman Catholic writers Historians of the French Revolution Liberal Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for Salford South Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Parkes family Pan-Europeanism People educated at The Oratory School People from Slindon People from Yvelines Presidents of the Oxford Union Priestley family UK MPs 1906–1910 UK MPs 1910 Writers from Birmingham, West Midlands Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template warnings All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2024 Use dmy dates from December 2024 Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2025 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hilaire Belloc 32 languages Add topic

