Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Flora 3 Fauna 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Egypt 6 languages العربية فارسی हिन्दी עברית مصرى ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biodiversity of Egypt ) Vegetation beside the Nile near Aswan The wildlife of Egypt is composed of the flora and fauna of this country in North Africa and West Asia , and is substantial and varied. Apart from the fertile Nile Valley , which bisects the country from south to north, the majority of Egypt's landscape is desert, with a few scattered oases . It has long coastlines on the Mediterranean Sea , the Gulf of Suez , the Gulf of Aqaba and the Red Sea . Each geographic region has a diversity of plants and animals each adapted to its own particular habitat.

Geography [ edit ] Topographical map of Egypt Egypt is bordered by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, Libya to the west and Sudan to the south. To the east lies the Red Sea , and the Sinai Peninsula , the Asian part of the country, which is bordered by the Gaza Strip and Israel . Egypt is a transcontinental nation , providing a land bridge between Africa and Asia. This is traversed by the Suez Canal which connects the Mediterranean Sea with the Indian Ocean by way of the Red Sea.

[ 1 ] This results in the flora and fauna having influences from both Africa and Asia, and the marine life from both the Atlantic / Mediterranean Sea and the Red Sea / Indian Ocean.

The River Nile enters Egypt as it flows through Lake Nasser , formed by the building of the Aswan Dam . In its lower reaches, the river is about 0.75 km (0.5 mi) wide and the alluvial plain about 10 km (6 mi) wide.

[ 2 ] The annual flooding of the Nile no longer occurs and the fertility of the Nile Valley is now maintained by irrigation rather than the deposition of silt. Much of the Nile is bordered by flat land but in some places there are low cliffs. Where the river flows into the Mediterranean, there is an extensive fan-shaped delta area with channels, lakes and salt marshes .

[ 1 ] Desert in Sinai To the west of the Nile lies the Western Desert , occupying about two-thirds of the area of the country. It consists largely of high stony and sandy plains with rocky plateaux in places. In the extreme southwest of the country on the border with Libya and Sudan, is Jebel Uweinat , a mountainous region and in the northwest lies the Qattara Depression , a large area of land some 133 m (436 ft) below sea level . Another depression, the Faiyum Oasis lies south west of Cairo and is connected to the Nile by a channel. To the east of the Nile lies the much smaller Eastern Desert , a high mountain ridge running parallel with the Red Sea, seamed with wadis on either flank. At the border with Sudan this rises to the rocky massif of Gebel Elba . The Sinai Peninsula is a mountainous area, deeply cleft by canyon-like wadis that flow towards the Gulf of Aqaba, the Gulf of Suez and the Mediterranean Sea.

[ 2 ] In general, Egypt is a very dry country. The Western Desert receives only occasional rainfall, the winters being mild and the summers very hot. The Eastern Desert receives some precipitation in the south in the form of orographic rainfall from winds that have crossed the Red Sea; this may cause torrential flows in the wadis. The winters here are mild and the summers hot, and Gebel Elba is cooler and wetter than other parts. The northern areas of the country, particularly close to the coast, receive some precipitation from Mediterranean weather systems.

[ 2 ] Flora [ edit ] Zygophyllum album , a desert plant Date palm The Nile is the lifeline of Egypt, the land bordering the river being rendered fertile by the irrigation it receives. Crops grown in the Nile Valley include cotton , cereals , sugarcane , beans , oil seed crops and peanuts .

[ 3 ] Date palms grow here as well as sycamore , carob and Acacia . Fruit trees are planted here and eucalyptus has been introduced. The rich delta soil is used for the cultivation of grapes, vegetables and flowers. The papyrus reeds that used to line the river are now restricted to the far south of the country, as are the crocodiles and hippopotamuses that also used to be plentiful.

[ 4 ] Large parts of the Western Desert are completely devoid of vegetation. The plants that do grow are adapted to the arid conditions and tend to be small and wiry, have small, leathery leaves, long shallow roots to exploit any available water, prickles or thorns to deter herbivores, and sometimes thick stems or leaves to store water. They include acacia trees, palms, succulents, spiny shrubs, and grasses. Some plants adopt an ephemeral life style, sprouting or springing into life when rain falls, rapidly reaching the flowering stage and producing long-lived durable seed.

[ 5 ] In depressions in the Western Desert, some plant communities are dominated by Zygophyllum album , Nitraria retusa and Tamarix nilotica . In the Siwa Oasis there are small lakes, reedbeds dominated by Phragmites australis and Typha domingensis , and saltmarshes with Arthrocnemum macrostachyum , Juncus rigidus , Alhagi maurorum , Cladium mariscus and Cressa cretica .

[ 6 ] In the mountains of the Eastern Desert grows the tree Balanites aegyptiaca , the open patchy woodland being remnants of forests that used to cover this region. In the Gulf of Suez coastal area the rainfall is supplemented by condensation from clouds. Water may ooze from cracks, flow down runnels and collect in potholes. Here mosses, ferns and various vascular plants grow, and Ficus pseudosycamorus and stunted date palms grow from cracks.

[ 7 ] The flora of the Sinai Peninsula mountains is very varied and is largely of Irano-Turanian origin. Here soil and plant litter accumulates in crevices and depressions in the rock and provides anchorage for roots. The most common plant is Artemisia inculta , and rocky slopes support shrubs, semi-shrubs and trees.

[ 8 ] Fauna [ edit ] The endemic pallid gerbil Dorcas gazelle The endangered Egyptian vulture At one time Egypt had a cooler, wetter climate than it has today; ancient tomb paintings show giraffes , hippopotamuses , crocodiles and ostriches , [ 9 ] and the petroglyphs at Silwa Bahari on the upper Nile, between Luxor and Aswan , show African bush elephants , white rhinoceroses , gerenuk and more ostriches, a fauna akin to that of present-day East Africa.

[ 10 ] Nor does the country have many endemic species, these being limited to the Egyptian weasel , pallid gerbil , Mackilligin's gerbil (this may possibly extend into the Sudan), Flower's shrew , Nile Delta toad , and two butterflies, the Sinai baton blue and Satyrium jebelia .

[ 10 ] Mammals of the Western Desert have been depleted over the years and the addax and scimitar oryx are no longer found there, and the Atlas lion has probably gone as well. The remaining mammals include the rhim gazelle , dorcas gazelle , Barbary sheep , Rüppell's fox , lesser Egyptian jerboa and Giza gerbil . Notable birds from this desert include the spotted sandgrouse , greater hoopoe-lark and white-crowned wheatear .

[ 10 ] The Eastern Desert has a quite different range of fauna and has much in common with the Sinai Peninsula, showing the importance of the broad Nile in separating the two desert regions. Here are found the striped hyena , Nubian ibex , bushy-tailed jird , golden spiny mouse , Blanford's fox and Rüppell's fox . The sand partridge , streaked scrub warbler , mourning wheatear and white-crowned wheatear are typical of this region. The high rocky mountains of Gebel Elba in the south have a distinctive range of animals including the aardwolf , striped polecat , and common genet , and there may still be African wild ass in this area.

[ 10 ] Birds are abundant in Egypt, especially in the Nile Valley and the Delta region. Birds of prey include vultures , eagles , hawks , falcons and owls . Other large birds include storks , flamingoes , herons , egrets , pelicans , quail , sunbirds and golden orioles .

[ 4 ] About four hundred and eighty species of bird have been recorded, the globally endangered ones being the red-breasted goose , white-headed duck , Balearic shearwater , Egyptian vulture , Rüppell's vulture , sociable lapwing , slender-billed curlew , saker falcon and yellow-breasted bunting .

[ 11 ] Egypt is on a major bird migratory route between Eurasia and East Africa and around two hundred species of migrants pass through twice a year.

[ 9 ] About thirty species of snake occur in Egypt, about half of them venomous . These include the Egyptian cobra , false smooth snake and horned viper . There are also numerous species of lizards.

[ 9 ] Above the Aswan Dam , the shores of Lake Nasser are largely barren, but the lake does support the last remaining Nile crocodiles and African softshell turtle in Egypt.

[ 10 ] Over one hundred species of fish live in the Nile and the Delta region.

[ 4 ] Egypt also has a large aquaculture industry producing tilapia in semi-intensive pond systems.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Philip's (1994).

Atlas of the World . Reed International. pp.

86– 87.

ISBN 0-540-05831-9 .

^ a b c Zahran, M.A.; Willis, A.J. (2013).

The Vegetation of Egypt . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

7– 8.

ISBN 978-94-015-8066-3 .

^ El-Nahrawy, Mohamed A.

"Egypt" .

Country Pasture/Forage Resource Profile . FAO. Archived from the original on 19 July 2012 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ a b c Zuehlke, Jeffrey (2002).

Egypt in Pictures . Twenty-First Century Books. pp.

13– 14.

ISBN 978-0-8225-0367-5 .

^ "Desert plants and animals" . Defenders of Wildlife . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ Zahran, M.A.; Willis, A.J. (2013).

The Vegetation of Egypt . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

69– 71.

ISBN 978-94-015-8066-3 .

^ Zahran, M.A.; Willis, A.J. (2013).

The Vegetation of Egypt . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 174.

ISBN 978-94-015-8066-3 .

^ Zahran, M.A.; Willis, A.J. (2013).

The Vegetation of Egypt . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 293.

ISBN 978-94-015-8066-3 .

^ a b c Pateman, Robert; El-Hamamsy, Salwa (2003).

Egypt . Marshall Cavendish. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0-7614-1670-8 .

^ a b c d e Hoath, Richard (2009).

A Field Guide to the Mammals of Egypt . American Univ in Cairo Press. pp.

1– 3.

ISBN 978-977-416-254-1 .

^ "Avibase – Bird Checklists of the World (Egypt)" . Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 24 May 2007 .

^ Macfadyen, G.; Nasr-Allah, A.M.; Dickson, M.

The market for Egyptian farmed fish . WorldFish. p. 1. GGKEY:YFQSNDDE2WB.

v t e Wildlife of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Egypt topics History Chronology Prehistoric Ancient topics Achaemenid 27th Dynasty 31st Dynasty Ptolemaic Battle of Actium Lighthouse of Alexandria Roman Diocese of Egypt Library of Alexandria Christian Sassanid Muslim Rashidun Caliphate Fustat Islamization Tulunid dynasty Ikhshidid dynasty Fatimid Caliphate Crusader invasions Ayyubid dynasty Mamluk Sultanate Mamluk Ottoman Ottoman Egypt Khedivate and Kingdom of Egypt Muhammad Ali dynasty Nahda Khedivate Egyptian–Ethiopian War Urabi revolt Modern French occupation Revolt of Cairo British occupation 1919 revolution Sultanate World War II Kingdom 1948 Arab–Israeli War Republic Nasser era 1952 Egyptian revolution Land reform Suez Crisis United Arab Republic Six-Day War Sadat era Yom Kippur War Egyptian–Libyan War Assassination of Anwar Sadat Mubarak era 2010s Crisis 2011 Egyptian revolution 2013 Rabaa massacre By topic Anarchism Capital Cigarette industry Constitution Copts Genetic Healthcare Jews Muslim Brotherhood 1928–1938 1939–1954 1954–present Parliament Population Postal Saladin Timekeeping devices By city Alexandria Cairo Port Said Geography Biota Borders Cities Climate Deserts Earthquakes Environmental issues Fossils Geology Halfaya Pass Islands Lakes Mountains Mount Sinai Nile Delta Northern coast Oases Qattara Depression Red Sea Riviera Rivers Nile Sinai Peninsula Suez Canal Towns and villages Wadis Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Governorates Civil Code Corruption Conscription Constitution Elections Foreign relations Missions Islamic extremism Judiciary Law enforcement Massacres Military Supreme Council Nationality law Parliament Passport Political parties President list Prime Minister list Proposed new capital Refugees of the Syrian civil war Terrorism Terrorism and tourism Twin towns and sister cities Economy Agriculture Banking National Bank Companies Economic regions Egyptian stock exchange Egyptian pound Energy Entrepreneurship policies Fishing Impact on the environment Lighthouses Military industry Mining Mines Nuclear program Power stations Aswan Dam Role of the Egyptian Armed Forces Tallest buildings Telecommunications Internet Tourism Cultural tourism Transport Airlines Airports Railway stations Water supply and sanitation Water resources management Society General Abortion Animal welfare Billionaires Cannabis Capital punishment Censuses Corruption Crime Human trafficking Mass sexual assault Rape Demographics Diaspora Education Academic grading Law schools Medical schools Schools Universities Families Abaza family Feminism Gender inequality Health Healthcare Hospitals Housing Human rights Freedom of religion LGBT rights International rankings Languages Egyptian Arabic Saʽidi Arabic Sign Language Liberalism Literature Prostitution Religion Baháʼí Blasphemy law Christianity Catholic dioceses Coptic Churches Hinduism Identification card controversy Irreligion Islam Ahmadiyya Mosques Niqāb Judaism Synagogues Scientology Smoking Units of measurement Vehicle registration plates Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art (ancient) Art (contemporary) Botanical gardens Castles Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Beer Wine Films Flag list regions Football Football clubs Football stadiums Egyptians Mass media Magazines Newspapers Radio TV Museums Music National anthem Olympics Public holidays World Heritage Sites Category Portal WikiProject Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Egypt&oldid=1304254653 " Categories : Biota of Egypt Wildlife by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 23:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Egypt 6 languages Add topic

