Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Types of cognitive processes Toggle Types of cognitive processes subsection 2.1 Perception and attention 2.2 Memory and learning 2.3 Thinking 2.4 Language 2.5 Others 3 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 3.1 Classical computationalism 3.2 Connectionism 3.3 Representationalism and anti-representationalism 3.4 Others 4 Development 5 Early studies Toggle Early studies subsection 5.1 Early theorists 6 Psychology Toggle Psychology subsection 6.1 Common types of tests on human cognition 6.1.1 Serial position 6.1.2 Word superiority 6.1.3 Brown–Peterson 6.1.4 Memory span 6.1.5 Visual search 6.1.6 Knowledge representation 7 Metacognition 8 Improving cognition Toggle Improving cognition subsection 8.1 Physical exercise 8.2 Dietary supplements 8.3 Pleasurable social stimulation 8.4 Other methods 9 Non-human Toggle Non-human subsection 9.1 Animal 9.2 Artificial 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Notes 11.2 Citations 11.3 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Cognition 80 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски ဘာသာမန် Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cognitive process ) Act or process of knowing This article is about the mental process. For the journal, see Cognition (journal) . For the company, see Cognition AI .

"Human cognition" redirects here; not to be confused with Animal cognition .

"Cognitive" redirects here. For other uses, see Cognitive (disambiguation) .

A cognitive model , as illustrated by Robert Fludd (1619) [ 1 ] Cognition refers to the broad set of mental processes that relate to acquiring knowledge and understanding through thought, experience, and the senses.

[ 2 ] It encompasses all aspects of intellectual functions and processes such as: perception , attention , thought , imagination , intelligence , the formation of knowledge , memory and working memory , judgment and evaluation , reasoning and computation , problem-solving and decision-making , comprehension and production of language . Cognitive processes use existing knowledge to discover new knowledge.

Cognitive processes are analyzed from very different perspectives within different contexts, notably in the fields of linguistics , musicology , anesthesia , neuroscience , psychiatry , psychology , education , philosophy , anthropology , biology , systemics , logic , and computer science .

[ 3 ] These and other approaches to the analysis of cognition (such as embodied cognition ) are synthesized in the developing field of cognitive science , a progressively autonomous academic discipline .

Definition [ edit ] Cognitions are mental processes that deal with knowledge , involving the acquisition, transformation, storage, retrieval, and use of information .

[ 4 ] For example, these processes occur when reading an article, as sensory information about the text is acquired and preexisting linguistic knowledge is retrieved to interpret the meaning. This information is then transformed as different ideas are linked, resulting in the storage of information as memories and beliefs are formed.

[ 5 ] Cognitions are a pervasive part of mental life, and many cognitive processes happen simultaneously. They are essential for understanding and interacting with the world by making individuals aware of their environment and helping them plan and execute appropriate responses.

[ 6 ] Thought is a paradigmatic form of cognition. It considers ideas , analyzes information, draws inferences , solves problems , and forms beliefs. However, cognition is not limited to abstract reasoning and encompasses diverse psychological processes, including perception , attention , memory , language , and decision-making .

[ 7 ] It is debated whether or under what conditions feelings , emotions , and other affects qualify as cognitions.

[ 8 ] Some controversial views associated with cognitivism argue that all mental phenomena are cognitions.

[ 9 ] Cognitive activities can happen consciously, like when a person deliberately analyzes a problem step by step. They can also take place unconsciously, such as automatic mechanisms responsible for language processing and facial recognition .

[ 10 ] Rationalists typically emphasize the role of basic principles and inferences in the generation of knowledge.

Empiricists , by contrast, highlight sensory processes as the ultimate source of all knowledge of the world, arguing that all cognitive processes deal with sensory input.

[ 11 ] Many fields of inquiry study cognition, including psychology , cognitive science , neurology , and philosophy . While research focuses primarily on the human mind, cognition is not limited to humans and encompasses animal and artificial cognition.

[ 12 ] The term cognition originates from the Indo-European root gnō- , meaning ' to know ' . This root is present in the Latin term gnōscere , also meaning ' to know ' , which led to the formation of the verb cognōscere , meaning ' to learn, to investigate ' . Through its past participle cognitus , the Latin verb entered Middle English as cognicioun . The earliest documented use occurred in 1447, eventually evolving into the modern English word cognition .

[ 13 ] Types of cognitive processes [ edit ] Cognitive processes encompass various types, each managing different information and performing distinct functions within the human mind. They are sometimes divided into basic processes, like perception and memory , and higher-order processes, like thinking . This distinction is based on the idea that higher-order processes rely on basic processes and could not occur without them.

[ 14 ] Perception and attention [ edit ] Main articles: Perception and Attention Perception is the organization and interpretation of sensory information about the world. It is a complex mental activity that involves the interplay of diverse cognitive processes, many of which occur automatically and unconsciously. It starts with physical stimuli , such as light or sound, which are detected by receptors and transmitted to the brain as electrical signals. These signals are processed in various brain regions to construct a coherent experience of distinct objects and events while situating them in a spatial-temporal framework .

[ 15 ] Certain cognitive processes are responsible for detecting basic features in the sensory data, such as edges, colors, and pitches , while others process spatial location.

Object recognition is another function that compares this information with stored representations in search of known patterns, such as recognizing a familiar landmark or identifying a specific melody. Some cognitive faculties are specialized for tasks only relevant to particular perceptual contents, such as face recognition and language processing.

[ 16 ] Cognitive processes responsible for perception rely on various heuristics to simplify problems and reduce cognitive labor. For example, visual perception often assumes that the size, shape, and color of objects remain constant to ensure a consistent view despite changes in perspective or lighting. Heuristics sometimes lead to inaccurate or illusory perceptions .

[ 17 ] Different forms of perception are associated with distinct types of stimuli and receptors.

Visual perception , based on the detection of light, is a primary source of knowledge about the external environment. Other forms of perception include hearing , touch , smell , and taste . Data from these different modalities is integrated by higher-order cognitive processes to form a unified and coherent experience of the world.

[ 18 ] Although sensory data is a central factor of perceptual experience, it is not the only factor, and various other forms of information influence the underlying cognitive operations. For instance, memories from earlier experiences determine which objects are experienced as familiar. Other factors include the expectations, goals, background knowledge, and belief system of the individual.

[ 19 ] Attention is a central aspect of mental processes that focuses cognitive resources on certain stimuli or features. It involves the selection or prioritization of specific aspects while filtering out irrelevant information. For example, attention is responsible for the cocktail party effect , in which the brain concentrates on a single conversation while relegating the surrounding party noise to the background. The selection process is crucial since the total amount of information is typically too vast for the brain to process all at once. It ensures that the most important features are prioritized. Attention is not limited to perception but is also present in other cognitive processes, such as remembering and thinking.

[ 20 ] Memory and learning [ edit ] Main articles: Memory and Learning Memory is the ability to retain, store, and retrieve information. It includes the capacity to consciously recall past experiences and is central to many other cognitive activities that rely on stored data to process information and coordinate behavior. Memory processes have three stages: an input phase where new information is acquired, a storage phase preserving the information for future access, and an output phase retrieving the information and making it available to other cognitive operations. Different types of memory are distinguished by the function they perform and the type of information they operate on.

[ 21 ] Working memory stores information temporarily, making it available to other cognitive processes while allowing manipulation of the stored information. During mental arithmetic , for example, the working memory holds and updates intermediate results while calculations are performed.

[ 22 ] The term is sometimes used interchangeably with the term short-term memory , which is defined by brief retention without the emphasis on dynamic manipulation.

Long-term memory , by contrast, retains information for long periods, in some cases indefinitely. During storage, the information is not actively considered. However, it remains available for retrieval, like when recalling a childhood memory.

[ 23 ] Passive exposure to information is usually not sufficient for the effective formation and retrieval of long-term memories. Relevant factors include the level and type of engagement with the content, like attention, emotion, mood, and the context in which the information is processed.

[ 24 ] Long-term memory is typically divided into episodic , semantic , and procedural memory based on the type of information involved.

[ 25 ] Episodic memory deals with information about past personal experiences and events. New memories are stored as a person undergoes experiences and can be accessed later, either by accessing factual information about the events or by reliving them. For example, remembering one's last holiday trip involves episodic memory.

[ 26 ] Semantic memory deals with general knowledge about facts and concepts not linked to specific experiences. For instance, the information that water freezes at 0 °C is stored in semantic memory.

[ 27 ] Procedural memory handles practical knowledge of how to do things. It encompasses learned skills that can be executed, like the abilities to ride a bicycle and type on a keyboard.

[ 28 ] As a form of know-how, procedural memory is distinct from the capacity to verbally describe the exact procedure involved in the execution, like explaining how to maintain balance on a bicycle.

[ 29 ] For this reason, procedural memory is categorized as non-declarative or implicit memory , which operates automatically and cannot be consciously accessed.

[ 30 ] Episodic and semantic memory, by contrast, belong to declarative or explicit memory , which encompasses information that can be consciously recalled and described.

[ 31 ] The different forms of memory play a central role in learning, which involves the acquisition of novel information, skills, or habits, as well as changes to existing structures. Learning occurs through experience and enables individuals to adapt to their environment. It happens either intentionally , such as studying or practicing, or unintentionally as an unconscious side effect while engaging in other tasks. A central aspect of effective learning is the formation of memory connections, which link different pieces of information and facilitate their retrieval.

[ 32 ] Thinking [ edit ] Main article: Thought Thinking is a mental activity in which concepts , ideas, and mental representations are considered and manipulated. Many cognitive processes fall into this category, including reasoning , concept formation , problem solving , and decision-making .

[ 33 ] Logical reasoning deals with information in the form of statements by inferring a conclusion from a set of premises . It proceeds in a rigorous and norm-governed manner to ensure that the conclusion is rationally convincing and supported by the premises.

[ 34 ] Logical reasoning encompasses deductive and non-deductive reasoning. Deductive reasoning follows strict rules of inference , providing the strongest support: the conclusion of a deductive inference cannot be false if all the premises are true. An example is the inference from the premises "all men are mortal" and "Socrates is a man" to the conclusion "Socrates is mortal". Non-deductive reasoning makes a conclusion rationally convincing but does not guarantee its truth. For instance, inductive reasoning infers a general law from many individual observations, like concluding that all ravens are black based on observations of numerous black ravens.

Abductive reasoning , another type of non-deductive reasoning, seeks the best explanation of a phenomenon. For example, a doctor uses abductive reasoning when they infer that a child has chickenpox as an explanation of the child's skin rash and fever .

[ 35 ] Problem-solving is a goal-directed activity that aims to overcome obstacles and arrive at a pre-defined objective. This happens, for instance, when determining the best route for an upcoming trip. Problem-solving starts with comprehending the problem, which typically involves an understanding of the initial state, the goal state, and the obstacles or constraints that hinder progress. Some problems are well-structured and have precise solution paths. For ill-structured problems, by contrast, it is not possible to determine which exact steps are successful. To find solutions, creativity in the form of divergent thinking generates many possible approaches.

Convergent thinking evaluates the different options and eliminates unfeasible ones. Thought often relies on heuristics or general rules to find and compare possible solutions. Common heuristics are to divide a problem into several simpler subproblems and to adapt strategies that were successful for similar problems encountered earlier.

[ 36 ] Closely related to problem-solving, decision-making is the cognitive process of choosing between courses of action . To determine the best alternative, it weighs the different options by assessing their advantages and disadvantages, for example, by considering their positive and negative consequences. According to expected utility theory , a decision is rational if it selects the option with the highest expected utility, which is determined by the probability and the value of each consequence. To assess the probability of an outcome, people use various heuristics in everyday situations, such as the representativeness heuristic , the availability heuristic , and anchoring .

[ 37 ] Different forms of thinking rely on concepts, which are general ideas or mental representations to sort objects into classes, like the concepts animal and table . Concept formation is the process of acquiring a new concept by learning to identify its instances and grasping its relation to other concepts. This process helps individuals organize information and make sense of the world. Psychologists distinguish between logical and natural concepts. Logical concepts have precise definitions and rules of application, like the concept triangle . Natural concepts, by contrast, are based on resemblance but lack exact definitions or clear-cut boundaries, like the concept table .

[ 38 ] Language [ edit ] Main article: Language A language is a structured communication system based on symbols and rules to share information and coordinate action, such as English , Spanish , and Japanese . Language plays a central role in everyday life, and some theorists argue that language affects numerous cognitive processes to some extent. For example, the Whorfian hypothesis and the thesis of linguistic relativity propose that language influences thought patterns and that speakers of distinct languages think differently.

[ a ] Many cognitive processes are involved in the acquisition , comprehension , and production of linguistic expressions.

[ 40 ] Language acquisition happens naturally in childhood through exposure to a linguistic environment. It is a complex process since the system of spoken language is made up of several layers.

[ 41 ] At the fundamental level are basic sounds or sound units . They do not have linguistic meaning themselves but are combined into words , which refer to diverse things and ideas.

[ b ] Words are combined into sentences by following the rules of grammar . This system makes it possible to form and comprehend an infinite number of sentences based on a finite knowledge of a limited number of words and rules. The exact meaning of sentences usually depends also on the context in which they are used.

[ 43 ] Although distinct languages can differ significantly in their general structure, there are some universal cognitive patterns that underlie all human languages.

[ 44 ] Language comprehension is the process of understanding spoken , written , and signed language . It involves the coordination of various cognitive skills to recognize words, consult memory to access their meanings, analyze sentence structures, and use contextual information to interpret their implications. Additional difficulties come from lexical and structural ambiguities , in which a word or a sentence can be associated with multiple meanings. To resolve ambiguities, individuals rely on background knowledge about the overall topic and the speaker to discern the intended meaning. As a result, language comprehension depends not only on bottom-up processes , which start with sensory information, but also on top-down processes, which integrate general knowledge and expectations. For example, expectations cause longer processing times if a familiar word occurs in a context where the reader did not expect it.

[ 45 ] While language comprehension seeks to uncover the meaning of pre-existing linguistic messages, language production involves the inverse process of generating linguistic expressions to convey thoughts. It starts with the formulation of a general idea one wants to express and a rough sentence pattern of how to communicate it. Speakers then cognitively search for words that match the concepts they wish to convey. This activity, known as lexicalization , is divided into two stages: the identification of an abstract semantic representation of the intended concept , followed by the retrieval of the phonological form needed to pronounce the word.

[ c ] As speakers string together words to generate a sentence, they consider the grammatical category of each word, like the contrast between nouns and adjectives , to align with the intended overall sentence structure. Additionally, the context of the conversation and the assumed background knowledge of the audience influence the selection of words and sentence structure.

[ 47 ] Others [ edit ] Cognitive processes can be conscious or unconscious . Conscious processes, such as attentively solving a math problem step by step or recalling a vivid memory, involve active awareness. Unconscious processes, such as low-level processes underlying face recognition and language processing, operate automatically in the background without the individual's awareness. Phenomenal consciousness involves a qualitative experience of mental phenomena, whereas access consciousness is an awareness of information that is available for use but not actively experienced at the moment.

[ 48 ] Various theories of the cognitive function of consciousness have been proposed. They include the idea that consciousness integrates diverse forms of data and makes information globally available to various subsystems. Other theories argue that consciousness improves social interaction by fostering self-awareness in social contexts and that it allows for increased flexibility and control, particularly in novel situations.

[ 49 ] A related distinction is between controlled and automatic processes . Controlled processes are actively guided by the individual's intentions, like when a person deliberately shifts attention from one object of perception to another. These processes are flexible and adaptable to new situations but require a lot of cognitive resources. Automatic processes, by contrast, happen unconsciously, are effortless, and require fewer cognitive resources. By becoming familiar with a task, a cognitive process that was initially controlled can become automatic, thereby freeing up cognitive resources for other tasks. For example, as a novice driver becomes experienced, they can automatically handle the car and adapt to road and traffic conditions while gaining the ability to engage in a conversation at the same time.

[ 50 ] Consciousness is closely related to metacognition , which encompasses any knowledge or cognitive process that deals with information about cognition. Some forms of metacognition only manage or store information about other aspects of cognition, like knowing that one can recall a specific memory . Others play an active role in monitoring and regulating ongoing processes, like changing a problem-solving strategy upon realizing that the previous one was ineffective. Metacognitive skills tend to improve the performance of other cognitive skills, particularly when dealing with complex tasks.

[ 51 ] Social cognitions are mental activities through which individuals make sense of social phenomena. They include diverse types, such as the recognition of faces and facial expressions, the interpretation of intentions and behavior, and the evaluation of social cues and dynamics. A central topic in this field is theory of mind —the ability to understand others as mental beings with emotions, desires, and beliefs different from one's own. This ability allows individuals to think about and respond to the mental states of others.

[ 52 ] Moral cognitions are a type of social cognition that make individuals aware of the moral significance of situations. They occur when people recognize and appreciate altruistic behavior or disapprove of malicious and harmful actions.

[ 53 ] Cognitive psychologists also study the relation between cognition and emotion , for example, how emotions influence mental operations like attention and decision-making.

[ 54 ] Cognitive processes do not always function as they should and can lead to inaccuracies, either because of natural errors or cognitive disorders. Many cognitive operations use heuristics or mental shortcuts, which increase speed and reduce cognitive load but occasionally lead to mistakes. For instance, people typically rely on information that easily comes to mind when assessing a situation while disregarding knowledge that may be more relevant but is more difficult to retrieve.

[ 55 ] Cognitive disorders involve a more pronounced and consistent deviation from typical mental functioning. High-level cognitive abilities usually require the interaction of many low-level processes. Impairments affecting a specific subprocess often result in a partial malfunction of the high-level process while leaving the other functions of the high-level process intact.

[ 56 ] For example, prosopagnosia is a perceptual disorder in which individuals lack the ability to recognize faces without impacting other visual abilities.

[ 57 ] Similarly, anterograde amnesia is an impaired ability to form and recall new memories but leaves long-term memory intact. Disorders can affect a wide range of mental functions, including thought and language.

[ 58 ] Some disorders involve a general cognitive decline that is not limited to one specific function. For instance, Alzheimer's disease is associated with a global, gradual impairment of memory, reasoning, and language.

[ 59 ] Theories [ edit ] Various theories of the nature of cognition have been proposed. They provide conceptualizations and models to represent cognitive processes, explain empirical data , and predict experimental outcomes. Some theories propose interpretations of the overall cognitive architecture of the mind , seeking to explain cognition as a whole. Others suggest more limited models intended only for specific mental activities, such as theories of visual attention.

[ 60 ] Classical computationalism [ edit ] Computationalism interprets cognition as a form of computation , highlighting the similarities between minds and computers. Classical computationalism understands cognitions as symbol manipulations and asserts that the brain represents information through symbols or strings of symbols. In this view, computations operate on strings to create new strings according to a set of mechanical rules. These rules only depend on the syntactic structure of the strings, meaning that cognitive processes have no understanding of what the symbols represent. For example, a simple calculator transforms the string "3 + 7" into the result "10" according to the mechanical rules of arithmetic without grasping the meaning of these numerals.

[ 61 ] To handle complex data dealing with many entities and their interrelations, theorists often introduce more sophisticated symbol-based devices of knowledge representation , such as semantic nets , schemata , and frames .

[ 62 ] According to classical computationalism, any cognitive activity is at its fundamental level a formal symbol manipulation, including perception, reasoning, planning, and language processing. This perspective helps researchers analyze and distinguish cognitive processes by examining the types of representations involved and the mechanical rules followed.

[ 63 ] The tri-level hypothesis divides this study into three levels of abstraction. The highest level analyzes the goal or purpose of a process, identifying the information it receives, the problem it aims to solve, and the result it produces. The intermediary level involves the decomposition of the process into individual steps, analyzing how the computation is performed or which algorithm is used. The most concrete level explores how the algorithm is implemented on a material level through neurological systems.

[ 64 ] Classical computationalism is closely related to the information-processing approach , which assumes that most cognitive activities are complex processes arising from the interaction of several subprocesses. Each process is characterized by the function it performs, which is connected to the input information it obtains, how it transforms this information, and the output it generates. Interaction happens when the output of one subprocess acts as the input for another. This approach is associated with serial models in which complex computations are divided into sequences of calculations where intermediary results are computed and transmitted until a final output is produced. It typically divides the mind into a small number of high-level systems responsible for different tasks, such as perception, memory, and reasoning. Information-processing models often rely on a hierarchical cognitive architecture where a central system integrates information from other units and formulates overall goals.

[ 65 ] The language of thought hypothesis is a version of classical computationalism arguing that thought happens through the medium of an internal linguistic system similar to natural languages, termed mentalese . It suggests that mental states like beliefs and desires are realized through mentalese sentences and that cognitive operations transform these sentences according to specific rules.

[ 66 ] Some symbol-based approaches use formal logic as a model of cognition. According to this view, representations have the form of statements , similar to declarative sentences. Computational processes are conceptualized as rules of inference , which take one or more sentences as input and produce a new sentence as output. For example, modus ponens is a rule of inference that, when applied to the premises "if it rains, then the ground is wet" and "it rains", results in the conclusion "the ground is wet".

[ 67 ] Certain rule-based approaches interpret cognition as the application of if-then rules to generate new representations. According to this outlook, a cognitive system is made up of many rules, each defined by one or more conditions together with an output procedure. If information stored in the working memory satisfies all the conditions of a rule then its output procedure is triggered and transfers a new representation to the working memory. This change may, in turn, prompt the execution of another rule, leading to a dynamic sequence of operations that can solve complex computational tasks. The cognitive architecture Soar is an example of this approach.

[ 68 ] Connectionism [ edit ] Main article: Connectionism Classical computationalism is typically contrasted with connectionism. As another form of computationalism, connectionism agrees that cognitions are computations but proposes a different cognitive architecture based on a complex network of nodes . The nodes are locally linked with each other, and the activity of each node depends on the inputs it receives from connected nodes.

[ 69 ] The nodes are typically arranged in layers where information flows in one direction from earlier to later layers. The initial input layer of nodes receives information, such as sensory data, and passes it on to intermediary layers , where the main computation takes place. At the end of the process stands an output layer, which transmits the result to other systems. The behavior of each individual node is usually relatively simple: the node's activation value is determined by its weighted inputs and broadcast to nodes in the subsequent layer. Complex computations emerge as numerous nodes operate in parallel and interact across layers.

[ 70 ] Connectionism is closely related to computational neuroscience , and some researchers directly integrate neurological data about electrochemical activities of neurons into their theories. However, the more common approach is to use abstract, idealized models to avoid complexities introduced by neurophysiological mechanisms. Connectionism also shares various interests with the field of artificial intelligence , and the networks and learning algorithms proposed in one field often have similar applications in the other.

[ 71 ] Connectionists typically reject the serial and hierarchical models common in classical computationalism. Instead, they argue that cognition happens in parallel as countless neurons work simultaneously without a central control system guiding the process.

[ 72 ] Although connectionism is often presented as an alternative to computationalism, the two views do not necessarily exclude each other. For example, implementation connectionists argue that non-symbolic processes at the fundamental neural level implement symbolic processes at a more abstract level. According to this view, the cognitive system functions as a neural network at the fundamental level and as a symbol-processor when viewed from a more abstract perspective. This position contrasts with radical connectionism, which asserts that symbol-based approaches are fundamentally flawed since they misconstrue the nature of cognition.

[ 73 ] Representationalism and anti-representationalism [ edit ] Both classical computationalism and common forms of connectionism [ d ] accept representationalism, which holds that information is stored in representations that depict the state of the world. Representations can take various forms, such as symbols, images, and concepts, as well as subsymbolic patterns used to model higher-level structures. Representationalists examine how cognitive systems encode, manipulate, and decode representations to construct internal models of the environment and predict changes.

[ 75 ] Anti-representationalists reject the idea that cognition is about representing the world through internal models. They assert that intelligence arises from the interaction between an organism and its environment rather than from internal processes alone. For example, approaches in behaviorism and situated robotics suggest an immediate link between perception and action: environmental stimuli are directly processed and translated into behavior following stimulus-response patterns. This outlook suggests that intelligent behavior emerges if an entity has stimulus-response patterns that match the external situation, even if the cognitive system responsible for these patterns has no representations of what the environment is like.

[ 76 ] Anti-representationalism is closely related to 4E cognition , a family of views critical of the prioritization of internal representations. 4E cognition examines the relation between mind, body, and environment, including embodied , embedded , extended , and enactive cognition . Embodied cognition is the idea that cognitive processes are grounded in bodily experience and cannot be understood in isolation from the organism's sensorimotor capacities. Embedded cognition asserts that cognitive effort and efficiency depend on physical and social environments. Extended cognition claims that the environment not only influences cognition but forms part of it, meaning that cognitive processes extend beyond internal neural activity to include external events. Enactive cognition asserts that cognition arises from the active interaction between organism and environment.

[ 77 ] Others [ edit ] The modularity of mind is an approach that analyzes the cognitive system in terms of independent mental modules. Each module is an inborn mechanism that deals only with a specific type of information while being mostly unaware of the activities of other modules. Mental modules are primarily used to explain low-level cognitive processes, such as edge detection in visual perception.

[ 78 ] The massive modularity hypothesis, by contrast, asserts that the mind is entirely composed of modules. According to this view, mental modules are also responsible for high-level cognitive processes by linking and integrating the outputs of low-level cognitive processes.

[ 79 ] Bayesianism applies probability theory to model cognitive processes such as learning, vision, and motor control. Its central idea is that representations of the environment can be more or less reliable and that the laws of probability theory describe how to integrate information and manage uncertainty.

[ 80 ] Bayesianism is sometimes combined with predictive models . According to them, the brain creates and adjusts its internal representation of the environment by predicting what is going to happen, comparing the predictions to reality, and updating the internal representation accordingly.

[ 81 ] Dual process theory relies on the distinction between automatic and controlled processes to analyze cognitive phenomena. It conceptualizes them as two systems and proposes different models of their interaction. According to the default-interventionist model, the automatic system generates impressions while the controlled system monitors them and intervenes if it detects problems. The parallel-competitive model, by contrast, suggests that each system generates its own type of knowledge and that the outputs of the different systems compete with each other.

[ 82 ] Development [ edit ] Main article: Cognitive development Cognitive development is the progressive growth of mental abilities from infancy through adulthood as individuals acquire improved cognitive skills and learn from experience. Some changes occur continuously as gradual improvements over extended periods. Others involve discontinuous transitions in the form of abrupt reorganizations resulting in qualitative changes. They are typically conceptualized as stages through which the individual passes.

[ 83 ] The nature versus nurture debate addresses the causes of cognitive development, contrasting the influences of inborn dispositions with the effects of environment and experience.

Empiricists identify environment and experience as the main factors. This view is inspired by John Locke 's idea that the mind of an infant is a blank slate that initially knows nothing of the world. According to this outlook, children learn through sense data by associating and generalizing impressions.

Nativists , by contrast, argue that the mind has innate knowledge of abstract patterns. They suggest that this inborn framework organizes sensory information and guides learning.

[ 84 ] Various theories of the general mechanisms and stages of cognitive development have been proposed.

Jean Piaget 's theory divides cognitive development into four stages, each marked by an increasing capacity for abstraction and systematic understanding. In the initial sensory-motor stage, from birth to about two years, children explore sensory impressions and motor capacities, learning that things continue to exist when not observed. During the pre-operational stage, up to about age seven, children begin to understand and use symbols intuitively. In the following stages of concrete and formal operation, children first apply logical reasoning to concrete physical objects and then, from around age twelve, also to abstract ideas.

[ 85 ] In contrast to Piaget's approach, Lev Vygotsky 's theory sees social interaction as the primary driver of cognitive development without clearly demarcated stages. It holds that children learn new skills by engaging in tasks under the guidance of knowledgeable others. This view emphasizes the role of language acquisition, suggesting that children internalize language and use it in private speech as a tool for planning, self-regulation, and problem solving.

[ 86 ] Other approaches examine the role of different types of representation in cognitive development. For example, Annette Karmiloff-Smith proposes that cognitive developments involve a shift from implicit to explicit representations, making knowledge more complex and easier to access. A further theory, proposed by Robert S. Siegler , asserts that children use multiple cognitive strategies to solve problems and become more adept at selecting effective strategies as they develop.

[ 87 ] Cognitive development is most rapid during childhood. Some influences occur even before birth, due to factors like nutrition, maternal stress , and harmful substances like alcohol during pregnancy .

[ 88 ] Developments in childhood affect all major cognitive faculties, including perception, memory, thinking, and language. Cognitive changes also happen during adulthood but are less pronounced. In old age , overall cognition declines, affecting reasoning, comprehension, novel problem solving, and memory.

[ 89 ] Early studies [ edit ] Despite the word cognitive itself dating back to the 15th century, [ 90 ] attention to cognitive processes came about more than eighteen centuries earlier, beginning with Aristotle (384–322 BCE) and his interest in the inner workings of the mind and how they affect the human experience. Aristotle focused on cognitive areas pertaining to memory, perception, and mental imagery. He placed great importance on ensuring that his studies were based on empirical evidence, that is, scientific information that is gathered through observation and conscientious experimentation.

[ 91 ] Two millennia later, the groundwork for modern concepts of cognition was laid during the Enlightenment by thinkers such as John Locke and Dugald Stewart who sought to develop a model of the mind in which ideas were acquired, remembered and manipulated.

[ 92 ] During the very early nineteenth century cognitive models were developed both in philosophy —particularly by authors writing about the philosophy of mind —and in medicine , especially by physicians seeking to understand how to cure madness. In Britain , these models were studied in the academy by scholars such as James Sully at University College London , and they were even used by politicians when considering the national Elementary Education Act 1870 ( 33 & 34 Vict.

c. 75).

[ 93 ] As psychology emerged as a burgeoning field of study in Europe , whilst also gaining a following in America , scientists such as Wilhelm Wundt , Herman Ebbinghaus , Mary Whiton Calkins , and William James would offer their contributions to the study of human cognition.

[ citation needed ] Early theorists [ edit ] Wilhelm Wundt (1832–1920) emphasized the notion of what he called introspection : examining the inner feelings of an individual. With introspection, the subject had to be careful with describing their feelings in the most objective manner possible in order for Wundt to find the information scientific.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Though Wundt's contributions are by no means minimal, modern psychologists find his methods to be too subjective and choose to rely on more objective procedures of experimentation to make conclusions about the human cognitive process.

[ 96 ] Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850–1909) conducted cognitive studies that mainly examined the function and capacity of human memory. Ebbinghaus developed his own experiment in which he constructed over 2,000 syllables made out of nonexistent words (for instance, 'EAS'). He then examined his own personal ability to learn these non-words. He purposely chose non-words as opposed to real words to control for the influence of pre-existing experience on what the words might symbolize, thus enabling easier recollection of them.

[ 94 ] [ 97 ] Ebbinghaus observed and hypothesized a number of variables that may have affected his ability to learn and recall the non-words he created. One of the reasons, he concluded, was the amount of time between the presentation of the list of stimuli and the recitation or recall of the same. Ebbinghaus was the first to record and plot a " learning curve " and a " forgetting curve ".

[ 98 ] Mary Whiton Calkins (1863–1930) was an influential American pioneer in the realm of psychology. Her work also focused on human memory capacity. A common theory, called the recency effect , can be attributed to the studies that she conducted.

[ 99 ] The recency effect, also discussed in the subsequent experiment section, is the tendency for individuals to be able to accurately recollect the final items presented in a sequence of stimuli. Calkin's theory is closely related to the aforementioned study and conclusion of the memory experiments conducted by Hermann Ebbinghaus.

[ 100 ] William James (1842–1910) is another pivotal figure in the history of cognitive science. James was quite discontent with Wundt's emphasis on introspection and Ebbinghaus' use of nonsense stimuli. He instead chose to focus on the human learning experience in everyday life and its importance to the study of cognition. James' most significant contribution to the study and theory of cognition was his textbook Principles of Psychology which preliminarily examines aspects of cognition such as perception, memory, reasoning, and attention.

[ 100 ] René Descartes (1596–1650) was a seventeenth-century philosopher who came up with the phrase "Cogito, ergo sum", which means "I think, therefore I am." He took a philosophical approach to the study of cognition and the mind, with his Meditations he wanted people to meditate along with him to come to the same conclusions as he did but in their own free cognition.

[ 101 ] Psychology [ edit ] When the mind makes a generalization such as the concept of tree , it extracts similarities from numerous examples; the simplification enables higher-level thinking (abstract thinking).

See also: Cognitivism (psychology) In psychology , the term "cognition" is usually used in an information processing view of an individual's psychological functions , [ 102 ] and such is the same in cognitive engineering .

[ 103 ] In the study of social cognition , a branch of social psychology , the term is used to explain attitudes , attribution , and group dynamics ; [ 102 ] however, psychological research in the field of cognitive science has also suggested an embodied approach to understanding cognition. Contrary to the traditional computationalist approach, embodied cognition emphasizes the body's significant role in the acquisition and development of cognitive capabilities.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Human cognition is conscious and unconscious , concrete or abstract , as well as intuitive (like knowledge of a language) and conceptual (like a model of a language). It encompasses processes such as memory , association , concept formation , pattern recognition , language , attention , perception , action , problem solving , and mental imagery .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Traditionally, emotion was not thought of as a cognitive process, but now much research is being undertaken to examine the cognitive psychology of emotion; research is also focused on one's awareness of one's own strategies and methods of cognition, which is called metacognition . The concept of cognition has gone through several revisions through the development of disciplines within psychology.

[ citation needed ] Psychologists initially understood cognition governing human action as information processing. This was a movement known as cognitivism in the 1950s, emerging after the Behaviorist movement viewed cognition as a form of behavior.

[ 108 ] Cognitivism approached cognition as a form of computation, viewing the mind as a machine and consciousness as an executive function.

[ 104 ] However; post cognitivism began to emerge in the 1990s as the development of cognitive science presented theories that highlighted the necessity of cognitive action as embodied, extended, and producing dynamic processes in the mind.

[ 109 ] The development of Cognitive psychology arose as psychology from different theories, and so began exploring these dynamics concerning mind and environment, starting a movement from these prior dualist paradigms that prioritized cognition as systematic computation or exclusively behavior.

[ 104 ] Common types of tests on human cognition [ edit ] Serial position [ edit ] The Serial-position effect is meant to test a theory of memory that states that when information is given in a serial manner, we tend to remember information at the beginning of the sequence, called the primacy effect , and information at the end of the sequence, called the recency effect . Consequently, information given in the middle of the sequence is typically forgotten, or not recalled as easily. This study predicts that the recency effect is stronger than the primacy effect, because the information that is most recently learned is still in working memory when asked to be recalled. Information that is learned first still has to go through a retrieval process. This experiment focuses on human memory processes.

[ 110 ] Word superiority [ edit ] The word superiority effect experiment presents a subject with a word, or a letter by itself, for a brief period of time, i.e. 40 ms, and they are then asked to recall the letter that was in a particular location in the word. In theory, the subject should be better able to correctly recall the letter when it was presented in a word than when it was presented in isolation. This experiment focuses on human speech and language.

[ 111 ] Brown–Peterson [ edit ] In the Brown–Peterson cohomology experiment , participants are briefly presented with a trigram and in one particular version of the experiment, they are then given a distractor task, asking them to identify whether a sequence of words is in fact words, or non-words (due to being misspelled, etc.). After the distractor task, they are asked to recall the trigram from before the distractor task. In theory, the longer the distractor task, the harder it will be for participants to correctly recall the trigram. This experiment focuses on human short-term memory .

[ 112 ] Memory span [ edit ] During the memory span experiment , each subject is presented with a sequence of stimuli of the same kind; words depicting objects, numbers, letters that sound similar, and letters that sound dissimilar. After being presented with the stimuli, the subject is asked to recall the sequence of stimuli that they were given in the exact order in which it was given. In one particular version of the experiment, if the subject recalled a list correctly, the list length was increased by one for that type of material, and vice versa if it was recalled incorrectly. The theory is that people have a memory span of about seven items for numbers, the same for letters that sound dissimilar and short words. The memory span is projected to be shorter with letters that sound similar and with longer words.

[ 113 ] Visual search [ edit ] In one version of the visual search experiment , a participant is presented with a window that displays circles and squares scattered across it. The participant is to identify whether there is a green circle on the window. In the featured search, the subject is presented with several trial windows that have blue squares or circles and one green circle or no green circle in it at all. In the conjunctive search, the subject is presented with trial windows that have blue circles or green squares and a present or absent green circle whose presence the participant is asked to identify. What is expected is that in the feature searches, reaction time, that is the time it takes for a participant to identify whether a green circle is present or not, should not change as the number of distractors increases. Conjunctive searches where the target is absent should have a longer reaction time than the conjunctive searches where the target is present. The theory is that in feature searches, it is easy to spot the target, or if it is absent, because of the difference in color between the target and the distractors. In conjunctive searches where the target is absent, reaction time increases because the subject has to look at each shape to determine whether it is the target or not because some of the distractors if not all of them, are the same color as the target stimuli. Conjunctive searches where the target is present take less time because if the target is found, the search between each shape stops.

[ 114 ] Knowledge representation [ edit ] The semantic network of knowledge representation systems have been studied in various paradigms. One of the oldest paradigms is the leveling and sharpening of stories as they are repeated from memory studied by Bartlett . The semantic differential used factor analysis to determine the main meanings of words, finding that the ethical value of words is the first factor. More controlled experiments examine the categorical relationships of words in free recall . The hierarchical structure of words has been explicitly mapped in George Miller 's WordNet . More dynamic models of semantic networks have been created and tested with computational systems such as neural networks , latent semantic analysis (LSA), Bayesian analysis , and multidimensional factor analysis. The meanings of words are studied by all the disciplines of cognitive science .

[ 115 ] Metacognition [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Metacognition .

[ edit ] Metacognition and self directed learning Metacognition is an awareness of one's thought processes and an understanding of the patterns behind them. The term comes from the root word meta , meaning "beyond", or "on top of".

[ 116 ] Metacognition can take many forms, such as reflecting on one's ways of thinking, and knowing when and how oneself and others use particular strategies for problem-solving .

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] There are generally two components of metacognition: (1) cognitive conceptions and (2) a cognitive regulation system.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Research has shown that both components of metacognition play key roles in metaconceptual knowledge and learning.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 119 ] Metamemory , defined as knowing about memory and mnemonic strategies, is an important aspect of metacognition.

[ 122 ] Writings on metacognition date back at least as far as two works by the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BC): On the Soul and the Parva Naturalia .

[ 123 ] Improving cognition [ edit ] Main article: Nootropic Physical exercise [ edit ] Aerobic and anaerobic exercise have been studied concerning cognitive improvement.

[ 124 ] There appear to be short-term increases in attention span, verbal and visual memory in some studies. However, the effects are transient and diminish over time, after cessation of the physical activity.

[ 125 ] People with Parkinson's disease have also seen improved cognition while cycling, while pairing it with other cognitive tasks.

[ 126 ] Exercise, even at light intensity, significantly improves general cognition across all populations, with the largest cognitive gains seen from shorter interventions (1–3 months), light to moderate intensity activity.

[ 127 ] Dietary supplements [ edit ] Studies evaluating phytoestrogen , blueberry supplementation and antioxidants showed minor increases in cognitive function after supplementation but no significant effects compared to placebo .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] Another study on the effects of herbal and dietary supplements on cognition in menopause show that soy and Ginkgo biloba supplementation could improve women's cognition.

[ 131 ] Pleasurable social stimulation [ edit ] Exposing individuals with cognitive impairment (i.e.

dementia ) to daily activities designed to stimulate thinking and memory in a social setting, seems to improve cognition. Although study materials are small, and larger studies need to confirm the results, the effect of social cognitive stimulation seems to be larger than the effects of some drug treatments.

[ 132 ] Other methods [ edit ] Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has been shown to improve cognition in individuals without dementia 1 month after treatment session compared to before treatment. The effect was not significantly larger compared to placebo.

[ 133 ] Computerized cognitive training, utilizing a computer based training regime for different cognitive functions has been examined in a clinical setting but no lasting effects has been shown.

[ 134 ] Non-human [ edit ] Animal [ edit ] Main article: Animal cognition Animal cognition refers to mechanisms through which animals acquire knowledge and transform information to engage in flexible, goal-oriented behavior. Animals use cognitive abilities for many daily tasks, for example, to find and recognize food, navigate territory, seek shelter, hunt prey, avoid predators, interact socially, communicate, learn new habits, and form long-term memories. Researchers examine cognition across diverse species, including mammals , birds , fish , and insects .

[ 135 ] Animal cognition is typically specialized and domain-specific, meaning that a species may excel at particular tasks and contexts while performing poorly in others.

[ 136 ] Researchers examine various areas of animal cognition. They are interested in whether animals can form abstract concepts , expressed in the ability to understand a category and apply it to novel instances. For instance, chimpanzees can learn concepts of different numbers. As a result, they acquire various number-related abilities, like identifying collections containing a specific number of items. Another often-studied capacity is the power to form and remember a spatial map of the environment. This enables animals, such as jays , to navigate efficiently and choose the shortest route to a shelter or a feeding site. Research also addresses imitation , in which an animal copies the behavior of another animal. This facilitates the spread of useful skills, including tool-use .

[ 137 ] Beyond animal cognition, some researchers also examine plant cognition , such as plant communication . For instance, maple trees release airborne chemicals to warn nearby trees of a herbivore attack, helping them prepare defensive responses.

[ 138 ] Comparative cognition is the study of the similarities and differences in cognitive abilities across species. It is an interdisciplinary field of inquiry that also considers evolutionary factors. For example, researchers investigate which cognitive traits are required to solve particular socioecological problems and how these traits evolved in different species. A traditionally dominant approach divides animal cognition into higher and lower psychological processes based on features like flexibility and complexity. However, it is controversial to what extent this contrast captures meaningful functional distinctions, and researchers risk anthropomorphic bias by interpreting animal cognition in terms of human traits.

[ 139 ] Artificial [ edit ] Artificial cognition uses computational systems to emulate and model cognitive processes, like perception and reasoning, with central applications in artificial intelligence and robotics .

[ 140 ] Artificial and human cognition have different strengths and weaknesses. For example, artificial cognition excels at rapidly processing vast datasets according to predefined algorithms . Human cognition, by contrast, is typically better suited to assess emotional significance and to find and evaluate solutions that require novel and creative thinking. These differences affect how the two forms of cognition are integrated with each other. For some applications, artificial cognition is used to assist human cognition. In aviation , for example, it helps monitor diverse metrics, allowing human pilots to focus on decision-making rather than data analysis. However, there are also cases where artificial cognition replaces human cognition, such as autonomous vehicle navigation .

[ 141 ] The field of artificial cognitive systems explores the possibility of autonomous machines with human-like cognition. This encompasses not only artificial intelligence at the level of individual tasks, such as object detection or language translation, but also the integration of diverse cognitive processes. The aim is an embodied system that can autonomously interact with its environment in real time. An artificial cognitive system can navigate its surroundings, set goals, devise means to achieve them, anticipate outcomes, adapt to circumstances, execute action plans, and learn from experience.

[ 142 ] Artificial general intelligence , a closely related concept, refers to hypothetical systems that possess or surpass the full range of human mental abilities. It is controversial whether such a system can be fully realized since it would include not only computational capacities associated with logical reasoning but also emotion and phenomenal consciousness.

[ 143 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Psychology portal Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument Cognitive biology Cognitive computing Cognitive holding power Cognitive liberty Cognitive musicology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Cognitivism Comparative cognition Embodied cognition Cognitive shuffle Information processing technology and aging Mental chronometry – i.e., the measuring of cognitive processing speed Nootropic Outline of human intelligence – a list of traits, capacities, models, and research fields of human intelligence, and more.

Outline of thought – a list that identifies many types of thoughts, types of thinking, aspects of thought, related fields, and more.

Shared intentionality Sex differences in cognition References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ There is no academic consensus on the nature and extent of this influence.

[ 39 ] ^ The smallest linguistic units to carry meaning are morphemes . Some morphemes can function independently as words, while others only occur as modifications, such as prefixes .

[ 42 ] ^ For example, this two-stage model analyzes tip of the tongue phenomena as a success of the first stage and a failure of the second stage, having identified the meaning but being unable to retrieve the phonological form from memory.

[ 46 ] ^ It is debated whether all forms of connectionism involve representations.

[ 74 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Fludd, Robert . "De tripl. animae in corp. vision".

Tract.

I, sect.

I, lib.

X in Utriusque cosmi maioris scilicet et minoris metaphysica, physica atqve technica historia , vol. II.  p.

217 .

^ "Cognition" .

Lexico .

Oxford University Press and Dictionary.com . Archived from the original on July 15, 2020 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

^ Von Eckardt B (1996).

What is cognitive science?

. Princeton, MA: MIT Press. pp.

45– 72.

ISBN 9780262720236 .

^ Revlin 2013 , pp. 2–7 Matlin 2013 , pp. 2–4 Strickland 2001 , pp. 131–132 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 2–4 Revlin 2013 , pp. 2–7 Best 1995 , pp. 4–5 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 2–4 Revlin 2013 , pp. 2–7 Strickland 2001 , pp. 131–132 Best 1995 , pp. 1 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Cognition Anastasi 2008 , Lead section Cain 2016 , § 1.2 Cognition Strickland 2001 , pp. 131–132 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Cognition Cain 2016 , § 1.2 Cognition ^ Dreyfus 1991 , pp. 1–2 ^ Cain 2016 , § 1.2 Cognition Robbins 2017 , § 1. What Is a Mental Module?

Bermúdez 2014 , p. 289 ^ Revlin 2013 , pp. 2–3 Balota 2000 , pp. 131–132 Coren & Ward 1989 , pp. 2–3 ^ Balota 2000 , pp. 131–132 Matlin 2013 , pp. iv, 3–4, 21–22 American Psychological Association 2018 , § Animal Cognition Fioretti 2024 ^ HarperCollins 2022 HarperCollins 2022a Hoad 1993 , p. 83 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 22–23 Best 1995 , pp. 367 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 34–36 Pomerantz 2006 , p. 1, 6–7 Matlin 2013 , pp. 34–35 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 22–23, 35–36 Pomerantz 2006 , p. 4–5, 7–8 Matlin 2013 , pp. 34–35, 40–41 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 59–61, 94–95 ^ Pomerantz 2006 , p. 4, 8–9 Bernstein & Nash 2006 , pp. 117–118 ^ Bernstein & Nash 2006 , pp. 85–88, 130–131 Biggs, Matthen & Stokes 2014 , pp.

1–5 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 27–28 Matlin 2013 , pp. 46–47 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 59–61, 94–95 ^ Gopher & Iani 2006 , p. 1–2 Best 1995 , pp. 35–36 American Psychological Association 2018 , § Attention Groome 2005 , pp. 13, 28–29 Pomerantz 2006 , p. 3 Matlin 2013 , pp. 71 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 23 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 132–135, 141 Groome 2005 , pp. 59–60 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 98–100, 108–109, 127 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 140–141 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 99–100, 126–128 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 135–136, 165 Groome 2005 , pp. 60–63 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 142, 151 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 132, 196 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 127 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

184 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 127, 250 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

184 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 23, 127, 248–250 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

184 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Procedural Memory Matlin 2013 , pp. 127 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Procedural Memory ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Nondeclarative Memory , § Implicit Memory Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

184 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Declarative Memory , § Explicit Memory ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Learning Reisberg 2010 , pp. 132, 155–156 Hager 2012 , pp.

208 ^ American Psychological Association 2018 , § Thinking Berlyne, Vinacke & Sternberg 2025 , Lead section, § Types of Thinking ^ Nunes 2011 , pp. 2066–2069, Logical Reasoning and Learning Dowden 2020 , pp. 5, 24 ^ Reichertz 2013 , pp.

123–126 Berlyne, Vinacke & Sternberg 2025 , § Reasoning Nunes 2011 , pp. 2066–2069, Logical Reasoning and Learning Dowden 2020 , pp. 1, 5, 24, 346–347, 432, 470 ^ Berlyne, Vinacke & Sternberg 2025 , § Problem-solving Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

218 Reisberg 2010 , pp. 444–445, 476–477 Matlin 2013 , pp. 370–371, 380, 386 ^ Matlin 2013 , pp. 419–420 Revlin 2013 , pp. 435–440 Mellers 2006 , pp. 1–2 Nairne 2011 , pp. 301–302 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

223 Best 1995 , pp. 392–393, 400–401 Berlyne, Vinacke & Sternberg 2025 , § Concept Attainment ^ Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § Part III: Language, § Whorfian Hypothesis ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 145–146 Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § Part III: Language, § Whorfian Hypothesis Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

204 Cain 2016 , § 5. Language Matlin 2013 , pp. 296–297, 336 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

268–269 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 133 Matlin 2013 , pp. 298–299 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 131–134 Matlin 2013 , pp. 297–299 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 134–135 Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § Part III: Language, § Is language innate?

^ Groome 2005 , pp. 135–141, 144–145 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

207–209, 212 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 138 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

210–211 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 138, 142–144 Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

209–211 Matlin 2013 , pp. 336–344, 348–349 ^ Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § 16. Consciousness Davies 2001 , pp.

191–192 Gennaro , § 1. Terminological Matters: Various Concepts of Consciousness ^ Van Gulick 2025 , § 6. The Functional Question: Why Does Consciousness Exist?

Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § 16. Consciousness ^ Groome 2005 , p. 10 Fabio, Caprì & Romano 2019 , pp. 773–774 ^ Moses & Baird 2001 , pp. 533–535 Matlin 2013 , pp. 188–189, 203–204 ^ Friedenberg, Silverman & Spivey 2022 , pp. 319–320, 329–330 Frith 2008 , pp. 2033–2034 Gilbert 2001 , pp. 777–778 ^ Haas 2020 , pp.

59–60 ^ Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § 15. Cognition and Emotion: Introduction ^ Eysenck & Keane 2015 , § Glossary: Heuristics Matlin 2013 , pp. 419–420, 427–428 American Psychological Association 2018 , § Heuristic ^ Groome 2005 , p. 11–12, 52–53, 56–57 ^ Groome 2005 , p. 52–53 Matlin 2013 , pp. 55 ^ Groome 2005 , p. 99–100, 118, 147 Matlin 2013 , pp. 146 ^ Groome 2005 , p. 83–85 American Psychological Association 2018 , § Alzheimer's Disease ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 159–160, 176 Thagard 2023 , § 4. Theoretical Approaches ^ Cain 2016 , § 2.1 Introduction, § 2.2 Classical Computationalism Buckner & Garson 2025 , § 5. The Shape of the Controversy between Connectionists and Classicists Groome 2005 , pp. 162–163, 176 Thagard 2023 , § 4.3 Concepts ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 162–163, 176 Thagard 2023 , § 4.3 Concepts ^ Cain 2016 , § 2.2 Classical Computationalism ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 161–162 Friedenberg, Silverman & Spivey 2022 , pp. 8–9 Bermúdez 2014 , pp. 122–123 Rescorla 2025 , Lead section Cain 2016 , § 2.2 Classical Computationalism ^ Best 1995 , pp. 20–25 Galotti 2015 , pp. 15–16 ^ Cain 2016 , § 2.1 Introduction Rescorla 2024 , Lead section ^ Thagard 2023 , § 4.1 Formal Logic ^ Thagard 2023 , § 4.2 Rules Groome 2005 , pp. 163, 165–166 Vernon, Hofsten & Fadiga 2011 , p.

160 ^ Best 1995 , pp. 25–26 Thagard 2023 , § 4.6 Connectionism, § 4.7 Theoretical Neuroscience Buckner & Garson 2025 , Lead section, § 1. A Description of Neural Networks Groome 2005 , pp. 167–168, 174–175 Cain 2016 , § Connectionism ^ Cain 2016 , § 2.4 Connectionism Buckner & Garson 2025 , Lead section, § 1. A Description of Neural Networks ^ Thagard 2023 , § 4.9 Deep Learning Buckner & Garson 2025 , § 11. Deep Learning: Connectionism’s New Wave Waskan , Lead section ^ Best 1995 , pp. 25–26 Thagard 2023 , § 4.6 Connectionism, § 4.7 Theoretical Neuroscience Buckner & Garson 2025 , Lead section, § 1. A Description of Neural Networks Groome 2005 , pp. 167–168, 174–175 Cain 2016 , § Connectionism ^ Buckner & Garson 2025 , § 5. The Shape of the Controversy between Connectionists and Classicists ^ Chemero 1999 , pp. 39–42 Fodor & Pylyshyn 1997 , p. 313 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 160–161 Cain 2016 , § 2.1 Introduction Waskan , § 7. Anti-Represenationalism: Dynamical Stystems Theory, A-Life and Embodied Cognition Fodor & Pylyshyn 1997 , p. 313 ^ Groome 2005 , pp. 160–161 Cain 2016 , § 2.6 Alternative Approaches to the Study of Cognition, § 7. Evaluating Anti-representationalism.

Chemero 1999 , pp. 39–40 ^ Shapiro & Spaulding 2025 , Lead section, § 2. Embodied Cognition: Themes and Close Relations Alexander 2025 , § Abstract, § Introduction, § 4. Paradigmatic examples of 4E cognitive science Cain 2016 , § 2.8 The Extended Mind ^ Robbins 2017 , § 1. What Is a Mental Module?

Hufendiek & Wild 2015 , pp.

265–268 Bermúdez 2014 , pp. 288–290 ^ Hufendiek & Wild 2015 , pp.

267–268 Robbins 2017 , § 3.1. The Case for Massive Modularity Bermúdez 2014 , p. 277 ^ Thagard 2023 , § 4.8 Bayesian ^ Thagard 2023 , § 4.10 Predictive Processing and Active Inference ^ Neys 2018 , pp. 1–2 Stets 2016 , pp.

351 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

235–238 Newcombe 2006 Gelman & Baird 2001 , pp. 128–129 Mareschal 2006 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

235–238 Newcombe 2006 Gelman & Baird 2001 , pp. 128–129 Mareschal 2006 ^ Bernstein & Nash 2006 , pp. 349–350 Gross 2020 , pp. 566–572 Khatoon 2012 , pp.

308–311 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

264–265 Berk & Harris 2006 ^ Davey, Sterling & Field 2014 , p.

260–264 ^ Coall et al. 2015 , pp.

57–58 Bernstein & Nash 2006 , pp. 342–348, 384 Abel 2003 , pp.

231–232 ^ Bernstein & Nash 2006 , pp. 382–385 Matlin 2013 , pp. 453–455 ^ Revlin 2013 ^ Matlin M (2009).

Cognition . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 4.

^ Eddy MD.

"The Cognitive Unity of Calvinist Pedagogy in Enlightenment Scotland" .

Ábrahám Kovács (Ed.), Reformed Churches Working Unity in Diversity: Global Historical, Theological and Ethical Perspectives (Budapest: l'Harmattan, 2016) : 46– 60.

^ Eddy, Matthew Daniel (2017).

"The politics of cognition: liberalism and the evolutionary origins of Victorian education" (PDF) .

British Journal for the History of Science .

50 (4): 677– 699.

doi : 10.1017/S0007087417000863 .

ISSN 1474-001X .

PMID 29019300 .

^ a b Fuchs AH, Milar KJ (2003). "Psychology as a science".

Handbook of Psychology . Vol. 1. pp.

1– 26.

doi : 10.1002/0471264385.wei0101 .

ISBN 9780471176695 .

^ Zangwill OL (2004).

The Oxford companion to the mind . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

951– 952.

ISBN 978-0-19-866224-2 .

^ Cowan, Nelson; Rachev, Nikolay R. (2018-08-01).

"Merging with the path not taken: Wilhelm Wundt's work as a precursor to the embedded-processes approach to memory, attention, and consciousness" .

Consciousness and Cognition .

63 : 228– 238.

doi : 10.1016/j.concog.2018.06.001 .

ISSN 1053-8100 .

PMID 29880413 .

^ Zangwill OL (2004).

The Oxford companion to the mind . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 276.

ISBN 978-0-19-866224-2 .

^ Brink TL (2008). " "Memory." Unit 7".

Psychology: A Student Friendly Approach . p. 126.

^ Madigan S, O'Hara R (1992). "Short-term memory at the turn of the century: Mary Whiton Calkin's memory research".

American Psychologist .

47 (2): 170– 174.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.47.2.170 .

^ a b Matlin, Margaret W. (2007).

Cognition . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-470-14664-4 .

^ "René Descartes" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ a b Sternberg RJ, Sternberg K (2009).

Cognitive Psychology (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-495-50632-4 .

^ Blomberg O (2011). "Concepts of cognition for cognitive engineering".

International Journal of Aviation Psychology .

21 (1): 85– 104.

doi : 10.1080/10508414.2011.537561 .

S2CID 144876967 .

^ a b c Paco Calvo; Antoni Gomila, eds. (2008).

Handbook of cognitive science: an embodied approach . Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-0-08-091487-9 .

OCLC 318353781 .

^ Lakoff, George (2012).

"Explaining Embodied Cognition Results" .

Topics in Cognitive Science .

4 (4): 773– 785.

doi : 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2012.01222.x .

ISSN 1756-8757 .

PMID 22961950 .

S2CID 18978114 .

^ Coren, Stanley ; Ward, Lawrence M.

; Enns, James T. (1999).

Sensation and Perception (5th ed.).

Harcourt Brace . p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-470-00226-1 .

^ Best, John B. (1999).

Cognitive Psychology (5th ed.). Wiley. pp.

15– 17.

ISBN 978-0-470-00232-2 .

^ Pyszczynski, Tom; Greenberg, Jeff; Koole, Sander; Solomon, Sheldon (2010). "Experimental Existential Psychology: Coping With the Facts of Life". In Fiske, Susan T.; Gilbert, Daniel T.; Lindzey, Gardner (eds.).

Handbook of Social Psychology . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons. pp. socpsy001020.

doi : 10.1002/9780470561119.socpsy001020 .

ISBN 978-0-470-56111-9 .

^ Zelazo, Philip David; Moscovitch, Morris; Thompson, Evan, eds. (2007).

The Cambridge Handbook of Consciousness .

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511816789 .

ISBN 9780511816789 .

^ Surprenant, Aimée M. (2001).

"Distinctiveness and serial position effects in tonal sequences" (PDF) .

Perception & Psychophysics .

63 (4): 737– 745.

doi : 10.3758/BF03194434 .

ISSN 0031-5117 .

PMID 11436742 .

^ Krueger, Lester E. (1992).

"The word-superiority effect and phonological recoding" (PDF) .

Memory & Cognition .

20 (6): 685– 694.

doi : 10.3758/BF03202718 .

ISSN 0090-502X .

PMID 1435271 .

^ Nairne, James S.; Whiteman, Howard L.; Kelley, Matthew R. (1999).

"Short-term forgetting of order under conditions of reduced interference" (PDF) .

Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology A .

52 : 241– 251.

doi : 10.1080/713755806 .

S2CID 15713857 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-07-30 . Retrieved 2018-01-09 .

^ May, Cynthia P.; Hasher, Lynn; Kane, Michael J. (1999).

"The role of interference in memory span" (PDF) .

Memory & Cognition .

27 (5): 759– 767.

doi : 10.3758/BF03198529 .

ISSN 0090-502X .

PMID 10540805 .

^ Wolfe J, Cave K, Franzel S (1989). "Guided search: An alternative to the feature integration model for visual search".

Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance .

15 (3): 419– 433.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.551.1667 .

doi : 10.1037/0096-1523.15.3.419 .

PMID 2527952 .

^ Pinker S, Bloom P (December 1990). "Natural language and natural selection".

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

13 (4): 707– 727.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X00081061 .

S2CID 6167614 .

^ a b Metcalfe, Janet; Shimamura, Arthur P. (1994-04-07).

Metacognition: Knowing about Knowing . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-13298-5 .

^ Flavell, J.H. (1979). "Metacognition and cognitive monitoring. A new area of cognitive-development inquiry".

American Psychologist .

34 (10): 906– 911.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.34.10.906 .

^ Schraw, Gregory (1998). "Promoting general metacognitive awareness".

Instructional Science .

26 : 113– 125.

doi : 10.1023/A:1003044231033 .

S2CID 15715418 .

^ a b Hartelt, Tim; Martens, Helge (2024).

"Influence of self-assessment and conditional metaconceptual knowledge on students' self-regulation of intuitive and scientific conceptions of evolution" .

Journal of Research in Science Teaching .

61 (5): 1134– 1180.

Bibcode : 2024JRScT..61.1134H .

doi : 10.1002/tea.21938 .

ISSN 0022-4308 .

^ Borkowski, J. G. (1992).

"Metacognitive Theory: A Framework for Teaching Literacy, Writing, and Math Skills" .

Journal of Learning Disabilities .

25 (4). Hammill Institute on Disabilities: 253– 257.

doi : 10.1177/002221949202500406 .

PMID 1573335 .

S2CID 10031331 .

^ Gunstone, R. F.; Mitchell, I. I. (2005). "Metacognition and conceptual change". In J. J. Mintzes; J. H. Wandersee; J. D. Novak (eds.).

Teaching science for understanding: A human constructivist view . Elsevier. pp.

133– 163.

doi : 10.1016/b978-012498360-1/50006-4 .

ISBN 978-0-12-498360-1 .

^ Dunlosky, John; Bjork, Robert A. (2008).

Handbook of Metamemory and Memory . New York: Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-8058-6214-0 .

^ Colman, Andrew M. (2001).

"metacognition" .

A Dictionary of Psychology . Oxford Paperback Reference (4 ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press (published 2015). p. 456.

ISBN 9780199657681 . Retrieved 17 May 2017 .

Writings on metacognition can be traced back at least as far as De Anima and the Parva Naturalia of the Greek philosopher Aristotle (384-322 BC) [...].

^ Sanders LM, Hortobágyi T, la Bastide-van Gemert S, van der Zee EA, van Heuvelen MJ (2019-01-10). Regnaux JP (ed.).

"Dose-response relationship between exercise and cognitive function in older adults with and without cognitive impairment: A systematic review and meta-analysis" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (1): e0210036.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1410036S .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0210036 .

PMC 6328108 .

PMID 30629631 .

^ Young J, Angevaren M, Rusted J, Tabet N, et al. (Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group) (April 2015).

"Aerobic exercise to improve cognitive function in older people without known cognitive impairment" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2015 (4): CD005381.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD005381.pub4 .

PMC 10554155 .

PMID 25900537 .

^ Hazamy, Audrey A.; Altmann, Lori J.P.; Stegemöller, Elizabeth; Bowers, Dawn; Lee, Hyo Keun; Wilson, Jonathan; Okun, Michael S.; Hass, Chris J. (April 2017).

"Improved cognition while cycling in Parkinson's disease patients and healthy adults" .

Brain and Cognition .

113 : 23– 31.

doi : 10.1016/j.bandc.2017.01.002 .

PMC 5346468 .

PMID 28088064 .

^ Singh, Ben; Bennett, Hunter; Miatke, Aaron; Dumuid, Dorothea; Curtis, Rachel; Ferguson, Ty; Brinsley, Jacinta; Szeto, Kimberley; Petersen, Jasmine M.; Gough, Claire; Eglitis, Emily; Simpson, Catherine EM; Ekegren, Christina L.; Smith, Ashleigh E.; Erickson, Kirk I. (2025-03-06).

"Effectiveness of exercise for improving cognition, memory and executive function: a systematic umbrella review and meta-meta-analysis" .

British Journal of Sports Medicine .

59 (12): 866– 876.

doi : 10.1136/bjsports-2024-108589 .

ISSN 0306-3674 .

PMC 12229068 .

PMID 40049759 .

^ Barfoot KL, May G, Lamport DJ, Ricketts J, Riddell PM, Williams CM (October 2019).

"The effects of acute wild blueberry supplementation on the cognition of 7–10-year-old schoolchildren" .

European Journal of Nutrition .

58 (7): 2911– 2920.

doi : 10.1007/s00394-018-1843-6 .

PMC 6768899 .

PMID 30327868 .

^ Thaung Zaw JJ, Howe PR, Wong RH (September 2017).

"Does phytoestrogen supplementation improve cognition in humans? A systematic review" .

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1403 (1): 150– 163.

Bibcode : 2017NYASA1403..150T .

doi : 10.1111/nyas.13459 .

PMID 28945939 .

S2CID 25280760 .

^ Sokolov AN, Pavlova MA, Klosterhalfen S, Enck P (December 2013). "Chocolate and the brain: neurobiological impact of cocoa flavanols on cognition and behavior".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

37 (10 Pt 2): 2445– 2453.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.06.013 .

PMID 23810791 .

S2CID 17371625 .

^ Clement, Yuri N.; Onakpoya, Igho; Hung, Shao K.; Ernst, Edzard (March 2011).

"Effects of herbal and dietary supplements on cognition in menopause: A systematic review" .

Maturitas .

68 (3): 256– 263.

doi : 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.12.005 .

PMID 21237589 .

^ Woods B, Aguirre E, Spector AE, Orrell M, et al. (Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group) (February 2012). "Cognitive stimulation to improve cognitive functioning in people with dementia".

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews (2): CD005562.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD005562.pub2 .

PMID 22336813 .

S2CID 7086782 .

^ Trung J, Hanganu A, Jobert S, Degroot C, Mejia-Constain B, Kibreab M, et al. (September 2019).

"Transcranial magnetic stimulation improves cognition over time in Parkinson's disease" .

Parkinsonism & Related Disorders .

66 : 3– 8.

doi : 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2019.07.006 .

PMID 31300260 .

S2CID 196350357 .

^ Gates NJ, Rutjes AW, Di Nisio M, Karim S, Chong LY, March E, et al. (Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group) (February 2020).

"Computerised cognitive training for 12 or more weeks for maintaining cognitive function in cognitively healthy people in late life" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2020 (2): CD012277.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD012277.pub3 .

PMC 7045394 .

PMID 32104914 .

^ Andrews & Monsó 2021 , Lead section, § 1. What is Animal Cognition?

Howard & Barron 2024 , pp. R294–R295 Stevens & Stevens 2012 Kuhlmeier & Boysen 2006 ^ Bräuer et al. 2020 , Abstract, § 2. Performing Competently–Performing Poorly: Cognitive Skills Are Not Necessarily Linked Together Santos & Caramazza 2005 , pp.

6 ^ Kuhlmeier & Boysen 2006 Hauser 2001 , pp. 666–667 ^ Segundo‐Ortin & Calvo 2022 , § 1. Introduction, § 2.1 Communication harvnb error: no target: CITEREFSegundo‐OrtinCalvo2022 ( help ) Arimura & Pearse 2017 , pp. 4–5 Schenk & Seabloom 2010 , p. 1 ^ Howard & Barron 2024 , pp. R294–R295 Halina 2023 , Lead section, § 1. Evolution, Development, and Culture, § 3.1 Anthropomorphism ^ Siemens et al. 2022 , § Introduction Taylor & Taylor 2021 , pp. 454–456 ^ Siemens et al. 2022 , § Introduction, § 2. Human and Artificial Cognition, § 3.1.2. Computer vision, § 5. Human and Artificial Cognition in Practice ^ Vernon 2014 , pp.

1–8 Crowder, Carbone & Friess 2013 , pp.

1–3 ^ Chen 2023 , p.

1141 Bringsjord & Govindarajulu 2024 , § 8. Philosophy of Artificial Intelligence Butz 2021 , pp. 91–92 Sources [ edit ] Abel, Ernest L. (2003).

"Fetal Alcohol Syndrome" . In Blocker, Jack S.; Fahey, David M.; Tyrrell, Ian R. (eds.).

Alcohol and Temperance in Modern History: An International Encyclopedia . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

231– 232.

ISBN 978-1-57607-834-1 .

Alexander, Cameron (2025). "What is 4E cognitive science?".

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences .

doi : 10.1007/s11097-025-10055-w .

American Psychological Association (2018).

"APA Dictionary of Psychology" . American Psychological Association.

Anastasi, Jeffrey S. (2008). "Cognition". In Darity, William A. (ed.).

International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences (2nd ed.). Macmillan Reference USA.

ISBN 978-0-02-865965-7 .

Andrews, Kristin; Monsó, Susana (2021).

"Animal Cognition" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 15 August 2025 .

Arimura, G.; Pearse, I. S. (17 March 2017). "From the Lab Bench to the Forest: Ecology and Defence Mechanisms of Volatile-Mediated 'Talking Trees' ". In Becard, Guillaume (ed.).

How Plants Communicate With Their Biotic Environment . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-801620-6 . Retrieved 26 December 2022 .

Balota, David A. (2000). "Cognition". In Kazdin, Alan E. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Psychology . American Psychological Association. pp.

131– 132.

ISBN 978-1-55798-187-5 .

Berk, Laura E.; Harris, Sara (2006). "Vygotsky, Lev". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Berlyne, D. E.; Vinacke, W. Edgar; Sternberg, Robert J. (2025).

"Thought" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc . Retrieved 31 July 2025 .

Bermúdez, José Luis (2014).

Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Science of the Mind (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-05162-1 .

Bernstein, Douglas; Nash, Peggy W. (2006).

Essentials of Psychology . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

ISBN 978-0-618-71312-7 .

Best, John B. (1995).

Cognitive Psychology (4th ed.). West Publishing Company.

ISBN 0-314-04445-0 .

Biggs, Stephen; Matthen, Mohan; Stokes, Dustin (2014). "Sorting the Senses". In Stokes, Dustin; Matthen, Mohan; Biggs, Stephen (eds.).

Perception and Its Modalities . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 20.

ISBN 978-0-19-938161-6 .

Bräuer, Juliane; Hanus, Daniel; Pika, Simone; Gray, Russell; Uomini, Natalie (2020).

"Old and New Approaches to Animal Cognition: There Is Not "One Cognition" " .

Journal of Intelligence .

8 (3): 28.

doi : 10.3390/jintelligence8030028 .

PMC 7555673 .

PMID 32630788 .

Bringsjord, Selmer; Govindarajulu, Naveen Sundar (2024).

"Artificial Intelligence" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 6 May 2024 .

Buckner, Cameron; Garson, James (2025).

"Connectionism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 7 August 2025 .

Butz, Martin V. (2021).

"Towards Strong AI" .

KI - Künstliche Intelligenz .

35 (1): 91– 101.

doi : 10.1007/s13218-021-00705-x .

Cain, M. J. (2016).

The Philosophy of Cognitive Science . Polity Press.

ISBN 978-1-5095-0205-9 .

Chemero, Anthony (1999). "Empirical and Metaphysical Anti-Representationalism". In Riegler, Alexander; Peschl, Markus; Stein, Astrid (eds.).

Understanding Representation in the Cognitive Sciences . Springer. pp.

39– 47.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-585-29605-0_5 .

ISBN 978-0-306-46286-3 .

Chen, Zhaoman (2023).

"Exploration of Youth Social Work Model Driven by Artificial Intelligence" . In Hung, Jason C.; Yen, Neil Y.; Chang, Jia-Wei (eds.).

Frontier Computing: Theory, Technologies and Applications (FC 2022) . Springer. pp.

1138– 1146.

ISBN 978-981-99-1428-9 .

Coall, David A.; Callan, Anna C.; Dickins, Thomas E.; Chisholm, James S. (2015).

"Evolution and Prenatal Development: An Evolutionary Perspective" . In Lamb, Michael E. (ed.).

Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental Science, Socioemotional Processes . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

57– 105.

ISBN 978-1-118-95387-7 .

Coren, Stanley; Ward, Lawrence M. (1989).

Sensation & Perception (3rd ed.). Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Publishers.

ISBN 0-15-579647-X .

Crowder, James; Carbone, John N.; Friess, Shelli (2013).

Artificial Cognition Architectures . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4614-8072-3 .

Davey, Graham; Sterling, Christopher; Field, Andy (2014).

Complete Psychology . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-4441-4530-4 .

Davies, Martin (2001).

"Consciousness" . In Wilson, Robert A.; Keil, Frank C. (eds.).

The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MITECS) . MIT Press. pp.

190– 193.

ISBN 978-0-262-73144-7 .

Dowden, Bradley H. (2020).

Logical Reasoning (PDF) .

(for an earlier version, see: Dowden, Bradley Harris (1993).

Logical Reasoning . Wadsworth Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780534176884 .

) Dreyfus, Hubert L. (1991).

"Socratic And Platonic Sources Of Cognitivism" . In Smith, J-C. (ed.).

Historical Foundations Of Cognitive Science . Springer Dordrecht. pp.

1– 17.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-009-2161-0_1 .

ISBN 978-94-009-2161-0 .

Eysenck, Michael W.; Keane, Mark T. (2015).

Cognitive Psychology (7th ed.). Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-84872-415-0 .

Fabio, Rosa Angela; Caprì, Tindara; Romano, Martina (2019). "From Controlled to Automatic Processes and Back Again: The Role of Contextual Features".

Europe's Journal of Psychology .

15 (4): 773– 788.

doi : 10.5964/ejop.v15i4.1746 .

PMID 33680159 .

Fioretti, Guido (2024). "Artificial Cognition". In Wall, Friederike; Chen, Shu-Heng; Leitner, Stephan (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Agent-based Computational Management Science . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780197668122.013.3 .

ISBN 978-0-19-766812-2 .

Fodor, Jerry A.; Pylyshyn, Zenon W. (1997). "Connectionism And Cognitive Architecture: A Critical Analysis". In Haugeland, John (ed.).

Mind Design: Philosophy, Psychology, Artificial Intelligence . MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-58153-1 .

Friedenberg, Jay; Silverman, Gordon; Spivey, Michael (2022).

Cognitive Science: An Introduction to the Study of Mind (4 ed.). Sage.

ISBN 978-1-5443-8015-5 .

Frith, Chris D (2008). "Social Cognition".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

363 (1499): 2033– 2039.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2008.0005 .

PMID 18292063 .

Galotti, Kathleen M. (2015).

Cognitive Psychology In and Out of the Laboratory (5 ed.). SAGE Publications.

ISBN 978-1-4522-3032-0 .

Gelman, Rochel; Baird, Jodie A. (2001). "Cognitive Development". In Wilson, Robert A.; Keil, Frank C. (eds.).

The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MITECS) . MIT Press. pp.

128– 129.

ISBN 978-0-262-73144-7 .

Gennaro, Rocco J.

"Consciousness" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

Gilbert, Daniel (2001). "Social Cognition". In Wilson, Robert A.; Keil, Frank C. (eds.).

The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MITECS) . MIT Press. pp.

777– 778.

ISBN 978-0-262-73144-7 .

Gopher, Daniel; Iani, Cristina (2006). "Attention". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Gregory, R. L. (1987).

The Oxford Companion to the Mind . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-866124-X .

Groome, David (2005).

An Introduction to Cognitive Psychology: Processes and Disorders . Psychology Press.

ISBN 0-203-97798-X .

Gross, Richard (2020).

Psychology: The Science of Mind and Behaviour (8 ed.). Hodder Education.

ISBN 978-1-5104-6846-7 .

Haas, Julia (2020).

"Two Theories of Moral Cognition" . In Holtzman, Geoffrey S.; Hildt, Elisabeth (eds.).

Does Neuroscience Have Normative Implications?

. The International Library of Ethics, Law and Technology. Vol. 22. Springer International Publishing. pp.

59– 79.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-56134-5_4 .

ISBN 978-3-030-56134-5 .

Hager, Paul (2012).

"Informal Learning: Everyday Living" . In Jarvis, Peter; Watts, Mary H. (eds.).

The Routledge International Handbook of Learning . Routledge. pp.

207– 215.

ISBN 978-0-415-57130-2 .

Halina, Marta (2023).

"Methods in Comparative Cognition" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 15 August 2025 .

HarperCollins (2022).

"Cognition" .

The American Heritage Dictionary . HarperCollins Publishers . Retrieved 25 July 2025 .

HarperCollins (2022a).

"Indo-European Roots Appendix" .

The American Heritage Dictionary . HarperCollins Publishers. § gnō- . Retrieved 25 July 2025 .

Hauser, Marc D. (2001). "Primate Cognition". In Wilson, Robert A.; Keil, Frank C. (eds.).

The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MITECS) . MIT Press. pp.

666– 667.

ISBN 978-0-262-73144-7 .

Hoad, T. F. (1993).

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-283098-8 .

Howard, Scarlett R.; Barron, Andrew B. (2024). "Understanding the limits to animal cognition".

Current Biology .

34 (7): R294 – R300 .

Bibcode : 2024CBio...34.R294H .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2024.02.043 .

PMID 38593777 .

Hufendiek, Rebekka; Wild, Markus (2015).

"6. Faculties and Modularity" . In Perler, Dominik (ed.).

The Faculties: A History . Oxford University Press. pp.

254– 298.

ISBN 978-0-19-993527-7 .

Khatoon, Naima, ed. (2012).

General Psychology . Pearson Education India.

ISBN 978-81-317-5999-8 .

Kuhlmeier, Valerie A.; Boysen, Sarah T. (2006). "Animal Cognition". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Mareschal, Denis (2006). "Cognitive Development, Computational Models of". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Matlin, Margaret W. (2013).

Cognition (8th ed.). John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-118-14896-9 .

Mellers, Barbara A. (2006). "Decision-Making". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Moses, Louis J.; Baird, Jodie A. (2001). "Metacognition". In Wilson, Robert A.; Keil, Frank C. (eds.).

The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences (MITECS) . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-73144-7 .

Nairne, James S. (2011).

Psychology (5 ed.). Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-8400-3310-9 .

Newcombe, Nora S. (2006). "Development". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Neys, Wim De (2018). "Dual Process Theory 2.0: An Introduction". In De Neys, Wim (ed.).

Dual Process Theory 2.0 . Routledge. pp.

1– 4.

ISBN 9781138700642 .

Nunes, Terezinha (5 October 2011). "Logical Reasoning and Learning". In Seel, Norbert M. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of the Sciences of Learning . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

2066– 2069.

ISBN 9781441914279 .

Piccinini, Gualtiero; Scarantino, Andrea (2011).

"Information processing, computation, and cognition" .

Journal of Biological Physics .

37 (1): 1– 38.

doi : 10.1007/s10867-010-9195-3 .

PMC 3006465 .

PMID 22210958 .

Pomerantz, James R. (2006). "Perception: Overview". In Nadel, Lynn (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . John Wiley & Sons.

doi : 10.1002/0470018860 .

ISBN 9780470016190 .

Reichertz, Jo (2013). "Induction, Deduction, Abduction". In Flick, Uwe (ed.).

The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data Analysis . SAGE. pp.

123– 135.

ISBN 9781446296691 .

Reisberg, Daniel (2010).

Cognition: Exploring the Science of the Mind (4th ed.). W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-93048-1 .

Rescorla, Michael (2024).

"The Language of Thought Hypothesis" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

Rescorla, Michael (2025).

"The Computational Theory of Mind" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

Revlin, Russell (2013).

Cognition: Theory and Practice . Worth Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7167-5667-5 .

Robbins, Philip (2017).

"Modularity of Mind" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 12 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 April 2024 .

Santos, L. R.; Caramazza, A. (2005).

"The Domain-Specific Hypothesis: A Developmental and Comparative Perspective on Category-Specific Deficists" . In Forde, Emer; Humphreys, Glyn (eds.).

Category Specificity in Brain and Mind . Psychology Press. pp.

1– 24.

ISBN 978-1-135-42625-5 .

Schenk, H. Jochen; Seabloom, Eric W. (5 August 2010). "Evolutionary Ecology of Plant Signals and Toxins: A Conceptual Framework". In Baluška, František; Ninkovic, Velemir (eds.).

Plant Communication From an Ecological Perspective . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-3-642-12162-3 . Retrieved 20 December 2022 .

Segundo-Ortin, Miguel; Calvo, Paco (2022). "Consciousness and cognition in plants".

WIREs Cognitive Science .

13 (2) e1578.

doi : 10.1002/wcs.1578 .

PMID 34558231 .

Shapiro, Lawrence; Spaulding, Shannon (2025).

"Embodied Cognition" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 7 August 2025 .

Siemens, George; Marmolejo-Ramos, Fernando; Gabriel, Florence; Medeiros, Kelsey; Marrone, Rebecca; Joksimovic, Srecko; de Laat, Maarten (2022). "Human and artificial cognition".

Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence .

3 100107.

doi : 10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100107 .

Stets, Jan E. (2016).

"Rationalist vs. Intuitionist Views on Morality. A Sociological Perspective" . In Brand, Cordula (ed.).

Dual-Process Theories in Moral Psychology: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Theoretical, Empirical and Practical Considerations . Springer. pp.

345– 366.

ISBN 978-3-658-12053-5 .

Stevens, Alison N. P.; Stevens, Jeffrey R. (2012).

"Animal Cognition" .

Nature Education Knowledge .

3 (11).

Strickland, Bonnie Ruth, ed. (2001).

The Gale Encyclopedia of Psychology (2nd ed.). Gale Group.

ISBN 0-7876-4786-1 .

Taylor, J. Eric T.; Taylor, Graham W. (2021). "Artificial Cognition: How Experimental Psychology Can Help Generate Explainable Artificial Intelligence".

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review .

28 (2): 454– 475.

doi : 10.3758/s13423-020-01825-5 .

PMID 33159244 .

Thagard, Paul (2023).

"Cognitive Science" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

Van Gulick, Robert (2025).

"Consciousness" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 2 August 2025 .

Vernon, David (2014).

Artificial Cognitive Systems: A Primer . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-02838-7 .

Vernon, David; Hofsten, Claes von; Fadiga, Luciano (2011).

A Roadmap for Cognitive Development in Humanoid Robots . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-3-642-16904-5 .

Waskan, Jonathan.

"Connectionism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 August 2025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ardila A (2018).

Historical Development of Human Cognition. A Cultural-Historical Neuropsychological Perspective . Springer.

ISBN 978-9811068867 .

Coren S, Ward LM, Enns JT (1999).

Sensation and Perception . Harcourt Brace. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-470-00226-1 .

Lycan WG, ed. (1999).

Mind and Cognition: An Anthology (2nd ed.). Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing .

Stanovich, Keith (2009).

What Intelligence Tests Miss: The Psychology of Rational Thought . New Haven (CT): Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-12385-2 .

Stix, Gary , "Thinking without Words: Cognition doesn't require language, it turns out" (interview with Evelina Fedorenko , a cognitive neuroscientist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology ), Scientific American , vol. 332, no. 3 (March 2025), pp. 86–88. "[I]n the tradition of linguist Noam Chomsky ... we use language for thinking : to think is why language evolved in our species. [However, evidence that thought and language are separate systems is found, for example, by] looking at deficits in different abilities – for instance, in people with brain damage... who have impairments in language – some form of aphasia [ – yet are clearly able to think]." (p. 87.) Conversely, " large language models such as GPT-2 ... do language very well [but t]hey're not so good at thinking, which... nicely align[s] with the idea that the language system by itself is not what makes you think." (p. 88.) External links [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Cognition Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Cognitive psychology Look up cognition in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Cognition An international journal publishing theoretical and experimental papers on the study of the mind.

Information on music cognition, University of Amsterdam Cognitie.NL Archived 2011-10-19 at the Wayback Machine Information on cognition research, Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) and University of Amsterdam (UvA) Emotional and Decision Making Lab, Carnegie Mellon, EDM Lab The Limits of Human Cognition – an article describing the evolution of mammals' cognitive abilities Half-heard phone conversations reduce cognitive performance The limits of intelligence Douglas Fox, Scientific American , 14 June 14, 2011.

v t e Mental processes Cognition Association Awareness Cognitive flexibility Cognitive liberty Forecasting affective Foresight Comprehension Consciousness Critical thinking Decision-making Imagination Intuition Problem solving methods strategies Prospection Perception Amodal Color RGB model Depth Form Haptic ( Touch ) Perception as interpretation Peripheral Social Sound Harmonics Pitch Speech Visual Memory Consolidation Encoding Storage Recall Other Attention Experiential avoidance Higher nervous activity Intention Ironic process theory Learning Mental fatigue Relational frame theory Mental set Thinking Thought suppression Volition Category v t e Human intelligence topics Types Collective Emotional Intellectual Linguistic Multiple Social Spatial ( visuospatial ) Abilities , traits, and constructs Cognition Cognitive liberty Communication Creativity Fluid and crystallized intelligence g factor Intellect Intelligence quotient Knowledge Learning Memory Problem solving Reasoning Skill Thought ( abstraction ) Understanding Visual processing Models and theories Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory Fluid and crystallized intelligence Multiple-intelligences theory PASS theory Three-stratum theory Triarchic theory Areas of research Evolution of human intelligence Heritability of IQ Psychometrics Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex Outline of human intelligence / thought Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐56ff6c5bb7‐tcwj4
Cached time: 20250818164011
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.183 seconds
Real time usage: 2.335 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13085/1000000
Revision size: 120150/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 417397/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3593/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 503236/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.543/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17421158/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2091.781      1 -total
 42.11%  880.816      2 Template:Reflist
 24.17%  505.599     77 Template:Cite_book
 17.60%  368.170     80 Template:Multiref
 13.43%  280.925    241 Template:Harvnb
 12.64%  264.460     38 Template:Cite_journal
  9.01%  188.545     18 Template:Cite_web
  6.30%  131.708      5 Template:Lang
  4.12%   86.233      2 Template:Navbox
  3.84%   80.280      1 Template:Mental_processes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:106238:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818164011 and revision id 1306593459. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cognition&oldid=1306593459 " Categories : Cognition Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Thought Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with text in Indo-European languages Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles with excerpts Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 16:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cognition 80 languages Add topic

