Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Selected publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert K. Yin 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American social scientist Robert K. Yin Yin Kuo-zuir Traditional Chinese 應國瑞 Simplified Chinese 应国瑞 [ 1 ] Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Yīng Guóruì Robert Kuo-zuir Yin is an American social scientist and President of COSMOS Corporation, known for his work on case study research as well as on qualitative research .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Over the years, his work on case study research has been frequently cited.

Google Scholar listed it as the second most cited methodological work, qualitative or quantitative, over a 20-year period [ 4 ] Life and work [ edit ] Yin was born and grew up in New York City as the son of Yin Huo-Chin ( 应和春 ; Yīng Héchūn ) and How Loo Yuin ( 夏璐 ; Xià Lù ).

[ 1 ] : 作者简介 His maternal grandfather is Xia Ruifang , one of the founders of Commercial Press .

[ 1 ] : 1, 中文版前言 Yin obtained his BA in history, magna cum laude , from Harvard College in 1962, and successfully pursued his graduate studies at Massachusetts Institute of Technology , where he obtained his PhD in brain and cognitive sciences in 1970.

[ 5 ] While at graduate school, Yin published his first articles on face recognition, in the field of experimental psychology and neuroscience. Later, his research interests shifted to the use of case study research and qualitative research in public policy and related topics. An exemplary example of a case study, relying on both qualitative and quantitative methods, covered organizational innovations in public services.

[ 6 ] More broadly, Yin's text on case study research received the McGuffey Longevity Award in 2019, as a text that had been published for over 30 years and that was still in print.

[ 7 ] During these years, the text has been translated into eight languages:  Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Swedish, Romanian, Italian, Polish, and Portuguese.

In 1980, Yin founded COSMOS Corporation. He developed COSMOS as a research corporation for "applied research and evaluation, technical support, and management assistance aimed at improving public policy, private enterprise, and collaborative ventures." [ 8 ] The firm has completed research studies for such sponsors as:  The MacArthur Foundation, the Mott Foundation, The Ford Foundation, the National Science Foundation, the US Dept. of Education, the US Dept. of Health and Human Services, the National Institute of Mental Health, and the National Institute of Justice.

Yin has also been affiliated with the University of Copenhagen , the RAND Corporation, the United Nations Development Programme , and the School for International Service at American University .

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] More recently, he has worked with faculty and students at the School of Education at Southern New Hampshire University , as well as the Division of Special Education and disAbility Research at George Mason University . He has collaborated regularly on evaluation projects with The World Bank .

[ 9 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Yin, Robert K.

Case study research: Design and methods.

Sage publications, 1984; 1989; 1994; 2003; 2009; 2014.

Yin, Robert K.

Case study research and applications: Design and methods.

Sage publications, 2018 Yin, Robert K.

Qualitative research from start to finish.

Guilford Press, 2010; 2016.

Yin, Robert K.

Applications of case study research.

Sage, 2011.

Articles, a selection Yin, Robert K. "Looking at upside-down faces." Journal of experimental psychology 81.1 (1969): 141-145.

Yin, Robert K. "Face recognition by brain-injured patients: a dissociable ability?." Neuropsychologia 8.4 (1970): 395-402.

Yin, Robert K. " The case study crisis: Some answers ." Administrative science quarterly (1981): 58-65.

Yin, Robert K. "The case study as a serious research strategy." Science communication 3.1 (1981): 97-114.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Yin, Robert K. (2003).

Ànlì xuéxí yánjiū: Shèjì yǔ fāngfǎ 案例学习研究：设计与方法 [ Case Study Research: Design and Methods ] (in Chinese). Translated by Zhang, Mengzhong (2 ed.). Guangzhou: Zhongshan University Press.

ISBN 7-306-02163-X .

^ Joy, Mike.

Research methods in education.

The Higher Education Academy, 2007.

^ Marshall, Catherine, and Gretchen B. Rossman.

Designing qualitative research.

Sage publications, 2010.

^ "What are the most-cited publications in the social sciences (according to Google Scholar)?" . LSE Impact Blog. 12 May 2016.

^ a b Robert K. Yin profile at sagepub.com . Accessed 31.01.2015 ^ “Life Histories of Innovations,” Public Administration Review, January/February 1981, 41:21-28, which received the William E. Mosher Award from the American Society for Public Administration, as the best article published in PAR in 1981.

^ Case study research and applications: Design and methods, Sage Publications, 2018, 6th edition.

^ About COSMOS CORPORATION . 029c7c0.netsolhost.com. Accessed 31.01.2015.

^ a b Yin, Robert K. 2016 Qualitative Research from Start to Finish , pp. xiii-xiv External links [ edit ] COSMOS Corporation profile Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_K._Yin&oldid=1305622484 " Categories : Living people American social scientists Harvard College alumni Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Science alumni Academic staff of the University of Copenhagen American University faculty George Mason University faculty Southern New Hampshire University faculty Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 04:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert K. Yin 2 languages Add topic

