Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advantages and disadvantages 2 Number and timing of images 3 3D photos from a single image 4 Perception 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Wiggle stereoscopy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 3-D image display method Example of wiggle stereoscopy, a street in Cork , Ireland in 1927 Wiggle stereoscopy is an example of stereoscopy in which left and right images of a stereogram are animated . This technique is also called wiggle 3-D , wobble 3-D , wigglegram , or sometimes Piku-Piku (Japanese for "twitching").

[ 1 ] The sense of depth from such images is due to parallax and to changes to the occlusion of background objects. In contrast to other stereo display techniques, the same image is presented to both eyes.

Advantages and disadvantages [ edit ] Wiggle stereoscopy offers the advantages that no glasses or special hardware is required; most people can perceive the effect more quickly than when using cross-eyed and parallel viewing techniques. Furthermore, it offers stereo-like depth to people with limited or no vision in one eye.

Disadvantages of wiggle stereoscopy are that it does not provide true binocular depth perception ; it is not suitable for print media, being limited to displays that can alternate between the two images, and it is difficult to appreciate details in images that are constantly in motion.

Number and timing of images [ edit ] Most wiggle images use only two images, yielding a jerky image. A smoother image can be composed by using several intermediate images and using the left and right images as end images of the image sequence. If intermediate images are not available, approximate images can be computed from the end images using techniques known as view interpolation .

[ 2 ] The two end images may be displayed for a longer time than the intermediate images to allow inspection of details in the left and right images.

Another option for reducing the impression of jerkiness is to reduce the time between the frames of a wiggle image.

[ citation needed ] 3D photos from a single image [ edit ] An example of monocular portrait images of human faces that have been converted to create a moving 3D photo using depth estimation via Machine Learning using TensorFlow.js [ 3 ] in the browser With advances in machine learning and computer vision, [ 3 ] it is now also possible to recreate this effect using a single monocular image as an input.

[ 4 ] In this case one can use a segmentation model combined with a depth estimation model [ 5 ] to estimate information relating to the distance of the surfaces of objects in the scene from a given viewpoint for every pixel in that image (known as a depth map ), and with that information you can then render that pixel data as if it were 3 dimensional to create a subtle 3D effect.

Perception [ edit ] The sense of depth from wiggle 3-D images is due to parallax and to changes to the occlusion of background objects.

[ 6 ] Although wiggle stereoscopy permits the perception of stereoscopic images, it is not a "true" three-dimensional stereoscopic display format in the sense that wiggle stereoscopy does not present the eyes with their own separate view each. The sense of depth may be enhanced by closing one eye, which removes the conflicting vergence visual cue of both eyes looking at the flat image plane.

The apparent stereo effect results from syncing the timing of the wiggle and the amount of parallax to the processing done by the visual cortex. Three or five images with good parallax may produce a better effect than simple left and right images.

[ citation needed ] Wiggling works for the same reason that a transitional pan (or tracking shot ) in a film provides good depth information: the visual cortex is able to infer distance information from motion parallax , the relative speed of the perceived motion of different objects on the screen. Many small animals bob their heads to create motion parallax (wiggling) so they can better estimate distance prior to jumping.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Gallery [ edit ] Example of wiggle stereoscopy A wiggle stereogram of the Sun alternating between left and right eye images taken by the NASA 's STEREO solar observation mission Layered rock at the Home Plate plateau on Mars World War I stereo view A jinrikisha in Japan, c. 1901 A wiggle image of a model railroad using 4 frames repeating 1-2-3-4-3-2 See also [ edit ] Kinetic depth effect References [ edit ] ^ Simulated 3D—Wiggle 3D , Shortcourses.com ^ For a recent overview of view interpolation techniques, see for example N. Martin, S. Roy: Fast view interpolation from stereo: Simpler can be better ( PDF ), Proceedings of 3DPTV'08, The Fourth International Symposium on 3-D Data Processing, Visualization and Transmission , June 18–20, 2008, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, USA ^ a b "Depth Estimation" , GitHub ^ "Depth TensorFlow.js Demo" , googleapis.com ^ "Portrait Depth API: Turning a Single Image into a 3D Photo with TensorFlow.js" . Retrieved 2022-07-01 .

^ John Altoft: Data visualization for ESM and ELINT. Visualizing 3-D and hyper-dimensional data , Defense R&D Canada (DRDC) Ottawa, Contract Report 2011-084, June 2011 ^ Scott B. Steinman; Barbara A. Steinman; Ralph Philip Garzia (2000).

Foundations of Binocular Vision: A Clinical perspective . McGraw-Hill Medical. p. 180.

ISBN 0-8385-2670-5 .

^ Legg, C. R.; Lambert, S. (December 1990). "Distance estimation in the hooded rat: Experimental evidence for the role of motion cues".

Behavioural Brain Research .

41 (1): 11– 20.

doi : 10.1016/0166-4328(90)90049-K .

PMID 2073352 .

S2CID 45771715 .

^ Ellard, Colin Godfrey; Goodale, Melvin A.; Timney, Brian (October 1984). "Distance estimation in the Mongolian gerbil: the role of dynamic depth cues".

Behavioural Brain Research .

14 (1): 29– 39.

doi : 10.1016/0166-4328(84)90017-2 .

PMID 6518079 .

S2CID 15508633 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Stereoscopic 3D files (wiggle) at Wikimedia Commons Wigglegram , Android application v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wiggle_stereoscopy&oldid=1196831131 " Categories : 3D imaging Animation techniques Optical illusions Stereoscopic photography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 18 January 2024, at 17:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wiggle stereoscopy Add languages Add topic

