Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Visual 2 Auditory 3 Tactile 4 Temporal 5 Intersensory 6 Disorders 7 Neuroscience 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Illusion 58 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distortion of the perception of reality Not to be confused with Illustration .

This article is about perception. For figures of speech, see Allusion . For other uses, see Illusion (disambiguation) .

An illusion is a distortion of the senses , which can reveal how the mind normally organizes and interprets sensory stimulation . Although illusions distort the human perception of reality , they are generally shared by most people.

[ 1 ] Illusions may occur with any of the human senses, but visual illusions ( optical illusions ) are the best-known and understood. The emphasis on visual illusions occurs because vision often dominates the other senses. For example, individuals watching a ventriloquist will perceive the voice as coming from the dummy since they are able to see the dummy mouth the words.

[ 2 ] Some illusions are based on general assumptions the brain makes during perception . These assumptions are made using organizational principles (e.g., Gestalt theory), an individual's capacity for depth perception and motion perception , and perceptual constancy . Other illusions occur due to biological sensory structures within the human body or conditions outside the body within one's physical environment.

The term illusion refers to a specific form of sensory distortion. Unlike a hallucination , which is a distortion in the absence of a stimulus , an illusion describes a misinterpretation of a true sensation. For example, hearing voices regardless of the environment would be a hallucination, whereas hearing voices in the sound of running water (or another auditory source) would be an illusion. So, it should not be wrong to consider that illusions are just "misinterpretations" of how our brain perceives something that exists (unlike a hallucination where a stimulus is absent).

Visual [ edit ] Main article: Optical illusion Example of visual illusion: a real gecko hunts the pointer of a mouse , confused with a prey An optical illusion. Square A is exactly the same shade of grey as Square B. (See Checker shadow illusion .) A visual illusion or optical illusion is characterized by visually perceived images that are deceptive or misleading. Therefore, the information gathered by the visual sense is processed to create a percept that does not tally with information from other senses or physical measurements.

[ 3 ] The visual system, which includes the eyes (namely the retinas) and the central nervous system (namely the brain's visual cortex), constructs reality through both perceptual and cognitive neural pathways. Visual illusions are (at least in part) thought to be caused by excessive competing stimuli. Each stimulus follows a dedicated neural path in the early stages of visual processing, and intense/repetitive activity or interaction with active adjoining channels (perceptual neural circuits, usually at the same level) causes a physiological imbalance that alters perception. During low-level visual processing, the retinal circuit arranges the information in the photoreceptors, by creating initial visual percepts from the patterns of light which fall on the retina. The Hermann grid illusion and Mach bands are two illusions that are widely considered to be caused by a biological phenomenon named lateral inhibition , where the receptor signal in the retina's receptive fields from light and dark areas compete with one another.

[ 4 ] The assembly of visual elements into a collective percept, that distinguishes objects from backgrounds, takes part during intermediate-level visual processing. Many common visual illusions are a consequence of the percept constructed during this processing stage, as the elements first captured during low-level processing might easily be interpreted to form an image that differs from objective reality. An example is when two objects of the same size are placed on a certain background which conditions us to believe that one object might be larger than the other, and when the background is removed or replaced our perception immediately changes to the correct scenario (effectively concluding that both objects have equal dimensions).

[ 4 ] High-level visual processing consolidates information gathered from various sources to apply cognitive influences that create a conscious visual experience. Thus, allowing us to recognize the complex identity of different elements, and the disparate relations between them through cognitive processes. Visual illusions are also often a product of this processing stage, and it is during this stage that we might ultimately become conscious of any optical illusion. There are two crucial properties of our visual system related mostly to high-level visual processing, referred to as selectivity and invariance (which we have consistently attempted to replicate in image recognition computer algorithms). Selectivity refers to the identification of particular features that are relevant to recognize a specific element or object, while abstracting from other features that are not fundamental to performing the same recognition (e.g. when we see the shape of a house, certain contours that are essential for us to recognize it while other contours or image properties are not, such as color). On the other hand, invariance refers to the ability to be indifferent to small variations of a given feature, effectively identifying all those variations as simply being different versions of the same feature (e.g. we can recognize a given handwritten letter of the alphabet, written by different people with distinct styles of calligraphy).

[ 4 ] The whole process that constructs our visual experience is extremely complex (with multiple qualities that are unmatched by any computer or digital system). It is organized by many sequential and parallel sub-processes, each of which is essential in building our conscious image of the world. Our whole visual system seeks to simplify and categorize the unstructured low-level visual information, through both selectivity and invariance. Thus, while trying to organize an image by "filling in the gaps" through assumptions, we become vulnerable to misinterpretation.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Auditory [ edit ] Main article: Auditory illusion An auditory illusion is an illusion of hearing , the auditory equivalent of a visual illusion: the listener hears either sounds which are not present in the stimulus, or "impossible" sounds. In short, audio illusions highlight areas where the human ear and brain, as organic, makeshift tools, differ from perfect audio receptors (for better or for worse). One example of an auditory illusion is a Shepard tone .

Tactile [ edit ] Main article: Tactile illusion Examples of tactile illusions include phantom limb , the thermal grill illusion , the cutaneous rabbit illusion and a curious illusion that occurs when the crossed index and middle fingers are run along the bridge of the nose with one finger on each side, resulting in the perception of two separate noses. The brain areas activated during illusory tactile perception are similar to those activated during actual tactile stimulation.

[ 7 ] Tactile illusions can also be elicited through haptic technology.

[ 8 ] These "illusory" tactile objects can be used to create "virtual objects".

[ 9 ] Temporal [ edit ] Main article: Time perception § Types of temporal illusions A temporal illusion is a distortion in the perception of time, which occurs when the time interval between two or more events is very narrow (typically less than a second). In such cases, a person may momentarily perceive time as slowing down, stopping, speeding up, or running backward.

Intersensory [ edit ] Illusions can occur with the other senses including those involved in food perception. Both sound [ 10 ] and touch [ 11 ] have been shown to modulate the perceived staleness and crispness of food products. It was also discovered that even if some portion of the taste receptor on the tongue became damaged that illusory taste could be produced by tactile stimulation.

[ 12 ] Evidence of olfactory (smell) illusions occurred when positive or negative verbal labels were given prior to olfactory stimulation.

[ 13 ] The McGurk effect shows that what we hear is influenced by what we see as we hear the person speaking; the auditory component of one sound is paired with the visual component of another sound, leading to the perception of a third sound.

[ 14 ] Disorders [ edit ] Some illusions occur as a result of an illness or a disorder. While these types of illusions are not shared with everyone, they are typical of each condition. For example, people with migraines often report fortification illusions .

[ citation needed ] Neuroscience [ edit ] Perception is linked to specific brain activity and so can be elicited by brain stimulation. The (illusory) percepts that can be evoked range from simple phosphenes (detections of lights in the visual field ) to high-level percepts.

[ 15 ] In a single-case study on a patient undergoing presurgical evaluation for epilepsy treatment, electrical stimulation at the left temporo-parietal junction evoked the percept of a nearby (illusory) person who "closely 'shadowed' changes in the patient's body position and posture".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Aesthetic illusion – A type of mental absorption.

Altered state of consciousness – Any condition which is significantly different from a normal waking state.

Aporia – State of puzzlement or expression of doubt, in philosophy and rhetoric.

Argument from illusion – Critique of direct realism in perception Augmented reality – View of the real world with computer-generated supplementary features.

Cognitive dissonance – Mental phenomenon of holding contradictory beliefs.

Delusion – Fixation of holding false beliefs.

Dream argument – Postulation about the act of dreaming Hallucination – A vivid perception in the absence of external stimulus that has qualities of real perceptions.

Holography – Recording to reproduce a three-dimensional light field.

List of cognitive biases .

List of optical illusions , Moon illusion – Perceived variation in the moon's size.

Paradox – Logically self-contradictory statement.

Pareidolia – Perception of meaningful patterns or images in random or vague stimuli.

Simulated reality – Concept of a false version of reality.

User illusion – Concept in the philosophy of mind.

References [ edit ] ^ Solso, R. L. (2001). Cognitive psychology (6th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

ISBN 0-205-30937-2 ^ McGurk, Hj.; MacDonald, J. (1976). "Hearing lips and seeing voices".

Nature .

264 (5588): 746– 748.

Bibcode : 1976Natur.264..746M .

doi : 10.1038/264746a0 .

PMID 1012311 .

S2CID 4171157 .

^ Gross, L. (2006).

"Classic Illusion Sheds New Light on the Neural Site of Tactile Perception" .

PLOS Biol .

4 (3): e96.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040096 .

PMC 1382017 .

PMID 20076548 .

^ a b c Kandel E.R., & Schwartz J.H., & Jessell T.M., & Siegelbaum S.A., & Hudspeth A.J., & Mack S(Eds.), (2014).

Principles of Neural Science, Fifth Edition . McGraw Hill.

^ The Cutting Edge of Haptics (MIT Technology Review article) ^ "Robles-De-La-Torre & Hayward 2001" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-10-03 . Retrieved 2006-10-03 .

^ Gross, L. (2006).

"Classic Illusion Sheds New Light on the Neural Site of Tactile Perception" .

PLOS Biol .

4 (3): e96.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040096 .

PMC 1382017 .

PMID 20076548 .

^ "Robles-De-La-Torre & Hayward 2001" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-10-03 . Retrieved 2006-10-03 .

^ The Cutting Edge of Haptics (MIT Technology Review article) ^ Zampini M & Spence C (2004) "The role of auditory cues in modulating the perceived crispness and staleness of potato chips" .

Journal of Sensory Studies 19, 347-363.

^ Barnett-Cowan M (2010) "An illusion you can sink your teeth into Haptic cues modulate the perceived freshness and crispness of pretzels" Archived 2015-06-13 at the Wayback Machine .

Perception 39, 1684-1686.

^ Todrank, J & Bartoshuk, L.M., 1991 ^ Herz R. S. & Von Clef J., 2001 ^ Nath, A. R.; Beauchamp, M. S. (Jan 2012).

"A neural basis for inter-individual differences in the McGurk effect, a multisensory, auditory-visual illusion" .

NeuroImage .

59 (1): 781– 787.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.07.024 .

PMC 3196040 .

PMID 21787869 .

^ Lotto, Beau (2017-05-01).

"Reality is not what it seems: the science behind why optical illusions mess with our minds" .

Wired UK .

ISSN 1357-0978 . Retrieved 2020-02-27 .

^ Arzy, S; Seeck, M; Ortigue, S; Spinelli, L; Blanke, O (2006).

"Induction of an illusory shadow person" (PDF) .

Nature .

443 (7109): 287.

Bibcode : 2006Natur.443..287A .

doi : 10.1038/443287a .

PMID 16988702 .

S2CID 4338465 .

^ Hopkin, Michael (20 September 2006), "Brain Electrodes Conjure up Ghostly Visions" , Nature : news060918–4, doi : 10.1038/news060918-4 , S2CID 191491373 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Illusion .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Illusions .

Universal Veiling Techniques Archived 2010-05-07 at the Wayback Machine What is an Illusion?

[ usurped ] by J.R. Block.

Optical illusions and visual phenomena by Michael Bach Auditory illusions Haptic Perception of Shape - touch illusions, forces and the geometry of objects, by Gabriel Robles-De-La-Torre.

Silencing awareness of visual change by motion v t e Sensation and perception Processes and concepts Sensation Stimulus Sensory receptor Transduction (physiology) Sensory processing Active sensory system Perception Multimodal integration Awareness Consciousness Cognition Feeling Motion perception Qualia Human External Sensory organs Eyes Ears Inner ear Nose Mouth Skin Sensory systems Visual system (sense of vision) Auditory system (sense of hearing) Vestibular system (sense of balance) Olfactory system (sense of smell) Gustatory system (sense of taste) Somatosensory system (sense of touch) Sensory cranial and spinal nerves Optic (II) Vestibulocochlear (VIII) Olfactory (I) Facial (VII) Glossopharyngeal (IX) Trigeminal (V) Spinal Cerebral cortices Visual cortex Auditory cortex Vestibular cortex Olfactory cortex Gustatory cortex Somatosensory cortex Perceptions Visual perception (vision) Color Auditory perception (hearing) Equilibrioception (balance) Olfaction (smell) Gustation (taste or flavor) Touch mechanoreception nociception (pain) thermoception Internal Proprioception Hunger Thirst Suffocation Nausea Visceral pain Nonhuman Animal Electroreception Magnetoreception Echolocation Infrared sensing in vampire bats Infrared sensing in snakes Surface wave detection Frog hearing Toad vision Plant Photomorphogenesis Gravitropism Artificial Robotic sensing Computer vision Machine hearing Types of sensory receptors Mechanoreceptor Baroreceptor Mechanotransduction Lamellar corpuscle Tactile corpuscle Merkel nerve ending Bulbous corpuscle Campaniform sensilla Slit sensilla Stretch receptor Photoreceptor Photoreceptor cell Cone cell Rod cell ipRGC Photopigment Aureochrome Chemoreceptor Taste receptor Olfactory receptor Osmoreceptor Thermoreceptor Cilium TRP channels Nociceptor Nociceptin receptor Juxtacapillary receptor Disorders Visual Visual impairment Alice in Wonderland syndrome Amaurosis Anopsia Color blindness Diplopia Hemeralopia and Nyctalopia Optic neuropathy Oscillopsia Palinopsia Papilledema Photophobia Photopsia Polyopia Scotoma Stereoblindness Visual snow Auditory Amblyaudia Auditory agnosia Auditory hallucination Auditory verbal agnosia Cortical deafness Hearing loss Microwave auditory effect Music-specific disorders Palinopsia Spatial hearing loss Tinnitus Vestibular Vertigo BPPV Labyrinthine fistula Labyrinthitis Ménière's disease Olfactory Anosmia Dysosmia Hyperosmia Hyposmia Olfactory reference syndrome Parosmia Phantosmia Gustatory Ageusia Hypergeusia Hypogeusia Parageusia Tactile Astereognosis CMT disease Formication Hyperesthesia Hypoesthesia Paresthesia Tactile hallucination Nociception (pain) Hyperalgesia Hypoalgesia Pain dissociation Phantom pain Proprioception Asomatognosia Phantom limb syndrome Somatoparaphrenia Supernumerary phantom limb Multimodal Aura Agnosia Allochiria Derealization Hallucination HSAN Sensory processing disorder Synesthesia Biases and errors Illusion · Pareidolia Category v t e Mental processes Cognition Association Awareness Cognitive flexibility Cognitive liberty Forecasting affective Foresight Comprehension Consciousness Critical thinking Decision-making Imagination Intuition Problem solving methods strategies Prospection Perception Amodal Color RGB model Depth Form Haptic ( Touch ) Perception as interpretation Peripheral Social Sound Harmonics Pitch Speech Visual Memory Consolidation Encoding Storage Recall Other Attention Experiential avoidance Higher nervous activity Intention Ironic process theory Learning Mental fatigue Relational frame theory Mental set Thinking Thought suppression Volition Category v t e Auditory illusions Examples Binaural beats Constant spectrum melody Deutsch's scale illusion Franssen effect Glissando illusion Illusory continuity of tones Illusory discontinuity Lossy audio compression McGurk effect Missing fundamental Octave illusion Risset's rhythmic effect Shepard-Risset tone Deutsch tritone paradox Speech-to-song illusion Yanny or Laurel Related Illusion Optical illusion Tactile illusion Temporal illusion v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion Authority control databases National Germany Japan Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐qf6zp
Cached time: 20250818152246
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.585 seconds
Real time usage: 0.766 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4426/1000000
Revision size: 15936/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 134770/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2446/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86168/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.383/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20734402/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  654.412      1 -total
 26.19%  171.390     16 Template:Annotated_link
 21.09%  138.033      1 Template:Reflist
 15.71%  102.806     10 Template:Navbox
 13.25%   86.700      1 Template:Sensation_and_perception
 10.25%   67.079      1 Template:Short_description
  7.52%   49.234      5 Template:Cite_journal
  6.79%   44.456      1 Template:ISBN
  6.42%   42.040      2 Template:Sister_project
  6.22%   40.687      2 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53472:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818152246 and revision id 1304463178. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Illusion&oldid=1304463178 " Categories : Perception Deception Illusions Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 05:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Illusion 58 languages Add topic

