Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 English 1.2 French 1.3 German 1.4 Russian 1.5 Barngarla 2 Inflectional suffixes Toggle Inflectional suffixes subsection 2.1 Verbs 2.2 Nouns 2.3 Adjectives and adverbs 3 Derivation 4 Altered pronunciation in English 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Suffix 93 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Basa Bali বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Македонски Malagasy Malti मराठी Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Papiamentu Plattdüütsch Polski Português Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский سرائیکی Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Morpheme placed at the end of a word For other uses, see Suffix (disambiguation) .

Affixes Prefix Suffix Circumfix Duplifix Infix Libfix Interfix Transfix Simulfix Suprafix Disfix See also: Null morpheme v t e In linguistics , a suffix is an affix which is placed after the stem of a word. Common examples are case endings , which indicate the grammatical case of nouns and adjectives, and verb endings, which form the conjugation of verbs.

Suffixes can carry grammatical information ( inflectional endings) or lexical information ( derivational /lexical suffixes) .

[ 1 ] Inflection changes the grammatical properties of a word within its syntactic category . Derivational suffixes fall into two categories: class-changing derivation and class-maintaining derivation.

Particularly in the study of Semitic languages , suffixes are called affirmatives , as they can alter the form of the words. In Indo-European studies , a distinction is made between suffixes and endings (see Proto-Indo-European root ).

A word-final segment that is somewhere between a free morpheme and a bound morpheme is known as a suffixoid [ 2 ] or a semi-suffix [ 3 ] (e.g., English -like or German -freundlich "friendly").

Examples [ edit ] English [ edit ] Girl s —where the suffix -s marks the plurality .

He make s —where suffix -s marks the third person singular present tense .

It clos ed —where the suffix -ed marks the past tense .

It's bright er —where the suffix -er marks the comparative .

French [ edit ] De beau x jours —where the suffix -x marks the plural .

Elle est passablement joli e —where the suffix -e marks the feminine form of the adjective.

German [ edit ] mein Computer —where the lack of suffixes is because its case, nominative, is "unmarked" mein es Computer s —genitive case mein em Computer —dative case mein en Computer —accusative case Russian [ edit ] мой компьютер— where the lack of suffixes is because its case, nominative, is "unmarked" мо его компьютер а —genitive case мо ему компьютер у —dative case мой компьютер —accusative case за-туш- и-ть свеч у —where first word has -и- suffix, -ть ending (infinitive form); second word with ending -у (accusative case, singular, feminine).

добр-о-жел-а- тель-н-ый —добр- root, -о- interfix, -жел- root, verbal -a- interfix, nominal -тель suffix, adjectival -н- suffix, adjectival -ый ending (nominative case, singular, masculine).

выда- ющ-ий-ся —here suffix -ся (reflexive) is so-called postfix as it is placed after the adjectival ending.

Barngarla [ edit ] wárraidya " emu " — where the lack of suffixes is because its grammatical number, singular, is "unmarked" wárraidya lbili "two emus" — dual wárraidya rri "emus" — plural wárraidya ilyarranha "a lot of emus", "heaps of emus" — superplural [ 4 ] : 227–228 Inflectional suffixes [ edit ] Inflection changes the grammatical properties of a word within its syntactic category . In several languages, this is realized by an inflectional suffix, also known as desinence . In the example: I was hoping the cloth wouldn't fade, but it has fad ed quite a bit.

the suffix -d inflects the root -word fade to indicate past participle.

Inflectional suffixes do not change the word class of the word after the inflection.

[ 5 ] Inflectional suffixes in Modern English include: Verbs [ edit ] -s third person singular simple present indicative active -ed past tense and past participle -t past tense (weak irregular) -ing present participle and gerund -en past participle (irregular) Nouns [ edit ] -s plural number -en plural number (irregular) Adjectives and adverbs [ edit ] -er comparative degree -est superlative degree Derivation [ edit ] Derivational suffixes can be divided into two categories: class-changing derivation and class-maintaining derivation.

[ 6 ] In English, they include -ly (usually changes adjectives into adverbs, but also some nouns into adjectives) -al / -ual (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -ic / -ical (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -ish (usually changes nouns into adjectives/class-maintaining, with the word class remaining an adjective) -ful (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -oid (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -like (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -less (usually changes nouns into adjectives) -able / -ible (usually changes verbs into adjectives) -ant (usually changes verbs into nouns, often referring to a human agent) -tion / -ion / -ation (usually changes verbs into nouns) -ment (usually changes verbs into nouns) -ity (usually changes adjectives into nouns) -ness (usually changes adjectives into nouns) -fy (usually changes nouns into verbs) -ise / -ize (usually changes nouns into verbs) -ess (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -ism (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -ist (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -hood (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -logy / -ology (usually class-maintaining, with the word class remaining a noun) -um (usually) museum; stadium; auditorium; aquarium; planetarium; medium -wise From wīse ("manner, way, condition, direction") Altered pronunciation in English [ edit ] A suffix will often change the stress or accent pattern of a multi-syllable word, altering the phoneme pattern of the root word even if the root's morphology does not change.

[ 7 ] An example is the difference between "photograph" and "photography". In this case, the "-y" ending governs the stress pattern, causing the primary stress to shift from the first syllable ("pho-") to the antepenultimate ("-to-"). The unaccented syllables have their ordinary vowel sound changed to a schwa. This can be a particular problem for dyslexics, affecting their phonemic awareness, [ 8 ] as well as a hurdle for non-native speakers.

References [ edit ] ^ Mead, Jonathan (1993).

Proceedings of the 11th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics . Center for the Study of Language (CSLI).

ISBN 978-1-881526-12-4 .

^ Kremer, Marion. 1997.

Person reference and gender in translation: a contrastive investigation of English and German . Tübingen: Gunter Narr, p. 69, note 11.

^ Marchand, Hans. 1969.

The categories and types of present-day English word-formation: A synchronic-diachronic approach . Munich: Beck, pp. 356 ff.

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad 2020, Revivalistics: From the Genesis of Israeli to Language Reclamation in Australia and Beyond , Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780199812790 / ISBN 9780199812776 ^ Jackson and Amvela (2000): Word, Meaning and Vocabulary; An Introduction to Modern English Lexicology . London, Athenaeum Press, p. 83 ^ Jackson and Amvela (2000): Word, Meaning and Vocabulary; An Introduction to Modern English Lexicology . London, Athenaeum Press, p. 88 ^ Nancy K. Lewkowicz, " Pronouncing Longer Words:  Don't Begin at the Beginning ".

Journal of Reading , Vol. 29, No. 3 (Dec., 1985), 226–237.

^ " Dyslexia Help: Success Starts Here ". University of Michigan.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Suffixes at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suffix&oldid=1304577453 " Categories : Suffixes Affixes Linguistics terminology English suffixes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suffix 93 languages Add topic

