Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Static balance 2 Dynamic balance 3 Vehicle vibration 4 Environmental consequences 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Tire balance 8 languages العربية Català Español Euskara Lietuvių Norsk bokmål Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mass distribution in an automobile tire 25 g zinc tire weight This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tire balance" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Tire balance , also called tire unbalance or tire imbalance , describes the distribution of mass within an automobile tire or the entire wheel (including the rim ) on which it is mounted.

When the wheel rotates, asymmetries in its mass distribution may cause it to apply periodic forces and torques to the axle, which can cause ride disturbances, usually as vertical and lateral vibrations, and this may also cause the steering wheel to oscillate. The frequency and magnitude of this ride disturbance usually increases with speed, and vehicle suspensions may become excited when the rotating frequency of the wheel equals the resonant frequency of the suspension.

Tire balance is measured in factories and repair shops by two methods: with static balancers and with dynamic balancers. Tires with large unbalances are downgraded or rejected. When tires are fitted to wheels at the point of sale, they are measured again on a balancing machine , and correction weights are applied to counteract their combined unbalance. Tires may be rebalanced if driver perceives excessive vibration. Tire balancing is distinct from wheel alignment .

Static balance [ edit ] Static and dynamic imbalance is concerned with unbalanced distribution of mass (see also radial run-out and axial run-out , respectively, for concerns of variance in the position of the surface from the axis of rotation) Static balance requires the wheel center of mass to be located on its axis of rotation, usually at the center of the axle on which it is mounted. This has some similarities to radial run-out, but involves where the center of mass is located, unlike radial run-out which involves the variance in the distance to the outer surface from the axis of rotation. Static balance can be measured by a static balancing machine where the tire is placed on a vertical, non-rotating spindle. If the center of mass of the tire is not located on this vertical axis, then gravity will cause the axis to deflect. The amount of deflection indicates the magnitude of the unbalance, and the orientation of the deflection indicates the angular location of the unbalance. In tire manufacturing factories, static balancers use sensors mounted to the spindle assembly. In tire retail shops, static balancers are usually non-rotating bubble balancers, where the magnitude and angle of the unbalance is indicated by the center bubble in an oil-filled glass sighting gauge. While some very small shops that lack specialized machines still do this process, they have been largely replaced in larger shops with machines.

Dynamic balance [ edit ] Dynamic balance requires that a principal axis of the tire's moment of inertia be aligned with the axis about which the tire rotates, usually the axle on which it is mounted. This is similar to axial run-out , but again, dynamic balance involves where the center of mass is, while axial runout involves the distance of the outer surface from the axis of rotation. In the tire factory, the tire and wheel are mounted on a balancing machine test wheel, the assembly is rotated at 100 r/min (about 5–7 m/s (18–25 km/h; 11–16 mph) with recent high sensitivity sensors) or higher, 300 r/min (about 25–27 m/s (90–97 km/h; 56–60 mph) with typical low sensitivity sensors), and forces of unbalance are measured by sensors.

[ 1 ] These forces are resolved into static and couple values for the inner and outer planes of the wheel, and compared to the unbalance tolerance (the maximum allowable manufacturing limits). If the tire is not checked, it has the potential to cause vibration in the suspension of the vehicle on which it is mounted. In tire retail shops, tire/wheel assemblies are checked on a spin-balancer, which determines the amount and angle of unbalance. Balance weights are then fitted to the outer and inner flanges of the wheel.

[ 2 ] Although dynamic balance is theoretically better than static balance, because both dynamic and static imbalances can be measured and corrected, its effectiveness is disputed because of the flexible nature of the rubber. A tire in a free spinning machine may not experience the same centrifugal distortion, heat distortion, nor weight and camber that it would on a vehicle. Dynamic balancing may therefore create new unintended imbalances.

[ 3 ] Dynamic balancing has traditionally required removing the wheel from the vehicle, but sensors installed in modern cars, such as for anti-lock brakes , could enable estimating the imbalance while driving.

[ 4 ] Vehicle vibration [ edit ] Vibration in automobiles may occur for many reasons, such as wheel unbalance, imperfect tire or wheel shape, brake pulsation, and worn or loose driveline, suspension, or steering components. Unbalance can result from collision-induced wheel deformations, uneven tire wear, or a shift of the tire on the rim. In some cases, losing a counterweight or bumping the curb hard can lead to wheel unbalance. Foreign material, such as road tar, stones, ice, or snow, that is stuck in a tire's tread or otherwise adhered to the tire or wheel may also cause a temporary unbalance and subsequent vibration. Uneven weight distribution in the wheel and tire assembly can result from manufacturing inaccuracies, uneven tread wear, damage over time, or improper tire mounting.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Environmental consequences [ edit ] As balancing weights are attached to the exterior of the wheel, they may break or fall off while driving. Traditionally, these weights have been made of lead ; it is estimated that up to 230 tonnes (500,000 lb) of lead, having fallen off car wheels, ended up in the environment.

[ 8 ] According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency , these total more than 20,000 tonnes of lead worldwide every year, [ 9 ] and therefore the use of less-toxic materials is encouraged.

[ 10 ] In Europe , lead weights have been banned since 2005; in the United States , they have been banned by various states but have not been restricted at the federal level. Alternatives include weights made of zinc-lead or leaded copper , or weights that are altogether lead-free.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Speed wobble Rotordynamics Run-out , an inaccuracy of rotating mechanical systems References [ edit ] ^ "Balancing tires" .

Continental Tires . Retrieved 2024-11-11 .

^ Baruh, Haim (2014).

Applied Dynamics . Hoboken: CRC Press. p. 586.

ISBN 978-1-4822-5079-4 .

OCLC 908079666 .

^ "Car Care Guide: 14. Tires" .

Popular Mechanics : 200. May 1976.

^ Jianbo Lu, Dimitar Filev and Len Johnson (2011). "Real-time Tire Imbalance Detection Using ABS Wheel Speed Sensors".

SAE Int. J. Mater. Manuf .

4 (1): 1036– 1047.

doi : 10.4271/2011-01-0981 .

^ Kingston Heritage (February 19, 2016).

"What to do if your car gets the shakes after a snow storm" . Metroland Media Group Ltd. Archived from the original on 2019-12-14 . Retrieved 2018-10-05 .

You may end up with ice and snow packed in your wheels. This solid clump of ice causes a steering-wheel shake because the added mass rotating with the wheel throws off the wheel balance.

^ "How long does an alignment take" . 18 April 2021.

Saturday, 17 July 2021 ^ "Reifen auswuchten: Was es kostet, wie oft und wann es gemacht werden sollte" (in German) . Retrieved 2024-11-11 .

^ Schnubel, Mark (2014).

Today's Technician: Automotive Suspension & Steering Classroom Manual and Shop Manual . Cengage Learning. p. 607.

ISBN 9781305178410 .

^ National Lead Free Wheel Weight Initiative (NLFWWI) . epa.gov. Retrieved on 2012-06-26. (dead link 21 January 2023) ^ "Postal Services pledges to remove 8,000 pounds of lead" .

American Recycler . January 2009. p. B2 . Retrieved 3 May 2016 .

^ Gilles, Tim (2012).

Automotive Service: Inspection, Maintenance, Repair . Cengage Learning. p. 1167.

ISBN 9781133420682 .

v t e Tires Types Tubeless tire Radial tire Low rolling resistance tire Run-flat tire Michelin PAX System Airless tire Tweel Rain tyre Snow tire All-terrain tire Bar grip Knobby tire Large tire Mud-terrain tire Paddle tire Orange oil tires Whitewall tire Aircraft tire Tundra tire Bicycle tire Tubular tire Lego tire Motorcycle tyre Tractor tire Racing slick Formula One tyres Spare tire Continental tire Components Bead Beadlock Tread Siping (rubber) Valve stem Dunlop valve Presta valve Schrader valve Attributes Camber thrust Circle of forces Cold inflation pressure Contact patch Cornering force Ground pressure Pacejka's Magic Formula Pneumatic trail Relaxation length Rolling resistance Self aligning torque Slip angle Steering ratio Tire balance Tire load sensitivity Tire uniformity Lateral Force Variation Radial Force Variation Traction (engineering) Treadwear rating Behaviors Aquaplaning Groove wander Slip (vehicle dynamics) Tramlining Maintenance Tire maintenance Tire rotation Bicycle pump Central Tire Inflation System Tire mousse Tire-pressure monitoring system Tire-pressure gauge Direct TPMS Bead breaker Tire changer Tire manipulator Tire iron Life cycle Tire manufacturing List of tire companies Retread Waste tires Tire recycling Tire fire Blowout Flat tire Ozone cracking Organizations European Tyre and Rim Technical Organisation Tire Society Tire Science and Technology Identification Tire code Plus sizing Tire label Uniform Tire Quality Grading (UTQG) Outline of tires Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tire_balance&oldid=1299012452 " Categories : Tires Vehicle technology Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 02:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tire balance 8 languages Add topic

