Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Boethius 2 In the middle ages Toggle In the middle ages subsection 2.1 Religious instruction 2.2 Political instruction 2.3 Carmina Burana 3 Later usage Toggle Later usage subsection 3.1 Shakespeare 3.2 Victorian era 4 References Toggle the table of contents Wheel of Fortune (medieval) 11 languages العربية Bosanski Español Esperanto Français Italiano Português Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rota Fortunae ) Symbol of fate in medieval and ancient philosophy This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Wheel of Fortune" medieval – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Wheel of Fortune" medieval – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) From an edition of Boccaccio's De Casibus Virorum Illustrium showing Lady Fortune spinning her wheel.

In medieval and ancient philosophy , the Wheel of Fortune or Rota Fortunae is a symbol of the capricious nature of Fate . The wheel belongs to the goddess Fortuna ( Greek equivalent: Tyche ) who spins it at random, changing the positions of those on the wheel: some suffer great misfortune, others gain windfalls. The metaphor was already a cliché in ancient times, complained about by Tacitus , but was greatly popularized for the Middle Ages by its extended treatment in the Consolation of Philosophy by Boethius from around 520. It became a common image in manuscripts of the book, and then other media, where Fortuna, often blindfolded, turns a large wheel of the sort used in watermills , to which kings and other powerful figures are attached.

Origins [ edit ] The origin of the word is from the "wheel of fortune"—the zodiac , referring to the Celestial spheres of which the 8th holds the stars, and the 9th is where the signs of the zodiac are placed. The concept was first invented in Babylon and later developed by the ancient Greeks , with early references from Cicero's In Pisonem .

Cicero wrote: “The house of your colleague rang with song and cymbals while he himself danced naked at a feast, wherein, even while he executed his whirling gyrations, he felt no fear of the Wheel of Fortune” ("cum conlegae tui domus cantu et cymbalis personaret cumque ipse nudus in convivio saltaret, in quo cum illum saltatorium versaret orbem, ne tum qui dem fortunae rotam pertimescebat")." [ 1 ] The concept somewhat resembles the bhavachakra , or Wheel of Becoming, depicted throughout Ancient Indian art and literature, except that the earliest conceptions in the Roman and Greek world involve not a two-dimensional wheel but a three-dimensional sphere, a metaphor for the world. It was widely used in the Ptolemaic perception of the universe as the zodiac being a wheel with its "signs" constantly turning throughout the year and having effect on the world's fate (or fortune).

Statuette [ 2 ] of the Roman god Fortuna , with gubernaculum (ship's rudder), [ 3 ] Rota Fortunae (wheel of fortune) and cornucopia (horn of plenty) found near the altar at Castlecary in 1771.

[ 4 ] In the second century BC, the Roman tragedian Pacuvius wrote: Fortunam insanam esse et caecam et brutam perhibent philosophi, Saxoque instare in globoso praedicant volubili: Id quo saxum inpulerit fors, eo cadere Fortunam autumant.

Caecam ob eam rem esse iterant, quia nihil cernat, quo sese adplicet; Insanam autem esse aiunt, quia atrox, incerta instabilisque sit; Brutam, quia dignum atque indignum nequeat internoscere.

Philosophers say that Fortune is insane and blind and stupid, and they teach that she stands on a rolling, spherical rock: they affirm that, wherever chance pushes that rock, Fortuna falls in that direction.

They repeat that she is blind for this reason: that she does not see where she's heading; they say she's insane, because she is cruel, flaky and unstable; stupid, because she can't distinguish between the worthy and the unworthy.

— Pacuvius , Scaenicae Romanorum Poesis Fragmenta. Vol. 1 , ed. O. Ribbeck, 1897 The idea of the rolling ball of fortune became a literary topos and was used frequently in declamation. In fact, the Rota Fortunae became a prime example of a trite topos or meme for Tacitus , who mentions its rhetorical overuse in the Dialogus de oratoribus .

Ptolemaic model of the spheres for Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn with epicycle , eccentric deferent and equant point.

Georg von Peuerbach , Theoricae novae planetarum , 1474.

In the second century AD, astronomer and astrologer Vettius Valens wrote: There are many wheels, most moving from west to east, but some move from east to west.

Seven wheels, each hold one heavenly object, the first holds the moon...

Then the eighth wheel holds all the stars that we see...

And the ninth wheel, the wheel of fortunes, moves from east to west, and includes each of the twelve signs of fortune, the twelve signs of the zodiac.

Each wheel is inside the other, like an onion's peel sits inside another peel, and there is no empty space between them.

[ This quote needs a citation ] Illustration by Jean Miélot to Christine de Pizan 's Epitre d'Othéa; Les Sept Sacrements de l'Eglise , c. 1455 at Waddesdon Manor Boethius [ edit ] The goddess and her Wheel were eventually absorbed into Western medieval thought . The Roman philosopher Boethius (c. 480–524) played a key role, [ 5 ] utilizing both her and her Wheel in his Consolatio Philosophiae . For example, from the first chapter of the second book: I know the manifold deceits of that monstrous lady, Fortune; in particular, her fawning friendship with those whom she intends to cheat, until the moment when she unexpectedly abandons them, and leaves them reeling in agony beyond endurance.

[...] Having entrusted yourself to Fortune's dominion, you must conform to your mistress's ways. What, are you trying to halt the motion of her whirling wheel? Dimmest of fools that you are, you must realize that if the wheel stops turning, it ceases to be the course of chance." [ 6 ] Boethius had a unique perspective on Fortune and blended the concepts from Paganism and Christianity. The Pagans viewed Fortune as an "independent ruling power", whereas Christians viewed Fortune as a "power completely subservient to another God".

[ 7 ] This allowed Boethius to depict Fortune as having power without denying the fact that a Christian God has control.

In the middle ages [ edit ] The medieval Wheel of Fortunes appeared in the eleventh century from readings of Boethius' Consoldations and aimed to show the transitory, ephemeral and almost illusionary character of worldly power. The image first appeared during the Gregorian Reform , when the Church sought to get independent from secular powers and was, though initially scholarly in its application, quickly disseminated in society. Thus it was sculpted on cathedrals, though its meaning often changed.

[ 8 ] Religious instruction [ edit ] Mural by Albertus Pictor in Härkeberga Church , Sweden (1480s) Medvieval mural in Kvistofta Church , Sweden The Wheel was widely used as an allegory in medieval literature and art to aid religious instruction. Though classically Fortune's Wheel could be favourable and disadvantageous, medieval writers preferred to concentrate on the tragic aspect, dwelling on downfall of the mighty – serving to remind people of the temporality of earthly things . In the morality play Everyman (c. 1495), for instance, Death comes unexpectedly to claim the protagonist. Fortune's Wheel has spun Everyman low, and Good Deeds, which he previously neglected, are needed to secure his passage to heaven.

Geoffrey Chaucer used the concept of the tragic Wheel of Fortune a great deal. It forms the basis for the Monk's Tale , which recounts stories of the great brought low throughout history, including Lucifer , Adam , Samson , Hercules , Nebuchadnezzar , Belshazzar , Nero , Alexander the Great , Julius Caesar and, in the following passage, Peter I of Cyprus .

O noble Peter, Cyprus' lord and king, Which Alexander won by mastery, To many a heathen ruin did'st thou bring; For this thy lords had so much jealousy, That, for no crime save thy high chivalry, All in thy bed they slew thee on a morrow.

And thus does Fortune's wheel turn treacherously And out of happiness bring men to sorrow.

~ Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales , The Monk's Tale [ 9 ] Transept rose window of the Trento Cathedral . Fortune stands at the center and men turn around the wheel.

Fortune's Wheel often turns up in medieval art, from manuscripts to the great rose windows in many medieval cathedrals, which are based on the Wheel. Characteristically, it has four shelves, or stages of life, with four human figures, usually labeled on the left regnabo (I shall reign), on the top regno (I reign) and is usually crowned, descending on the right regnavi (I have reigned) and the lowly figure on the bottom is marked sum sine regno (I am without a kingdom).

Dante employed the Wheel in the Inferno and a " Wheel of Fortune " trump-card appeared in the Tarot deck (circa 1440, Italy).

Political instruction [ edit ] The wheel of fortune from the Burana Codex ; The figures are labelled "Regno, Regnavi, Sum sine regno, Regnabo": I reign, I reigned, I have no kingdom, I shall reign In the medieval and renaissance period, a popular genre of writing was " Mirrors for Princes ", which set out advice for the ruling classes on how to wield power (the most famous being The Prince by Niccolò Machiavelli ). Such political treatises could use the concept of the Wheel of Fortune as an instructive guide to their readers.

John Lydgate 's Fall of Princes , written for his patron Humphrey, Duke of Gloucester is a noteworthy example.

Many Arthurian romances of the era also use the concept of the Wheel in this manner, often placing the Nine Worthies on it at various points.

...fortune is so variant, and the wheel so moveable, there nis none constant abiding, and that may be proved by many old chronicles, of noble Hector , and Troilus , and Alisander , the mighty conqueror, and many mo other; when they were most in their royalty, they alighted lowest.

~ Lancelot in Thomas Malory 's Le Morte d'Arthur , Chapter XVII.

[ 10 ] Like the Mirrors for Princes, this could be used to convey advice to readers. For instance, in most romances, Arthur's greatest military achievement – the conquest of the Roman Empire – is placed late on in the overall story. However, in Malory's work the Roman conquest and high point of King Arthur 's reign is established very early on. Thus, everything that follows is something of a decline. Arthur, Lancelot and the other Knights of the Round Table are meant to be the paragons of chivalry , yet in Malory's telling of the story they are doomed to failure. In medieval thinking, only God was perfect, and even a great figure like King Arthur had to be brought low. For the noble reader of the tale in the Middle Ages, this moral could serve as a warning, but also as something to aspire to. Malory could be using the concept of Fortune's Wheel to imply that if even the greatest of chivalric knights made mistakes, then a normal fifteenth-century noble didn't have to be a paragon of virtue in order to be a good knight.

Carmina Burana [ edit ] The Wheel of Fortune motif appears significantly in the Carmina Burana (or Burana Codex ), albeit with a postclassical phonetic spelling of the genitive form Fortunae . Excerpts from two of the collection's better known poems, " Fortuna Imperatrix Mundi (Fortune, Empress of the World)" and " Fortune Plango Vulnera (I Bemoan the Wounds of Fortune)," read: Sors immanis et inanis, rota tu volubilis, status malus, vana salus semper dissolubilis, obumbrata et velata michi quoque niteris; nunc per ludum dorsum nudum fero tui sceleris.

. . . . . . . . . .

Fortune rota volvitur; descendo minoratus; alter in altum tollitur; nimis exaltatus rex sedet in vertice caveat ruinam!

nam sub axe legimus Hecubam reginam.

Fate – monstrous and empty, you whirling wheel, status is bad, well-being is vain always may melt away, shadowy and veiled you plague me too; now through the game bare backed I bear your villainy.

. . . . . . . . .

The wheel of Fortune turns; I go down, demeaned; another is carried to the height; far too high up sits the king at the summit – let him beware ruin!

for under the axle we read: Queen Hecuba .

The "Queen of Fortune", helped by four other personifications , turns her wheel.

Later usage [ edit ] Fortune and her Wheel have remained an enduring image throughout history. Fortune's wheel can also be found in Thomas More's Utopia .

Shakespeare [ edit ] Wheel of fortune in Sebastian Brant 's Narrenschiff , woodcut by A. Dürer William Shakespeare in Hamlet wrote of the "slings and arrows of outrageous fortune" and, of fortune personified, to "break all the spokes and fellies from her wheel." And in Henry V , Act 3 Scene VI [ 11 ] are the lines: Pistol: Bardolph, a soldier firm and sound of heart And of buxom valor, hath by cruel fate And giddy Fortune's furious fickle wheel That goddess blind, That stands upon the rolling restless stone— Fluellen: By your patience, Aunchient Pistol. Fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore his eyes, to signify to you that Fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning, and inconstant, and mutability, and variation. And her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls, and rolls, and rolls.

Pistol: Fortune is Bardolph's foe, and frowns on him; Shakespeare also references this Wheel in King Lear . The Earl of Kent, who was once held dear by the King, has been banished, only to return in disguise. This disguised character is placed in the stocks for an overnight and laments this turn of events at the end of Act II, Scene 2: [ 12 ] Fortune, good night, smile once more; turn thy wheel!

In Act IV, scene vii, King Lear also contrasts his misery on the "wheel of fire" to Cordelia's "soul in bliss".

Rosalind and Celia also discuss Fortune, especially as it stands opposed to Nature, in As You Like It , Act I, scene ii.

Throughout Shakespeare's works, Fortuna is a powerful force that can make even kings go from greatness to ruin with her wheel. She is often used as a scapegoat to blame when someone experiences a disaster.

[ 13 ] Victorian era [ edit ] The Wheel of Fortune by Edward Burne-Jones , 1875–1883 In Anthony Trollope 's novel The Way We Live Now , the character Lady Carbury writes a novel entitled The Wheel of Fortune about a heroine who suffers great financial hardships.

References [ edit ] ^ Robinson, David M. (1946).

"The Wheel of Fortune" .

Classical Philology .

41 (4): 207– 216.

doi : 10.1086/362976 .

ISSN 0009-837X .

JSTOR 267004 .

^ "statuette of Fortuna" .

Hunterian Museum & Art Gallery Collections: GLAHM F.43 . University of Glasgow. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ "Roman statuette of Fortuna" .

BBC - A History of the World . Retrieved 12 October 2017 .

^ MacDonald, James (1897).

Tituli Hunteriani: An Account of the Roman Stones in the Hunterian Museum, University of Glasgow . Glasgow: T. & R. Annan & Sons. pp.

90– 91 . Retrieved 11 October 2017 .

^ Patch, Howard Rollin (1927).

The Goddess Fortuna in Medieval Literature . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674183780 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Boethius (2008).

The Consolation of Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

19– 20.

ISBN 978-0-19-954054-9 .

^ Ziolkowski, Eric J. (October 1991).

"Don Quijote's Windmill and Fortune's Wheel" .

The Modern Language Review .

86 (4): 885– 897.

doi : 10.2307/3732543 .

JSTOR 3732543 .

^ Grafton, Anthony; Most, Glenn W.; Settis, Salvatore (25 October 2010). "Fortune".

The Classical Tradition . Harvard University Press. pp.

365– 366.

ISBN 978-0-674-03572-0 . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

^ "The Monk's Tale, Modern English – Canterbury Tales – Geoffrey Chaucer (1340?–1400)" . Classiclit.about.com. 2009-11-02. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18 . Retrieved 2011-11-24 .

^ "Le Morte d' Arthur – Chapter XVII" . Worldwideschool.org. Archived from the original on 2016-04-11 . Retrieved 2011-11-24 .

^ "King Henry V by William Shakespeare: Act 3. Scene VI" . Online-literature.com. 2007-01-26 . Retrieved 2011-11-24 .

^ "Act II. Scene II. King Lear. Craig, W.J., ed. 1914. The Oxford Shakespeare" . Bartleby.com . Retrieved 2011-11-24 .

^ Chapman, Raymond (1950).

"The Wheel of Fortune in Shakespeare's Historical Plays" .

The Review of English Studies .

1 (1): 1– 7.

doi : 10.1093/res/I.1.1 .

ISSN 0034-6551 .

JSTOR 511770 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wheel of Fortune .

Look up rota Fortuna or Wheel of Fortune in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wheel_of_Fortune_(medieval)&oldid=1300437331 " Categories : Fortuna Medieval legends Metaphors Mythological objects Objects in Greek mythology Wheels Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2018 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced quotes Articles containing Medieval Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 09:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wheel of Fortune (medieval) 11 languages Add topic

