Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Girard Desargues 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician and engineer (1591–1661) Girard Desargues Born ( 1591-02-21 ) 21 February 1591 Lyon , France Died September 1661 (aged 70) Lyon, France Known for Desarguesian plane , non-Desarguesian plane , Desargues' theorem , Desargues graph , Desargues configuration , Desargues (crater) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Girard Desargues ( French: [ʒiʁaʁ dezaʁɡ] ; 21 February 1591 – September 1661) was a French mathematician and engineer, who is considered one of the founders of projective geometry .

[ 1 ] Desargues' theorem , the Desargues graph , and the crater Desargues on the Moon are named in his honour.

Pratique du trait a preuves (1643) Biography [ edit ] Born in Lyon , Desargues came from a family devoted to service to the French crown. His father was a royal notary , an investigating commissioner of the Seneschal's court in Lyon (1574), the collector of the tithes on ecclesiastical revenues for the city of Lyon (1583) and for the diocese of Lyon .

Girard Desargues worked as an architect from 1645. Prior to that, he had worked as a tutor and may have served as an engineer and technical consultant in the entourage of Richelieu . Yet his involvement in the Siege of La Rochelle, though alleged by Ch. Weiss in Biographie Universelle [ 2 ] (1842), has never been testified.

As an architect, Desargues planned several private and public buildings in Paris and Lyon. As an engineer, he designed a system for raising water that he installed near Paris. It was based on the use of the epicycloidal wheel, the principle of which was unrecognized at the time.

His research on perspective and geometrical projections can be seen as a culmination of centuries of scientific inquiry across the classical epoch in optics that stretched from al-Hasan Ibn al-Haytham ( Alhazen ) to Johannes Kepler , and going beyond a mere synthesis of these traditions with Renaissance perspective theories and practices.

[ 3 ] His work was rediscovered and republished in 1864. A collection of his works was published in 1951, [ 4 ] and the 1864 compilation remains in print.

[ 5 ] One notable work, often cited by others in mathematics, is "Rough draft for an essay on the results of taking plane sections of a cone" (1639).

Late in his life, Desargues published a paper with the cryptic title of DALG . The most common theory about what this stands for is Des Argues, Lyonnais, Géometre (proposed by Henri Brocard ).

He died in Lyon.

See also [ edit ] Desarguesian plane , non-Desarguesian plane Desargues' theorem Desargues graph Desargues configuration Desargues (crater) Perspective (graphical) / Perspective (visual) Optics References [ edit ] ^ Swinden, B.A. "Geometry and Girard Desargues". The Mathematical Gazette. Vol. 34, No. 310 (Dec., 1950) p. 253 ^ Weiss, Charles (1843–1865). "Desargues, Gérard". In Michaud, Louis-Gabriel (ed.).

Biographie universelle ancienne et moderne . Vol. 10. p. 452.

.

^ El-Bizri, Nader (2010). "Classical Optics and the Perspectiva Traditions Leading to the Renaissance". In Hendrix, John Shannon ; Carman, Charles H. (eds.).

Renaissance Theories of Vision (Visual Culture in Early Modernity) . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate Publishing . pp.

11– 30.

ISBN 978-1-409400-24-0 .

; El-Bizri, Nader (2014). "Seeing Reality in Perspective: 'The Art of Optics' and the 'Science of Painting' ". In Lupacchini, Rossella; Angelini, Annarita (eds.).

The Art of Science: From Perspective Drawing to Quantum Randomness . Doredrecht: Springer. pp.

25– 47.

; El-Bizri, Nader (2016). "Desargues' oeuvres : On perspective, optics and conics". In Cairns, Graham (ed.).

Visioning Technologies: The Architectures of Sight . London: Taylor & Francis. pp.

36– 51.

^ Desargues, Girard (1951). Taton, René (ed.).

L'oeuvre mathématique de G. Desargues: Textes publiés et commentés avec une introd. biograph. et historique . Paris: Presses universitaires de France.

^ Desargues, Girard (2011). Poudra, Noël Germinal (ed.).

Oeuvres de Desargues . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108032582 .

Sources [ edit ] J. V. Field & J. J. Gray (1987) The Geometrical Work of Girard Desargues , Springer-Verlag , ISBN 0-387-96403-7 .

René Taton (1962) Sur la naissance de Girard Desargues.

, Revue d'histoire des sciences et de leurs applications Tome 15 n°2. pp. 165–166.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Girard Desargues .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Girard Desargues" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Richard Westfall, Gerard Desargues, The Galileo Project Gerard Desargues, Brouillon Project d'une Atteinte aux Evenemens des Rencontres du Cone avec un Plan ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Artists ULAN People Trove Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Girard_Desargues&oldid=1301423085 " Categories : 1591 births 1661 deaths 17th-century French mathematicians 17th-century French architects French engineers French geometers Architects from Lyon People from the Lyonnais Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 19:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Girard Desargues 43 languages Add topic

