Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 Marriage and family 3 Weimar and later career 4 Legacy and honors 5 Siblings 6 Writing Toggle Writing subsection 6.1 Philosophical papers 6.2 Plays 6.3 Aesthetic Letters 6.4 Freemasonry 7 Musical settings 8 Schiller's burial 9 Works 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Notes 11.2 Citations 11.3 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Schiller 113 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kotava Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Gagana Samoa Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German playwright, poet, philosopher and historian (1759–1805) "Schiller" redirects here. For other uses, see Schiller (disambiguation) .

Hofrat ( Saxe-Meiningen ) Friedrich Schiller Portrait 1786–1791 Born Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller ( 1759-11-10 ) 10 November 1759 Marbach am Neckar , Duchy of Württemberg, Holy Roman Empire Died 9 May 1805 (1805-05-09) (aged 45) Weimar , Duchy of Saxe-Weimar Occupation Playwright poet philosopher historian Alma mater Karlsschule Stuttgart ( MD ) Literary movement Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Notable works The Robbers William Tell " Ode to Joy " Mary Stuart Wallenstein trilogy Don Carlos " Song of the Bell " On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters Spouse Charlotte von Lengefeld ​ ​ ( m.

1790) ​ Children 4 Relatives Johann Kaspar Schiller (father) Elisabetha Dorothea Schiller , born Kodweiß (mother) Christophine Reinwald (sister) Signature Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller ( German: [ˈjoːhan ˈkʁɪstɔf ˈfʁiːdʁɪç fɔn ˈʃɪlɐ] , short: [ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈʃɪlɐ] ⓘ ; 10 November 1759 – 9 May 1805) was a German playwright , poet , philosopher and historian . Schiller is considered to be one of Germany's most important classical playwrights.

He was born in Marbach to a devoutly Protestant family. Initially intended for the priesthood, in 1773 he entered a military academy in Stuttgart and ended up studying medicine. His first play, The Robbers , was written at this time and proved very successful. After a brief stint as a regimental doctor, he left Stuttgart and eventually wound up in Weimar. In 1789, he became professor of History and Philosophy at Jena, where he wrote historical works.

During the last seventeen years of his life (1788–1805), Schiller developed a productive, if complicated, friendship with the already famous and influential Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . They frequently discussed issues concerning aesthetics , and Schiller encouraged Goethe to finish works that he had left as sketches. This relationship and these discussions led to a period now referred to as Weimar Classicism . Together they founded the Weimar Theater.

They also worked together on Xenien , a collection of short satirical poems in which both Schiller and Goethe challenge opponents of their philosophical vision.

Early life and career [ edit ] Friedrich Schiller was born on 10 November 1759, in Marbach , Württemberg, as the only son of military doctor Johann Kaspar Schiller and Elisabetha Dorothea Schiller . They also had five daughters, including Christophine , the eldest. Schiller grew up in a very religious Protestant [ 1 ] family and spent much of his youth studying the Bible , which would later influence his writing for the theatre.

[ 2 ] His father was away in the Seven Years' War when Friedrich was born. He was named after king Frederick the Great , but he was called Fritz by nearly everyone.

[ 3 ] Kaspar Schiller was rarely home during the war, but he did manage to visit the family once in a while. His wife and children also visited him occasionally wherever he happened to be stationed.

[ 4 ] When the war ended in 1763, Schiller's father became a recruiting officer and was stationed in Schwäbisch Gmünd . The family moved with him. Due to the high cost of living—especially the rent—the family moved to the nearby town of Lorch .

[ 5 ] Although the family was happy in Lorch, Schiller's father found his work unsatisfying. He sometimes took his son with him.

[ 6 ] In Lorch, Schiller received his primary education. The quality of the lessons was fairly bad, and Friedrich regularly cut class with his older sister.

[ 7 ] Because his parents wanted Schiller to become a priest , they had the priest of the village instruct the boy in Latin and Greek . Father Moser was a good teacher, and later Schiller named the cleric in his first play Die Räuber ( The Robbers ) after him. As a boy, Schiller was excited by the idea of becoming a cleric and often put on black robes and pretended to preach.

[ 8 ] In 1766, the family left Lorch for the Duke of Württemberg 's principal residence, Ludwigsburg . Schiller's father had not been paid for three years, and the family had been living on their savings but could no longer afford to do so. So Kaspar Schiller took an assignment to the garrison in Ludwigsburg.

[ 9 ] Portrait of Friedrich Schiller by Gerhard von Kügelgen (1808/1809) There the boy Schiller came to the attention of Karl Eugen, Duke of Württemberg . He entered the Karlsschule Stuttgart (an elite military academy founded by the Duke), in 1773, where he initially studied law but eventually switched to medicine, graduating with a doctor of medicine in 1780.

[ 10 ] During most of his short life, he suffered from illnesses that he tried to cure himself.

While at the Karlsschule, Schiller read Rousseau and Goethe and discussed Classical ideals with his classmates. At school, he wrote his first play, The Robbers , which dramatizes the conflict between two aristocratic brothers: the elder, Karl Moor, leads a group of rebellious students into the Bohemian forest where they become Robin Hood-like bandits, while Franz Moor, the younger brother, schemes to inherit his father's considerable estate. The play's critique of social corruption and its affirmation of proto-revolutionary republican ideals astounded its original audience. Schiller became an overnight sensation. Later, Schiller would be made an honorary member of the French Republic because of this play. The play was inspired by Leisewitz' earlier play Julius of Taranto , a favourite of the young Schiller.

[ 11 ] In 1780, he obtained a post as regimental doctor in Stuttgart , a job he disliked. In order to attend the first performance of The Robbers in Mannheim , Schiller left his regiment without permission. As a result, he was arrested, sentenced to 14 days of imprisonment, and forbidden by Karl Eugen from publishing any further works.

[ 12 ] He fled Stuttgart in 1782, going via Frankfurt , Mannheim, Leipzig , and Dresden to Weimar . During the journey, he had an affair with Charlotte von Kalb , an army officer's wife. At the centre of an intellectual circle, she was known for her cleverness and instability. To extricate himself from a dire financial situation and attachment to a married woman, Schiller eventually sought help from family and friends.

[ 13 ] In 1787, he settled in Weimar and in 1789, was appointed professor of History and Philosophy in Jena . His inaugural lecture, What Is, and to What End do We Study, Universal History?

( Was heißt und zu welchem Ende studiert man Universalgeschichte?

), delivered on 26 May 1789, outlined his philosophy of history and the moral purpose of historical study.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] At Jena, he wrote historical works.

Marriage and family [ edit ] Medal by Stefan Schwartz [ de ] to his 100th Death Anniversary, after a sculpture of 1794 by Dannecker , Vienna 1905, obverse On 22 February 1790, Schiller married Charlotte von Lengefeld , sister of writer Caroline von Wolzogen (1763–1847) and daughter of forest administrator of Louis Günther II, Prince of Schwarzburg-Rudolstadt Carl Christoph von Lengefeld [ de ] (1715–1775) and his wife Louise von Lengefeld [ de ] , nee Wurmb (1743–1823). Two sons Karl Friedrich Ludwig (1793–1857) and Ernst Friedrich Wilhelm (1796–1841) and two daughters Karoline Luise Henriette (1799–1850) and Luise Henriette Emilie (1804–1872) were born between 1793 and 1804. The last living descendant of Schiller was a grandchild of Emilie, Baron Alexander von Gleichen-Rußwurm (1865–1947), who died at Baden-Baden , Germany, in 1947.

[ 16 ] Weimar and later career [ edit ] Schiller returned with his family to Weimar from Jena in 1799. Goethe convinced him to return to playwriting. He and Goethe founded the Weimar Theater , which became the leading theater in Germany. Their collaboration helped lead to a renaissance of drama in Germany.

For his achievements, Schiller was ennobled in 1802 by the Duke of Saxe-Weimar, adding the nobiliary particle " von " to his name.

[ 13 ] He remained in Weimar, Saxe-Weimar until his death at 45 from tuberculosis in 1805.

Legacy and honors [ edit ] Lithograph portrait from 1905, captioned "Friedrich von Schiller" in recognition of his 1802 ennoblement The first authoritative biography of Schiller was by his sister-in-law Caroline von Wolzogen in 1830, Schillers Leben (Schiller's Life).

[ 17 ] The coffin containing what was purportedly Schiller's skeleton was brought in 1827 into the Weimarer Fürstengruft (Weimar's Ducal Vault), the burial place of the house of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach in the Historical Cemetery of Weimar and later also Goethe's resting place. On 3 May 2008, scientists announced that DNA tests have shown that the skull of this skeleton is not Schiller's, and his tomb is now vacant.

[ 18 ] The physical resemblance between this skull and the extant death mask [ 19 ] as well as to portraits of Schiller, had led many experts to believe that the skull was Schiller's.

Germany's oldest Schiller memorial (1839) on Schillerplatz, Stuttgart The city of Stuttgart erected in 1839 a statue in his memory on a square renamed Schillerplatz . A Schiller monument was unveiled on Berlin's Gendarmenmarkt in 1871.

The German-American community of New York City donated a bronze sculpture of Schiller to Central Park in 1859. It was Central Park's first installed sculpture .

[ 20 ] Chicago dedicated a statue to Schiller in its Lincoln Park.

Schiller Park in Columbus, Ohio is named for Schiller, and has been centered on a statue of his likeness since it was donated in 1891. During the First World War, the name of the park was changed to Washington Park in response to anti-German sentiment, but was changed back several years later. It is the primary park for the South Side neighborhood of German Village.

[ 21 ] There is a Friedrich Schiller statue on Belle Isle in Detroit, Michigan. This statue of the German playwright was commissioned by Detroit's German-American community in 1908 at a cost of $12,000; the designer was Herman Matzen.

An Ignatium Taschner bronze of Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller stands in Como Park - Saint Paul, MN. It was dedicated in 1907. The sculpture was donated by U.S. German Societies of Saint Paul and private citizens of German descent to commemorate the renowned Johann von Schiller.

His image has appeared on several coins and banknotes in Germany, including the 1964 German Democratic Republic 10 Mark banknotes, [ 22 ] 1972 German Democratic Republic 20 Mark commemorative coins, [ 23 ] and 1934 German Reich 5 Reichsmark commemorative coins.

[ 24 ] In September 2008, the German-French TV channel Arte conducted a poll among its viewers to determine the greatest European playwright ("King of Drama"). Schiller was voted in second place after William Shakespeare .

[ 25 ] On 10 November 2019, Google celebrated his 260th birthday with a Google Doodle .

[ 26 ] Siblings [ edit ] Friedrich Schiller had five sisters, two of whom died in childhood and three of whom lived to adulthood: Elizabeth Christophine Friederike Schiller (1757–1847) – painter, was married librarian Wilhelm Friedrich Hermann Reinwald [ de ] (1737–1815), no children.

Louisa Dorothea Catharina Schiller (1766–1836) – married the pastor Johann Gottlieb Franckh (1760–1834).

Marie Charlotte Schiller (1768–1774) Beata Friederike Schiller (1773) Caroline Christiane Schiller (1777–1796) Writing [ edit ] Kleinere prosaische Schriften. 1 (1792) Philosophical papers [ edit ] Goethe–Schiller Monument (1857), Weimar Schiller wrote many philosophical papers on ethics and aesthetics . He synthesized the thought of Immanuel Kant with the thought of the German idealist philosopher, Karl Leonhard Reinhold . He elaborated upon Christoph Martin Wieland 's concept of die schöne Seele (the beautiful soul), a human being whose emotions have been educated by reason, so that Pflicht und Neigung (duty and inclination) are no longer in conflict with one another; thus beauty, for Schiller, is not merely an aesthetic experience, but a moral one as well: the Good is the Beautiful. The link between morality and aesthetics also occurs in Schiller's controversial poem, " Die Götter Griechenlandes " (The Gods of Greece). The "gods" in Schiller's poem are thought by modern scholars to represent moral and aesthetic values, which Schiller tied to Paganism and an idea of enchanted nature .

[ 27 ] In this respect, Schiller's aesthetic doctrine shows the influence of Christian theosophy .

[ 28 ] There is general consensus among scholars that it makes sense to think of Schiller as a liberal , [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] and he is frequently cited as a cosmopolitan thinker.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Schiller's philosophical work was particularly concerned with the question of human freedom, a preoccupation which also guided his historical research, such as on the Thirty Years' War and the Dutch Revolt , and then found its way as well into his dramas: the Wallenstein trilogy concerns the Thirty Years' War, while Don Carlos addresses the revolt of the Netherlands against Spain. Schiller wrote two important essays on the question of the sublime ( das Erhabene ), entitled " Vom Erhabenen " and " Über das Erhabene "; these essays address one aspect of human freedom—the ability to defy one's animal instincts, such as the drive for self-preservation, when, for example, someone willingly sacrifices themselves for conceptual ideals.

Plays [ edit ] Schiller is considered to be one of Germany's most important classical playwrights. Critics like F. J. Lamport and Erich Auerbach have noted his innovative use of dramatic structure and his creation of new forms, such as the melodrama and the bourgeois tragedy.

[ citation needed ] What follows is a brief chronological description of the plays.

The Robbers ( Die Räuber ): The language of The Robbers is highly emotional, and the depiction of physical violence in the play marks it as a quintessential work of Germany's Romantic Sturm und Drang movement.

The Robbers is considered by critics like Peter Brooks to be the first European melodrama . The play pits two brothers against each other in alternating scenes, as one quests for money and power, while the other attempts to create revolutionary anarchy in the Bohemian Forest . The play strongly criticises the hypocrisies of class and religion, and the economic inequities of German society; it also conducts a complicated inquiry into the nature of evil. Schiller was inspired by the play Julius of Taranto by Johann Anton Leisewitz .

[ 11 ] Fiesco ( Die Verschwörung des Fiesco zu Genua ): Intrigue and Love ( Kabale und Liebe ): The aristocratic Ferdinand von Walter wishes to marry Luise Miller, the bourgeois daughter of the city's music instructor. Court politics involving the duke's beautiful but conniving mistress Lady Milford and Ferdinand's ruthless father create a disastrous situation reminiscent of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet . Schiller develops his criticisms of absolutism and bourgeois hypocrisy in this bourgeois tragedy . Act 2, scene 2 is an anti-British parody that depicts a firing-squad massacre. Young Germans who refused to join the Hessians and British to quash the American Revolutionary War are fired upon.

[ 35 ] Don Carlos : This play marks Schiller's entrée into historical drama. Very loosely based on the events surrounding the real Don Carlos of Spain, Schiller's Don Carlos is another republican figure—he attempts to free Flanders from the despotic grip of his father, King Phillip . The Marquis Posa's famous speech to the king proclaims Schiller's belief in personal freedom and democracy.

The Wallenstein trilogy : Consisting of Wallenstein's Camp , The Piccolomini , and Wallenstein's Death , these plays tell the story of the last days and assassination of the treasonous commander Albrecht von Wallenstein during the Thirty Years' War .

Mary Stuart ( Maria Stuart ): This history of the Scottish queen, who was Elizabeth I's rival, portrays Mary Stuart as a tragic heroine, misunderstood and used by ruthless politicians, including and especially, Elizabeth.

Monument in Kaliningrad (formerly Königsberg ), Russia The Maid of Orleans ( Die Jungfrau von Orleans ): about Joan of Arc The Bride of Messina ( Die Braut von Messina ) William Tell ( Wilhelm Tell ) Demetrius (unfinished) Aesthetic Letters [ edit ] Main article: Play drive A pivotal work by Schiller was On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters [ 36 ] ( Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von Briefen ), first published 1794, which was inspired by the great disenchantment Schiller felt about the French Revolution , its degeneration into violence and the failure of successive governments to put its ideals into practice.

[ 37 ] Schiller wrote that "a great moment has found a little people"; he wrote the Letters as a philosophical inquiry into what had gone wrong, and how to prevent such tragedies in the future. In the Letters he asserts that it is possible to elevate the moral character of a people, by first touching their souls with beauty, an idea that is also found in his poem Die Künstler ( The Artists ): "Only through Beauty's morning-gate, dost thou penetrate the land of knowledge." On the philosophical side, Letters put forth the notion of der sinnliche Trieb / Sinnestrieb ("the sensuous drive") and Formtrieb ("the formal drive"). In a comment to Immanuel Kant 's philosophy, Schiller transcends the dualism between Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb with the notion of Spieltrieb ("the play drive "), derived from, as are a number of other terms, Kant's Critique of the Faculty of Judgment . The conflict between man's material, sensuous nature and his capacity for reason ( Formtrieb being the drive to impose conceptual and moral order on the world), Schiller resolves with the happy union of Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb , the "play drive", which for him is synonymous with artistic beauty, or "living form". Modern interpretations consider Schiller to be one of the earliest known pansexual figures due to these ideals.

[ 38 ] On the basis of Spieltrieb , Schiller sketches in Letters a future ideal state (a eutopia ), where everyone will be content, and everything will be beautiful, thanks to the free play of Spieltrieb . Schiller's focus on the dialectical interplay between Formtrieb and Sinnestrieb has inspired a wide range of succeeding aesthetic philosophical theory, including notably Jacques Rancière 's conception of the "aesthetic regime of art", as well as social philosophy in Herbert Marcuse . In the second part of his important work Eros and Civilization , Marcuse finds Schiller's notion of Spieltrieb useful in thinking a social situation without the condition of modern social alienation . He writes, "Schiller's Letters ... aim at remaking of civilization by virtue of the liberating force of the aesthetic function: it is envisaged as containing the possibility of a new reality principle." [ 39 ] Freemasonry [ edit ] Some Freemasons speculate that Schiller was a Freemason , but this has not been proven.

[ 40 ] In 1787, in his tenth letter about Don Carlos , Schiller wrote: "I am neither Illuminatus nor Mason, but if the fraternization has a moral purpose in common with one another, and if this purpose for human society is the most important, ..." [ 41 ] In a letter from 1829, two Freemasons from Rudolstadt complain about the dissolving of their Lodge Günther zum stehenden Löwen that was honoured by the initiation of Schiller. According to Schiller's great-grandson Alexander von Gleichen-Rußwurm , Schiller was brought to the lodge by Wilhelm Heinrich Karl von Gleichen-Rußwurm. No membership document has been found.

[ 41 ] Musical settings [ edit ] Ludwig van Beethoven said that a great poem is more difficult to set to music than a merely good one because the composer must rise higher than the poet – "who can do that in the case of Schiller? In this respect Goethe is much easier," wrote Beethoven.

[ 42 ] There are relatively few famous musical settings of Schiller's poems. Notable exceptions are Beethoven's setting of "An die Freude" ( Ode to Joy ) [ 35 ] in the final movement of his Ninth Symphony , Johannes Brahms ' choral setting of " Nänie ", and " Des Mädchens Klage " by Franz Schubert , who set 44 of Schiller's poems [ 43 ] as Lieder , mostly for voice and piano, also including " Die Bürgschaft ".

Schiller on his deathbed – drawing by the portraitist Ferdinand Jagemann , 1805 The Italian composer Giuseppe Verdi admired Schiller greatly and adapted several of his stage plays for his operas: I masnadieri is based on The Robbers Giovanna d'Arco is based on The Maid of Orleans Luisa Miller is based on Intrigue and Love La forza del destino is based partly on Wallenstein 's Camp Don Carlos is based on the play of the same title Donizetti's Maria Stuarda is based on Mary Stuart ; Rossini's Guillaume Tell is an adaptation of William Tell .

Nicola Vaccai 's Giovanna d'Arco (1827) is based on The Maid of Orleans , and his La sposa di Messina (1839) on The Bride of Messina .

Bruch ’s The Lay of the Bell is also based on a poem by Schiller.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Elise Schmezer (1810–1856) used Schiller’s text for her Lied “Das Geheimnis”.

[ 46 ] Tchaikovsky 's 1881 opera The Maid of Orleans is partly based on Schiller's work. In 1923, German composer Frieda Schmitt-Lermann wrote the music for a theatre production ( Das Lied von der Glocke) based on Schiller's text. German-Russian composer Zinaida Petrovna Ziberova created a musical setting for Schiler's William Tell in 1935.

[ 47 ] The 20th-century composer Giselher Klebe adapted The Robbers for his first opera of the same name , which premiered in 1957.

Schiller's burial [ edit ] A poem written about the poet's burial: Two dim and paltry torches that the raging storm And rain at any moment threaten to put out.

A waving pall. A vulgar coffin made of pine With not a wreath, not e'en the poorest, and no train – As if a crime were swiftly carried to the grave!

The bearers hastened onward. One unknown alone, Round whom a mantle waved of wide and noble fold, Followed this coffin. 'Twas the Spirit of Mankind.

— Conrad Ferdinand Meyer [ 48 ] Works [ edit ] French-occupied German stamp depicting Schiller Monument on Schillerplatz in Vienna Bronze-Plaque-Medal of Schiller's laureate head by the Austrian artist Otto Hofner Plays Die Räuber ( The Robbers ), 1781 Fiesco ( Die Verschwörung des Fiesco zu Genua ), 1783 Kabale und Liebe ( Intrigue and Love ), [ 35 ] 1784 Don Karlos, Infant von Spanien ( Don Carlos ), [ a ] 1787 Wallenstein , [ b ] 1800 Maria Stuart ( Mary Stuart ), 1800 Die Jungfrau von Orleans ( The Maid of Orleans ), 1801 Turandot, Prinzessin von China , 1801 Die Braut von Messina ( The Bride of Messina ), 1803 Wilhelm Tell ( William Tell ), 1804 Demetrius (unfinished at his death) Histories Was heißt und zu welchem Ende studiert man Universalgeschichte?

or What Is, and to What End do We Study, Universal History?

, 1789 Geschichte des Abfalls der vereinigten Niederlande von der spanischen Regierung or The Revolt of the Netherlands Geschichte des dreißigjährigen Kriegs or A History of the Thirty Years' War Über Völkerwanderung, Kreuzzüge und Mittelalter or On the Barbarian Invasions, Crusades and Middle Ages Translations Euripides , Iphigenia in Aulis William Shakespeare , Macbeth Jean Racine , Phèdre Carlo Gozzi , Turandot , 1801 Louis-Benoît Picard , Der Neffe als Onkel Prose Der Geisterseher or The Ghost-Seer (unfinished novel) (started in 1786 and published periodically. Published as book in 1789) Über die ästhetische Erziehung des Menschen in einer Reihe von Briefen ( On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters ), 1795 Der Verbrecher aus verlorener Ehre ( Dishonoured Irreclaimable ), 1786 Poems An die Freude ( Ode to Joy ) [ 35 ] (1785) became the basis for the fourth movement of Beethoven 's ninth symphony Der Taucher ( The Diver ; set to music by Schubert ) Die Kraniche des Ibykus ( The Cranes of Ibykus ) Der Ring des Polykrates ( Polycrates' Ring ) Die Bürgschaft ( The Hostage ; set to music by Schubert) Das Lied von der Glocke ( Song of the Bell ) Das verschleierte Bild zu Sais ( The Veiled Statue at Sais ) Der Handschuh ( The Glove ) Nänie (set to music by Brahms ) See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Biography portal Musen-Almanach Schillerhaus The Theatre Considered as a Moral Institution Play drive References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Mike Poulton translated this play in 2004.

^ Wallenstein was translated from a manuscript copy into English as The Piccolomini and Death of Wallenstein by Coleridge in 1800.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Kerry, Paul E. (2007).

Friedrich Schiller: Playwright, Poet, Philosopher, Historian . Peter Lang.

ISBN 9783039103072 . Retrieved 1 March 2022 .

^ Simons, John D (1990).

"Frederich Schiller" .

Dictionary of Literary Biography, Volume 94: German Writers in the Age of Goethe: Sturm und Drang to Classicism .

ISBN 978-0-8103-4574-4 .

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 18.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 20.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , pp. 20–21.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 23.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 24.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 25.

^ Lahnstein 1984 , p. 27.

^ Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller: De discrimine febrium inflammatoriarum et putridarum.

Medizinische Dissertation, Stuttgart 1780; in: Friedrich Schiller: Medizinische Schriften.

Deutsche Hoffmann-LaRoche AG, Grenzach-Wyhlen 1959, p. 63–134.

^ a b "Johann Anton Leisewitz" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 5 May 2023.

^ "Friedrich Schiller biography" . Studiocleo.com . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ a b Friedrich Schiller , Encyclopædia Britannica , retrieved 1 May 2021 ^ Schiller, Friedrich.

Was heißt und zu welchem Ende studiert man Universalgeschichte?

Inaugural lecture, University of Jena, 26 May 1789. First published in Wieland's Teutscher Merkur , 1789.

^ Schiller, Friedrich.

What Is Universal History?

, edited by Jean Delaube. Berlin: Epubli, 2025.

ISBN 9783819082351 .

^ "Schillers Familie" , Schiller Birth House Museum, Deutsches Literaturarchiv Marbach (in German) ^ Sharpe, Lesley (April 1999). "Female Illness and Male Heroism: The Works of Caroline von Wolzogen".

German Life and Letters .

52 (2): 184– 196.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0483.00129 .

PMID 20677404 .

^ "Schädel in Schillers Sarg wurde ausgetauscht" (Skull in Schiller's coffin has been exchanged) , Der Spiegel , 3 May 2008.

"Schädel in Weimar gehört nicht Schiller" (Skull in Weimar does not belong to Schiller) , Die Welt , 3 May 2008.

^ "Death Mask" . Sammlungen.hu-berlin.de . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "New York City Department of Parks and Recreation Website" . Retrieved 7 April 2020 .

^ "Schiller Park" .

German Village Society . 10 March 2024.

^ German Democratic Republic, 10 Mark der DDR 1964 , Banknote.ws ^ "20 Mark, German Democratic Republic" .

en.numista.com . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ "5 Reichsmark, Germany" .

en.numista.com . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ Merck, Nikolaus (20 September 2008).

"King of Drama gekürt" [King of Drama chosen].

nachtkritik.de (in German) . Retrieved 22 August 2024 .

^ "Friedrich von Schiller's 260th Birthday" .

Google . 10 November 2019.

^ Josephson-Storm 2017 , pp. 82–83.

^ Josephson-Storm 2017 , p. 81.

^ Martin, Nicholas (2006).

Schiller: A Birmingham Symposium . Rodopi. p. 257.

^ Gray, John (1995).

Liberalism . University of Minnesota Press. p. 33.

^ Sharpe, Lesley (1991).

Friedrich Schiller: Drama, Thought and Politics . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

^ Bell, Duncan (2010).

Ethics and World Politics . Oxford University Press. p. 147.

ISBN 978-0-19-954862-0 .

^ Cavallar, Georg (2011).

Imperfect Cosmopolis: Studies in the history of international legal theory and cosmopolitan ideas . University of Wales Press. p. 41.

^ Sharpe, Lesley (1995).

Schiller's Aesthetic Essays: Two Centuries of Criticism . Camden House. p. 58.

^ a b c d The Autobiography of Col. John Trumbull , Sizer 1953 ed., p. 184, n. 13 ^ "Letters Upon The Aesthetic Education of Man" , Fordham University ^ Schiller, On the Aesthetic Education of Man , ed. Elizabeth M. Wilkinson and L. A. Willoughby , 1967 ^ Freud, Sigmund (2011).

Beyond the Pleasure Principle . New York: Broadview Press. p. 258.

ISBN 978-1-55111-994-6 .

^ Marcuse, Herbert .

Eros and Civilization . Beacon Press. 1966 ^ "Friedrich von Schiller" . Freemasonry.bcy.ca . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ a b Eugen Lennhoff, Oskar Posner, Dieter A. Binder: Internationales Freimaurer Lexikon . Herbig Publishing, 2006, ISBN 978-3-7766-2478-6 [ page needed ] ^ "Beethoven: the man and the artist, as revealed by his own words, Project Gutenberg" . Retrieved 20 November 2011 .

^ "Fifty Songs by Franz Schubert" by Henry T. Finck. Published in 1904 by Oliver Ditson Company ^ Schwartz, Steve.

"Das Lied von der Glocke" .

classical.net . Classical Net . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ Eggerking, Wolfgang.

" "Das Lied von der Glocke" op.45" .

repertoire-explorer.musikmph.de . Musikproduktion Hoeflich . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ "Elise Schmezer Song Texts | LiederNet" .

www.lieder.net . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ Cohen, Aaron I. (1987).

International encyclopedia of women composers (Second edition, revised and enlarged ed.). New York: Books & Music.

ISBN 0-9617485-2-4 .

OCLC 16714846 .

^ Munsterberg, Margarete (1916).

A Harvest of German Verse . New York and London: D. Appleton and Company. p.

242 .

Sources [ edit ] Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

Lahnstein, Peter (January 1984) [1981].

Schillers Leben . Frankfurt am Main: Fischer.

ISBN 978-3-596-25621-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Biographical Carlyle, Thomas (1825).

The Life of Friedrich Schiller, Comprehending an Examination of His Works . The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes. Vol. XXV. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons (published 1904).

Editions Historical-critical edition by K. Goedeke (17 volumes, Stuttgart, 1867–76) Säkular-Ausgabe edition by Von der Hellen (16 volumes, Stuttgart, 1904–05) historical-critical edition by Günther and Witkowski (20 volumes, Leipzig, 1909–10).

Other valuable editions are: the Hempel edition (1868–74) the Boxberger edition, in Kürschners National-Literatur (12 volumes, Berlin, 1882–91) the edition by Kutscher and Zisseler (15 parts, Berlin, 1908) the Horenausgabe (16 volumes, Munich, 1910, et. seq.) the edition of the Tempel Klassiker (13 volumes, Leipzig, 1910–11) Helios Klassiker (6 volumes, Leipzig, 1911).

Translations of Schiller's works — (2015). Guthrie, John (ed.).

Fiesco's Conspiracy at Genoa . Open Book Classics. Vol. 2. Translated by Flora Kimmich.

Open Book Publishers .

doi : 10.11647/obp.0058 .

ISBN 978-1-78374-042-0 .

— (2019).

Love and Intrigue . Open Book Classics. Vol. 11. Translated by Flora Kimmich. Open Book Publishers.

doi : 10.11647/obp.0175 .

ISBN 978-1-78374-738-2 .

ISSN 2054-216X .

S2CID 191793572 .

— (2017).

Wallenstein: A Dramatic Poem (PDF) . Open Book Classics. Vol. 5. Translated by Flora Kimmich. Open Book Publishers.

doi : 10.11647/obp.0101 .

ISBN 978-1-78374-263-9 .

— (2018).

Don Carlos Infante of Spain: A Dramatic Poem . Open Book Classics. Vol. 9. Translated by Flora Kimmich. Open Book Publishers.

doi : 10.11647/obp.0134 .

ISBN 978-1-78374-446-6 .

S2CID 194128320 .

Schiller, Friedrich (2016).

On the Aesthetic Education of Man in a Series of Letters . Translated by Alexander Schmidt, Keith Tribe. Pengui Classics.

ISBN 978-0-14-139696-5 .

Documents and other memorials of Schiller are in the Goethe and Schiller Archive [ de ] in Weimar.

External links [ edit ] German Wikisource has original text related to this article: Friedrich Schiller English Wikisource has original works by or about: Johann Christoph Friedrich von Schiller Media related to Friedrich Schiller at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Friedrich Schiller at Wikiquote Works by Friedrich Schiller at Project Gutenberg Works by Friedrich Schiller at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about Friedrich Schiller at the Internet Archive Works by Friedrich Schiller at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Friedrich Schiller at IMDb Sime, James (1886).

"Johann Christoph Friedrich Schiller" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XXI (9th ed.).

Robertson, John George (1911).

"Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). pp.

324– 326.

v t e Friedrich Schiller Plays The Robbers Fiesco Intrigue and Love Körner's Morning Don Carlos Wallenstein Wallenstein's Camp The Piccolomini Wallenstein's Death Mary Stuart The Maid of Orleans The Bride of Messina William Tell Die Huldigung der Künste Demetrius Libretti Semele Selected poems Ode to Joy Resignation Die Götter Griechenlandes Das verschleierte Bild zu Sais Die Teilung der Erde Xenien Der Handschuh Der Taucher Die Kraniche des Ibykus Ritter Toggenburg Der Gang nach dem Eisenhammer Der Ring des Polykrates Der Kampf mit dem Drachen Die Bürgschaft Das Lied von der Glocke Nänie Der Antritt des neuen Jahrhunderts Das Siegesfest Selected prose works The Criminal of Lost Honour The Ghost-Seer A magnanimous act Selected philosophical works The Theatre Considered as a Moral Institution Über den Grund des Vergnügens an tragischen Gegenständen Augustenburger Briefe On Grace and Dignity Über das Pathetische Kallias-Briefe On the Aesthetic Education of Man On Naïve and Sentimental Poetry Über das Erhabene Historical works What is universal history and why does one study it?

Journals Wirtembergisches Repertorium Thalia Die Horen Memorials Berlin Chicago Columbus Milwaukee (with Goethe) Syracuse (with Goethe) Weimar (with Goethe) Related Johann Kaspar Schiller (father) Elisabetha Dorothea Schiller (mother) Charlotte von Lengefeld (wife) Carl Christoph von Lengefeld (father-in-law) Louise von Lengefeld (mother-in-law) Karl von Schiller (son) Ernst von Schiller (son) Emilie von Gleichen-Rußwurm (daughter) Ludwig von Gleichen-Rußwurm (grandson) Alexander von Gleichen-Rußwurm (great-grandson) Christophine Reinwald (sister) Wilhelm Friedrich Hermann Reinwald (son-in-law) Weimar Classicism Play drive Skull Friedrich Schiller (1923 film) Friedrich Schiller – The Triumph of a Genius (1940 film) Beloved Sisters (2014 film) Links to related articles v t e Friedrich Schiller 's The Robbers (1781) Inspiration Julius of Taranto Opera I briganti (1836) I masnadieri (1847) Die Räuber (opera) (1957) v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e German-language literature Related articles German language History of Germany History of Austria History of Switzerland History of Liechtenstein Old High German literature Middle High German literature Early New High German literature Sturm und Drang Weimar Classicism Romanticism Literary realism Weimar culture Exilliteratur Pop literature Austrian literature Swiss literature German studies Related categories Austrian writers German writers Liechtenstein writers Swiss writers in German Category:Translators of William Shakespeare Reformation era literature Medieval Minnesang Courtly romance Der von Kürenberg Dietmar von Aist Reinmar von Hagenau Hartmann von Aue Walther von der Vogelweide Wolfram von Eschenbach Albrecht von Johansdorf Heinrich von Morungen Gottfried von Strassburg Dietrich von Bern Nibelungenlied Early modern Simon Dach Paul Fleming Hans Folz Hans Jakob Christoffel von Grimmelshausen Andreas Gryphius Christian Hoffmann von Hoffmannswaldau Johann Michael Moscherosch Martin Opitz Hans Sachs Angelus Silesius Anthony Ulrich, Duke of Brunswick Georg Wickram 18th century Barthold Heinrich Brockes Christian Gellert Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Johann Christoph Gottsched Johann Christian Günther Friedrich Hölderlin Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock Meta Klopstock Jakob Michael Reinhold Lenz Gotthold Ephraim Lessing Magnus Gottfried Lichtwer Novalis (Friedrich von Hardenberg) Jean Paul Friedrich Schiller Johann Gottfried Schnabel Christoph Martin Wieland 19th century Bettina von Arnim Achim von Arnim Clemens Brentano Georg Büchner Adelbert von Chamisso Annette von Droste-Hülshoff Marie von Ebner-Eschenbach Joseph von Eichendorff Theodor Fontane Gustav Freytag Jeremias Gotthelf Franz Grillparzer Jacob Grimm Wilhelm Grimm Gerhart Hauptmann Christian Friedrich Hebbel Johann Peter Hebel Heinrich Heine Georg Herwegh Paul Heyse E. T. A. Hoffmann Friedrich Hölderlin Gottfried Keller Heinrich von Kleist Nikolaus Lenau Karl May Conrad Ferdinand Meyer Eduard Mörike Johann Nestroy Wilhelm Raabe Adalbert Stifter Theodor Storm Ludwig Tieck Ludwig Uhland 20th century Ilse Aichinger May Ayim Ingeborg Bachmann Hermann Bahr Vicki Baum Johannes R. Becher Gottfried Benn Thomas Bernhard Hugo Bettauer Heinrich Böll Thomas Brasch Volker Braun Bertolt Brecht Rolf Dieter Brinkmann Hermann Broch Arnolt Bronnen Hermann Burger Elias Canetti Paul Celan Alfred Döblin Heimito von Doderer Friedrich Dürrenmatt Lion Feuchtwanger Marieluise Fleißer Erich Fried Max Frisch Stefan George Günter Grass Peter Handke Marlen Haushofer Hermann Hesse Georg Heym Wolfgang Hilbig Hugo von Hofmannsthal Ödön von Horváth Ricarda Huch Peter Huchel Ernst Jandl Uwe Johnson Ernst Jünger Franz Kafka Marie Luise Kaschnitz Erich Kästner Bernhard Kellermann Hermann Kesten Irmgard Keun Sarah Kirsch Egon Erwin Kisch Siegfried Kracauer Karl Kraus Else Lasker-Schüler Kurd Laßwitz Gert Ledig Siegfried Lenz Heinrich Mann Klaus Mann Thomas Mann Friederike Mayröcker Christian Morgenstern Erich Mühsam Heiner Müller Adolf Muschg Robert Musil Erich Maria Remarque Rainer Maria Rilke Joseph Roth Nelly Sachs Ernst von Salomon Paul Scheerbart Arthur Schnitzler Helga Schubert Kurt Schwitters W. G. Sebald Anna Seghers Bertha von Suttner Ernst Toller Georg Trakl Kurt Tucholsky Robert Walser Josef Weinheber Peter Weiss Franz Werfel Christa Wolf Stefan Zweig Contemporary writers Zsuzsa Bánk Thomas Brussig Dietmar Dath Jenny Erpenbeck Rainald Goetz Durs Grünbein Peter Handke Judith Hermann Elfriede Jelinek Reinhard Jirgl Wladimir Kaminer Daniel Kehlmann Esther Kinsky Alexander Kluge Barbara Köhler Christian Kracht Monika Maron Clemens Meyer Terézia Mora Herta Müller Sharon Dodua Otoo Emine Sevgi Özdamar Teresa Präauer Julya Rabinowich Rafik Schami Ingo Schulze Lutz Seiler Clemens J. Setz Botho Strauss Yoko Tawada Uwe Timm Ilija Trojanow Jan Wagner Martin Walser Peter Wawerzinek Wolf Wondratschek Feridun Zaimoğlu Juli Zeh German-language Nobel laureates Theodor Mommsen Rudolf Christoph Eucken Paul Heyse Gerhart Hauptmann Carl Spitteler Thomas Mann Hermann Hesse Nelly Sachs Heinrich Böll Elias Canetti Günter Grass Elfriede Jelinek Herta Müller Peter Handke German-language literary awards Ingeborg Bachmann Prize Georg Büchner Prize Sigmund Freud Prize Adelbert von Chamisso Prize Hans Fallada Prize Goethe Prize Heinrich Heine Prize Kleist Prize Leipzig Book Fair Prize Nelly Sachs Prize Kurd Laßwitz Award v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists KulturNav Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People Trove 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wwkzx
Cached time: 20250817043813
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.603 seconds
Real time usage: 1.930 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9007/1000000
Revision size: 44185/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 504310/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 140300/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 203744/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.972/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24810605/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1541.121      1 -total
 22.52%  346.986      2 Template:Reflist
 17.72%  273.126      1 Template:Infobox_writer
 17.42%  268.434      1 Template:Infobox
 14.04%  216.332     18 Template:Cite_book
  9.81%  151.234      2 Template:IPA
  8.07%  124.378      2 Template:Wikisource
  7.85%  120.920      2 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  7.71%  118.848      2 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
  7.68%  118.311      1 Template:Navboxes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63742:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043813 and revision id 1303940148. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Schiller&oldid=1303940148 " Categories : Friedrich Schiller 1759 births 1805 deaths 18th-century German dramatists and playwrights 18th-century German historians 18th-century German male writers 18th-century German philosophers 18th-century German poets 18th-century German translators 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis 19th-century German dramatists and playwrights 19th-century German historians 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century German poets 19th-century German physicians 19th-century translators Enlightenment philosophers French–German translators German-language poets German literary theorists German male dramatists and playwrights German male non-fiction writers German male poets German medical writers German satirists German satirical poets German untitled nobility History of literature History of poetry Intellectual history Johann Wolfgang von Goethe People educated at the Karlsschule Stuttgart People from Marbach am Neckar People from the Duchy of Württemberg German philosophers of art German philosophers of culture German philosophers of education Philosophers of literature German philosophy writers Romantic philosophers Sturm und Drang Translators from Greek Translators of William Shakespeare Tuberculosis deaths in Germany Writers from Baden-Württemberg Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 23:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Schiller 113 languages Add topic

