Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Topics Toggle Topics subsection 2.1 Polyhedra and polytopes 2.2 Packings, coverings and tilings 2.3 Structural rigidity and flexibility 2.4 Incidence structures 2.5 Oriented matroids 2.6 Geometric graph theory 2.7 Simplicial complexes 2.8 Topological combinatorics 2.9 Lattices and discrete groups 2.10 Digital geometry 2.11 Discrete differential geometry 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Discrete geometry 25 languages العربية Български Bosanski Català Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Magyar Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Português Română Русский Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of geometry that studies combinatorial properties and constructive methods "Combinatorial geometry" redirects here. The term combinatorial geometry is also used in the theory of matroids to refer to a simple matroid , especially in older texts.

A collection of circles and the corresponding unit disk graph Discrete geometry and combinatorial geometry are branches of geometry that study combinatorial properties and constructive methods of discrete geometric objects.  Most questions in discrete geometry involve finite or discrete sets of basic geometric objects, such as points , lines , planes , circles , spheres , polygons , and so forth.  The subject focuses on the combinatorial properties of these objects, such as how they intersect one another, or how they may be arranged to cover a larger object.

Discrete geometry has a large overlap with convex geometry and computational geometry , and is closely related to subjects such as finite geometry , combinatorial optimization , digital geometry , discrete differential geometry , geometric graph theory , toric geometry , and combinatorial topology .

History [ edit ] Polyhedra and tessellations had been studied for many years by people such as Kepler and Cauchy , modern discrete geometry has its origins in the late 19th century.  Early topics studied were: the density of circle packings by Thue , projective configurations by Reye and Steinitz , the geometry of numbers by Minkowski, and map colourings by Tait, Heawood, and Hadwiger .

László Fejes Tóth , H.S.M. Coxeter , and Paul Erdős laid the foundations of discrete geometry .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Topics [ edit ] Polyhedra and polytopes [ edit ] Main articles: Polyhedron and Polytope A polytope is a geometric object with flat sides, which exists in any general number of dimensions. A polygon is a polytope in two dimensions, a polyhedron in three dimensions, and so on in higher dimensions (such as a 4-polytope in four dimensions). Some theories further generalize the idea to include such objects as unbounded polytopes ( apeirotopes and tessellations ), and abstract polytopes .

The following are some of the aspects of polytopes studied in discrete geometry: Polyhedral combinatorics Lattice polytopes Ehrhart polynomials Pick's theorem Hirsch conjecture Opaque set Packings, coverings and tilings [ edit ] Main articles: circle packing and tessellation Packings, coverings, and tilings are all ways of arranging uniform objects (typically circles, spheres, or tiles) in a regular way on a surface or manifold .

A sphere packing is an arrangement of non-overlapping spheres within a containing space. The spheres considered are usually all of identical size, and the space is usually three- dimensional Euclidean space . However, sphere packing problems can be generalised to consider unequal spheres, n -dimensional Euclidean space (where the problem becomes circle packing in two dimensions, or hypersphere packing in higher dimensions) or to non-Euclidean spaces such as hyperbolic space .

A tessellation of a flat surface is the tiling of a plane using one or more geometric shapes, called tiles, with no overlaps and no gaps. In mathematics , tessellations can be generalized to higher dimensions.

Specific topics in this area include: Circle packings Sphere packings Kepler conjecture Quasicrystals Aperiodic tilings Periodic graph Finite subdivision rules Structural rigidity and flexibility [ edit ] Main article: Structural rigidity Graphs are drawn as rods connected by rotating hinges. The cycle graph C 4 drawn as a square can be tilted over by the blue force into a parallelogram, so it is a flexible graph. K 3 , drawn as a triangle, cannot be altered by any force that is applied to it, so it is a rigid graph.

Structural rigidity is a combinatorial theory for predicting the flexibility of ensembles formed by rigid bodies connected by flexible linkages or hinges .

Topics in this area include: Cauchy's theorem Flexible polyhedra Incidence structures [ edit ] Main article: Incidence structure Seven points are elements of seven lines in the Fano plane , an example of an incidence structure.

Incidence structures generalize planes (such as affine , projective , and Möbius planes ) as can be seen from their axiomatic definitions. Incidence structures also generalize the higher-dimensional analogs and the finite structures are sometimes called finite geometries .

Formally, an incidence structure is a triple C = ( P , L , I ) .

{\displaystyle C=(P,L,I).\,} where P is a set of "points", L is a set of "lines" and I ⊆ ⊆ P × × L {\displaystyle I\subseteq P\times L} is the incidence relation. The elements of I {\displaystyle I} are called flags.

If ( p , l ) ∈ ∈ I , {\displaystyle (p,l)\in I,} we say that point p "lies on" line l {\displaystyle l} .

Topics in this area include: Configurations Line arrangements Hyperplane arrangements Buildings Oriented matroids [ edit ] Main article: Oriented matroid An oriented matroid is a mathematical structure that abstracts the properties of directed graphs and of arrangements of vectors in a vector space over an ordered field (particularly for partially ordered vector spaces ).

[ 4 ] In comparison, an ordinary (i.e., non-oriented) matroid abstracts the dependence properties that are common both to graphs , which are not necessarily directed , and to arrangements of vectors over fields , which are not necessarily ordered .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Geometric graph theory [ edit ] Main article: Geometric graph theory A geometric graph is a graph in which the vertices or edges are associated with geometric objects. Examples include Euclidean graphs, the 1- skeleton of a polyhedron or polytope , unit disk graphs , and visibility graphs .

Topics in this area include: Graph drawing Polyhedral graphs Random geometric graphs Voronoi diagrams and Delaunay triangulations Simplicial complexes [ edit ] Main article: Simplicial complex A simplicial complex is a topological space of a certain kind, constructed by "gluing together" points , line segments , triangles , and their n -dimensional counterparts (see illustration).  Simplicial complexes should not be confused with the more abstract notion of a simplicial set appearing in modern simplicial homotopy theory.  The purely combinatorial counterpart to a simplicial complex is an abstract simplicial complex . See also random geometric complexes .

Topological combinatorics [ edit ] Main article: Topological combinatorics The discipline of combinatorial topology used combinatorial concepts in topology and in the early 20th century this turned into the field of algebraic topology .

In 1978, the situation was reversed – methods from algebraic topology were used to solve a problem in combinatorics – when László Lovász proved the Kneser conjecture , thus beginning the new study of topological combinatorics . Lovász's proof used the Borsuk-Ulam theorem and this theorem retains a prominent role in this new field. This theorem has many equivalent versions and analogs and has been used in the study of fair division problems.

Topics in this area include: Sperner's lemma Regular maps Lattices and discrete groups [ edit ] Main articles: Lattice (group) and discrete group A discrete group is a group G equipped with the discrete topology . With this topology, G becomes a topological group . A discrete subgroup of a topological group G is a subgroup H whose relative topology is the discrete one. For example, the integers , Z , form a discrete subgroup of the reals , R (with the standard metric topology ), but the rational numbers , Q , do not.

A lattice in a locally compact topological group is a discrete subgroup with the property that the quotient space has finite invariant measure . In the special case of subgroups of R n , this amounts to the usual geometric notion of a lattice , and both the algebraic structure of lattices and the geometry of the totality of all lattices are relatively well understood. Deep results of Borel , Harish-Chandra , Mostow , Tamagawa , M. S. Raghunathan , Margulis , Zimmer obtained from the 1950s through the 1970s provided examples and generalized much of the theory to the setting of nilpotent Lie groups and semisimple algebraic groups over a local field . In the 1990s, Bass and Lubotzky initiated the study of tree lattices , which remains an active research area.

Topics in this area include: Reflection groups Triangle groups Digital geometry [ edit ] Main article: Digital geometry Digital geometry deals with discrete sets (usually discrete point sets) considered to be digitized models or images of objects of the 2D or 3D Euclidean space .

Simply put, digitizing is replacing an object by a discrete set of its points. The images we see on the TV screen, the raster display of a computer, or in newspapers are in fact digital images.

Its main application areas are computer graphics and image analysis .

[ 7 ] Discrete differential geometry [ edit ] Main article: Discrete differential geometry Discrete differential geometry is the study of discrete counterparts of notions in differential geometry . Instead of smooth curves and surfaces, there are polygons , meshes , and simplicial complexes . It is used in the study of computer graphics and topological combinatorics .

Topics in this area include: Discrete Laplace operator Discrete exterior calculus Discrete calculus Discrete Morse theory Topological combinatorics Spectral shape analysis Analysis on fractals See also [ edit ] Discrete and Computational Geometry (journal) Discrete mathematics Paul Erdős Notes [ edit ] ^ Pach, János; et al. (2008), Intuitive Geometry, in Memoriam László Fejes Tóth , Alfréd Rényi Institute of Mathematics ^ Katona, G. O. H. (2005), "Laszlo Fejes Toth – Obituary", Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica , 42 (2): 113 ^ Bárány, Imre (2010), "Discrete and convex geometry", in Horváth, János (ed.), A Panorama of Hungarian Mathematics in the Twentieth Century, I , New York: Springer, pp.

431– 441, ISBN 9783540307211 ^ Rockafellar 1969. Björner et alia, Chapters 1-3. Bokowski, Chapter 1. Ziegler, Chapter 7.

^ Björner et alia, Chapters 1-3. Bokowski, Chapters 1-4.

^ Because matroids and oriented matroids are abstractions of other mathematical abstractions, nearly all the relevant books are written for mathematical scientists rather than for the general public. For learning about oriented matroids, a good preparation is to study the textbook on linear optimization by Nering and Tucker, which is infused with oriented-matroid ideas, and then to proceed to Ziegler's lectures on polytopes.

^ See Li Chen, Digital and discrete geometry: Theory and Algorithms, Springer, 2014.

References [ edit ] Bezdek, András (2003).

Discrete geometry: in honor of W. Kuperberg's 60th birthday . New York, N.Y: Marcel Dekker.

ISBN 0-8247-0968-3 .

Bezdek, Károly (2010).

Classical Topics in Discrete Geometry . New York, N.Y: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4419-0599-4 .

Bezdek, Károly (2013).

Lectures on Sphere Arrangements - the Discrete Geometric Side . New York, N.Y: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4614-8117-1 .

Bezdek, Károly ; Deza, Antoine; Ye, Yinyu (2013).

Discrete Geometry and Optimization . New York, N.Y: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-00200-2 .

Brass, Peter; Moser, William; Pach, János (2005).

Research problems in discrete geometry . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 0-387-23815-8 .

Pach, János ; Agarwal, Pankaj K. (1995).

Combinatorial geometry . New York: Wiley-Interscience.

ISBN 0-471-58890-3 .

Goodman, Jacob E.

and O'Rourke, Joseph (2004).

Handbook of Discrete and Computational Geometry, Second Edition . Boca Raton: Chapman & Hall/CRC.

ISBN 1-58488-301-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Gruber, Peter M.

(2007).

Convex and Discrete Geometry . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-71132-2 .

Matoušek, Jiří (2002).

Lectures on discrete geometry . Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 0-387-95374-4 .

Vladimir Boltyanski , Horst Martini , Petru S. Soltan (1997).

Excursions into Combinatorial Geometry . Springer.

ISBN 3-540-61341-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐7nnbl
Cached time: 20250812004215
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.413 seconds
Real time usage: 0.607 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1524/1000000
Revision size: 15589/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50343/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1336/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53120/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.270/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5531034/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  465.074      1 -total
 22.34%  103.886      1 Template:Short_description
 21.34%   99.229      1 Template:Reflist
 19.76%   91.893      1 Template:Areas_of_mathematics
 19.34%   89.962      1 Template:Navbox
 18.33%   85.238      3 Template:Citation
 15.33%   71.312      2 Template:Pagetype
 12.27%   57.064     10 Template:Cite_book
  9.02%   41.937      1 Template:Redirect
  9.02%   41.932      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:386468:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004215 and revision id 1251447950. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Discrete_geometry&oldid=1251447950 " Category : Discrete geometry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list This page was last edited on 16 October 2024, at 05:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Discrete geometry 25 languages Add topic

