Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Barking 3 Breeds 4 Legality 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Guard dog 28 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Working dog This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For the 2004 film, see Guard Dog (film) .

"Guardian dog" redirects here. For the statues, see Chinese guardian lion . For the dogs in the role of livestock guardians/protection, see Livestock guardian dog .

Presa Canario undergoing guard dog training A guard dog or watchdog is a dog used to watch for and guard people or property against unwanted human or animal intruders.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A dog trained to attack intruders is known as an attack dog .

History [ edit ] Roman mosaic of a large chained dog (with cropped ears and docked tail ) at the Archaeological Park of Lilybaeum, Marsala , Sicily A raggedly dressed man being bitten by a house guard dog. Etching by Thomas Lord Busby , ca. 1826.

Dogs have been used as guardians since ancient times. The ancient Romans placed Cave canem mosaics at the entrance of homes to warn visitors and intruders of the presence of dangerous dogs at the property.

[ 3 ] One of the first dog types used as guardians were Mastiff -type landraces of livestock guardian dogs , which protected livestock against large predators such as wolves , bears and leopards .

[ 4 ] In Greek mythology , Orthrus is an example of a livestock guardian dog known for guarding Geryon 's red cattle. In more urban areas, some ancient guard dogs, such as the extinct bandogges , were chained during the day and released at night [ 5 ] to protect properties, camps and villages.

Barking [ edit ] German Shepherd dog guarding property Guard dogs bark loudly to alert their owners of an intruder's presence and to scare away the intruder.

[ 6 ] Livestock guardian dogs are often large enough—100–200 pounds (45–91 kg)—and strong enough to attack and drive away livestock predators .

[ 4 ] Guard dogs bark to alert their master and to warn of approaching animal or human threats prior to their interception of the trespasser.

Specifically, livestock guardian dogs such as the Kangal use loud alarm barks as a first line of defense against presumed threats; if these do not deter a perceived foe, other displays, such as bluffing and charging, are employed. For livestock guardians, proactive forms of defense such as biting are only used if all other forms of deterrence fail.

If the risk is from human intruders, a suitable dog can be trained to be aggressive towards unrecognized humans and then tethered or enclosed in an area that the owner wishes to protect when he is not around (such as at night).

[ 7 ] Breeds [ edit ] Many currently prominent guard dogs started as general purpose farm dogs , but gradually developed into guard breeds. However, dog breeds such as the Dobermann and the Dogue Brasileiro were specifically bred to guard.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ unreliable source?

] Guard dog breeds tend to be territorial, averse to strangers, dominant, and protective and loyal.

Legality [ edit ] The laws regarding ownership and usage of guard dogs vary from country to country.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 1 ] In England, the main legislation relating to the use of guard dogs on commercial premises are contained within the 1975 Guard Dogs Act. The act specifies the requirements of kennels and the need to display guard dog warning signs at the entrance to sites.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Attack dog – Dogs trained to attack people Bandog – Type of dog Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Beware of the dog – Warning sign Dogs in warfare Faithful Ruslan – 1975 anti-Soviet novel Livestock guardian dog – Dog type bred for the purpose of protecting livestock from predators Working dog – Dog trained to perform practical tasks References [ edit ] ^ a b Department of Economic Development, Jobs.

"Guard dogs" .

agriculture.vic.gov.au . Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "Definition of GUARD DOG" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "Pompeii guard dog mosaic back on show" . 27 July 2015 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ a b "Livestock Guardian Dogs and Their Care in Winter" .

www.omafra.gov.on.ca . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ Beilby, Ralph (1792).

A General History of Quadrupeds: The Figures Engraved on Wood . S. Hodgson, R. Beilby, & T. Bewick.

^ Clayden, Paul (1 May 2011).

The Dog Law Handbook . Sweet & Maxwell.

ISBN 9780414048188 .

^ Tierney, John (11 June 2011).

"For the Executive With Everything, a $230,000 Dog to Protect It" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "DPCA | The Doberman | History" .

dpca.org . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ "Brazilian Dogo – Facts, Pictures, Puppies, Price, Temperament, Breeders | Animals Adda" . 19 April 2018 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ "Guard Dogs Act 1975" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "Permits and Housing of Guard Dogs – 6.10" .

Town of Rangely . 30 March 2016. Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "Guard Dogs Act 1975" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Guard dogs .

v t e Dogs Types African village dog Free-ranging dog Pye-dog Street dog Hairless dog Herding dog Collie Livestock guardian dog Sheep dog Hunting dog Cur Feist Lurcher Gun dog Pointer Retriever Setter Spaniel Water dog Hound Scenthound Basset Coonhound Foxhound Sighthound Longdog Terrier Bull-type terrier Pinscher Schnauzer Mastiff Bulldog Spitz Husky Laika Tugou Toy dog Bichon Turnspit dog Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dog Crossbreed Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dog Autism dog Guide dog Hearing dog Medical response dog Seizure dog Mobility assistance dog Therapy dog Psychiatric assistance dog Attack dog Bay dog Carriage dog Catch dog Companion dog Detection dog Fighting dog Guard dog Lap dog Meat dog Mercy dog Police dog usage by country Search and rescue dog Sled dog War dog Behavior Communication Barking Body language Howling Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–dog interaction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Cynanthropy Dog bite Dog beach Dog daycare Dog fighting Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dog grooming Dogs in religion Dogs in space Dog licence Dog meat Dog park Dog show Dog theft Dog sports Dog walking Fear of dogs Human–canine bond Origin of the domestic dog Therapy Health Aging ( List of longest-living dogs ) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Housebreaking Socialization Related Domesticated silver fox List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Lists of dogs Category Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guard_dog&oldid=1299375649 " Categories : Working dogs Dogs in warfare Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from May 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2022 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guard dog 28 languages Add topic

