Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Exact dates of birth and death 1.2 Pen name 2 Astronomy and mathematics 3 Architecture 4 Shia jurisprudence 5 Mysticism 6 Works Toggle Works subsection 6.1 Other works 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Baha al-Din al-Amili 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Kurdî Кыргызча مصرى پنجابی Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Baha' al-din al-'Amili ) Bahāʾ al-Dīn al-ʿĀmilī بهاء الدين محمد بن حسين العاملي Born ( 1547-02-18 ) 18 February 1547 Baalbek, Jabal ʿĀmil, Ottoman Syria Died ( 1621-09-01 ) 1 September 1621 Isfahan, Safavid Iran Era Safavid era Known for Urban planning of Safavid Isfahan, Naqsh-e Jahan Square, Shah Mosque, theological and scientific treatises Portrait of Bahāʾī, falsely attributed to Ṣādiqī Beg, signed by "the slave Muhammad ʿAlī", 1744–45. Malek Museum, Tehran.

Bahāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn al-ʿĀmilī (Arabic: بهاء الدين محمد بن حسين العاملي; 18 February 1547 – 1 September 1621), commonly known as Sheikh Bahāʾī (Persian: شیخ بهایی), was an Arab Shia scholar, philosopher, mathematician, astronomer, engineer, and architect in Safavid Iran.

Born in Baalbek (Jabal ʿĀmil, then Ottoman Syria), he came from a distinguished Arab Shia scholarly family and migrated to Iran in his youth, becoming a leading figure at the court of Shah ʿAbbās I.

[ 1 ] He stands out as one of the most influential Arab figures, and figures generally, in shaping the scientific, cultural, urban, and intellectual identity of Safavid Iran.

[ 2 ] He was the principal planner and architectural mind behind the transformation of Safavid Isfahan, credited with devising the overall spatial logic and ceremonial symbolism of the imperial capital.

[ 3 ] Sheikh Bahāʾī conceived the urban vision behind Naqsh-e Jahan Square and was instrumental in initiating the planning of the Shah Mosque , Sheikh Lotfollah Mosque , and Ali Qapu Palace . His designs also structured the layout of the Imperial Bazaar and he is also associated with hydraulic innovations and water management projects, though attributions such as the Zarrīn Kamar canal remain speculative.

[ 4 ] As chief advisor to Shah ʿAbbās I, Sheikh Bahāʾī played a central role in defining the symbolic and geometric principles of Safavid civic and religious architecture. His commanding intellectual leadership and cohesive vision, executed through close collaboration with master builders and artisans, were instrumental in forging the Safavid architectural identity.

[ 5 ] A prolific author in both Arabic and Persian, Sheikh Bahāʾī composed over one hundred treatises spanning jurisprudence, logic, astronomy, mathematics, and theology—primarily in his mother tongue, Arabic.

[ 6 ] His contributions also extended to literature and poetry, including didactic and mystical verse in Persian. In his Persian work Tashrīḥ al-Aflāk , he was among the earliest Muslim thinkers to propose the possibility of the Earth’s motion, anticipating the later diffusion of Copernican ideas in the Islamic world.

[ 7 ] Biography [ edit ] Sheikh Baha' al-Din (also spelled Baha'uddin) Muhammad ibn Husayn al-'Amili was born near Baalbek , in Ottoman Syria (present-day Lebanon) in 1547.

[ 8 ] His family had moved there from a small village near Jezzine .

[ 8 ] After the execution of al-Shahid al-Tani in 1558, his father's mentor, he and his family moved to the neighboring Safavid Empire ; first to Isfahan , and from there to Qazvin , the then Iranian royal capital.

[ 8 ] At the time, the Safavid realm was ruled by king Tahmasp I (r. 1524-1576).

[ 8 ] Tahmasp I appointed Sheikh Bahāʾī's father to serve as Shaykh al-Islām in several important Safavid cities in order to propagate Twelver Shi'ism amongst the population.

[ 8 ] Sheikh Bahāʾī completed his studies in Isfahan . Having intended to travel to Mecca in 1570, he visited many Islamic countries including Iraq , Syria and Egypt and after spending four years there, he returned to Iran.

Sheikh Baha' al-Din died in 1621 in Isfahan. His body was buried in Mashhad according to his will.

Exact dates of birth and death [ edit ] The exact dates of his birth and death are different on his grave stone and on the ceramic of the walls of the room where he is buried in.

[ citation needed ] Date of birth : On the ceramics of the wall : 27 February 1547 On the grave stone : March 1546 Date of death : On the ceramics of the wall : 30 August 1621 On the grave stone : August 1622 The dates on the wall contain day, month and year, while the dates on the grave stone only contain month and year. The ceramics of the wall are made in 1945. It seems that at that time a research is performed about the exact dates, and, therefore, the information about the day is added to the dates.

[ citation needed ] Pen name [ edit ] According to Baháʼí Faith scholar ‘Abdu’l-Hamíd Ishráq-Khávari , Sheikh Baha' al-Din adopted the pen name ( takhallus ) 'Baha' after being inspired by words of Shi'a Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (the fifth Imam) and Imam Ja'far al-Sadiq (the sixth Imam), who had stated that the Greatest Name of God was included in either Du'ay-i-Sahar or Du'ay-i-Umm-i-Davud . In the first verse of the Du'ay-i-Sahar, a dawn prayer for the Ramadan , the name "Bahá" appears four times: "Allahumma inni as 'aluka min Bahá' ika bi Abháh va kulla Bahá' ika Bahí".

[ 9 ] Astronomy and mathematics [ edit ] Manuscript of The Summa of Arithmetics His interest in the sciences is also apparent by some of his works and treaties, although many of his astronomical treatises are yet to be studied.

[ 10 ] He probably have written 17 tracts and books on astronomy and related subjects. The following are some his works in astronomy: Risālah dar ḥall-i ishkāl-i ʿuṭārid wa qamar ( Treatise on the problems of the Moon and Mercury ), on attempting to solve inconsistencies of the Ptolemaic system within the context of Islamic astronomy .

Tashrīḥ al-aflāk ( Anatomy of the celestial spheres ), a summary of theoretical astronomy where he affirms the view that supports the positional rotation of the Earth. He was one of Islamic astronomers to advocate the feasibility of the Earth's rotation in the 16th century, independent of Western influences.

[ 10 ] Kholasat al-Hesab ( The summa of arithmetic ) was translated into German by G. H. F. Nesselmann and was published as early as 1843.

[ 11 ] Manuscript of the Anatomy of Celestial Spheres Architecture [ edit ] Sheikh Baha' al-Din was known for his proficiency in mathematics, architecture and geometry. A number of architectural and engineering designs are attributed to him, but none can be substantiated with sources.

[ 10 ] He is credited with designing the canal network of the Zayanderud river and a heating system for an Isfahan public bath that used a single candle.

[ 10 ] Some of his designs may have included the Naqsh-e Jahan Square and Charbagh Avenue in Isfahan .

[ 12 ] Shia jurisprudence [ edit ] Sheikh Bahai (center left) meeting Shah Abbas (center right) by Muhammad Ismail Isfahani In the Twelver tradition, Sheikh Bahai is regarded as a leading scholar of his age and a mujaddid of the seventeenth century.

[ 11 ] His erudition won him the admiration of Shah Abbas , and he was appointed the Sheikh ul-Islam of Isfahan after the death of the previous incumbent .

[ 11 ] He composed works on tafsir , hadith , grammar and fiqh (jurisprudence).

[ 11 ] Mysticism [ edit ] Illustrated manuscript of Nan wa Halwa Sheikh Baha' al-Din was also an adept of mysticism . He had a distinct Sufi leaning for which he was criticized by Mohammad Baqer Majlesi.

[ 11 ] During his travels he dressed like a Dervish [ 11 ] and frequented Sufi circles.

[ 11 ] He also appears in the chain of both the Nurbakhshi and Ni'matullāhī Sufi orders.

[ 11 ] In the work called "Resāla fi’l-waḥda al-wojūdīya" (Exposition of the concept of Wahdat al-Wujud (Unity of Existences), he states that the Sufis are the true believers, [ 11 ] calls for an unbiased assessment of their utterances, [ 11 ] and refers to his own mystical experiences.

[ 11 ] Both his Persian and Arabic poetry is also replete with mystical allusions and symbols.

[ 11 ] At the same time, Sheikh Baha' al-Din calls for strict adherence to the Sharia as a prerequisite for embarking on the Tariqah [ 11 ] and did not hold a high view of antinomian mysticism.

[ 11 ] Works [ edit ] A manuscript by Sheikh Bahai Sheikh Baha' al-Din contributed numerous works in philosophy, logic, astronomy and mathematics. His works include over 100 articles, epistles and books. Sheikh Baha' al-Din also composed poems in Persian and Arabic . His outstanding works in the Persian language are Jame-e Abbasi and two masnavis (rhymed couplets) by the names of Shīr u Shakar ("Milk and Sugar") and Nān u Halwā ("Bread and Halva").

[ citation needed ] His other important work is the Kashkūl , which includes stories, news, scientific topics, Persian and Arabic proverbs .

He also wrote Khulāṣat al-ḥisāb ( Arabic : خلاصة الحساب , lit. "Essentials of arithmetic"), an Arabic textbook that became popular throughout the Islamic world from Egypt to India until the 19th century. It was translated into German in Berlin by G. H. F. Nesselmann and published in 1843. A French translation appeared later 1854.

[ 10 ] Other works [ edit ] Meklāt (in Arabic) Kashkūl (in Persian and Arabic) ( کشکول ) Tūtī-Nāmah (in Persian) ( طوطی نامه ) Nān u Panīr (in Persian) ( نان و پنیر ) Shīr u Shakar (in Persian) ( شیر و شکر ) Nān u Halwā (in Persian and Arabic) ( نان و حلوا ) Jame-e Abbasi (in Persian) ( جامع عباسی ) Tashrīḥ Al-Aflāk (in Arabic) ( تشريح الأفلاك ) Al-fawayid as-Samadiah (in Arabic) Mashriq al-Shamsayn wa Iksīr al-Sa'adatayn (in Arabic) ( مشرق الشمسين وإكسير السعادتين ) Al-Athnā' Ash'ariyyah (in Arabic) ( الأثناء عشرية ) Zubdat al-Usūl (in Arabic) ( زبدة الأصول ) See also [ edit ] Sheikhbahaee University in Isfahan, which was named in his honor.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Gutas, Dimitri (1988).

"Bahāʾ al-Dīn ʿĀmilī" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica .

^ Necipoğlu, Gülru. The Age of Sinan: Architectural Culture in the Ottoman Empire. Reaktion Books, 2005, pp. 397–398.

^ Blake, Stephen P. Half the World: The Social Architecture of Safavid Isfahan, 1590–1722. Mazda Publishers, 1999, pp. 41–56.

^ Bagherzadeh, Mohammad. "The Architectural Vision of Shaykh Bahāʾī in Safavid Isfahan." Iranian Studies, vol. 44, no. 2, 2011, pp. 179–197.

^ Rizvi, Kishwar. The Safavid Dynastic Shrine: Architecture, Religion and Power in Early Modern Iran. I.B. Tauris, 2011.

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein. Science and Civilization in Islam. Harvard University Press, 1968.

^ Saliba, George. Islamic Science and the Making of the European Renaissance. MIT Press, 2007, p. 186.

^ a b c d e Kohlberg 2009 , pp. 429–430.

^ Khadem, Dhikru'llah (March 1976).

"Bahá'u'lláh and His Most Holy Shrine" .

Baháʼí News . No. 540. pp.

4– 5.

^ a b c d e Hashemipour 2007 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Encyclopædia Iranica , BAHĀʾ-AL-DĪN ʿĀMELĪ, SHAIKH MOḤAMMAD B. ḤOSAYN BAHĀʾĪ by E. Kohlberg.

^ Masoud, Kheirabadi Masoud (2000).

Iranian Cities: Formation and Development . Syracuse University Press. p. 47.

References [ edit ] Kohlberg, E. (2009). "BAHĀʾ-AL-DĪN ʿĀMELĪ".

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. III, Fasc. 4 . pp.

429– 430.

Hashemipour, Behnaz (2007).

"ʿĀmilī: Bahāʾ al-Dīn Muḥammad ibn Ḥusayn al-ʿĀmilī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

42– 3.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Baha' ad-Din al-Amili" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Biography Menar-e-Jonban Archived 2009-06-21 at the Wayback Machine Legend of bathhouse powered by single candle for centuries v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Italy 2 3 Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baha_al-Din_al-Amili&oldid=1303677260 " Categories : 1547 births 1621 deaths 16th-century Iranian astronomers 17th-century Iranian astronomers Emigrants from the Ottoman Empire to Iran Safavid theologians 16th-century Iranian mathematicians 16th-century architects 17th-century Iranian mathematicians 17th-century architects People from Baalbek 16th-century Iranian philosophers Iranian architects 16th-century Muslim scholars of Islam 17th-century Muslim scholars of Islam 16th-century writers from Safavid Iran 17th-century writers from Safavid Iran 16th-century Arab people 17th-century Arab people Burials at Imam Reza Shrine Lebanese astronomers Hidden categories: Pages using infobox person with unknown parameters Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baha al-Din al-Amili 20 languages Add topic

