Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Turin 1.3 Communist Party of Italy 1.4 Imprisonment and death 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Hegemony 2.2 Intellectuals and education 2.3 State and civil society 2.4 Historicism 2.5 Critique of economism 2.6 Critique of materialism 3 Legacy 4 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 4.1 Association football 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Collections 5.2 Essays 6 See also 7 References 8 Cited sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle External links subsection 10.1 Institutes 10.2 Texts by Gramsci 10.3 Articles on Gramsci Toggle the table of contents Antonio Gramsci 96 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Ligure Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taclḥit ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Marxist philosopher, writer, and politician (1891–1937) Antonio Gramsci Gramsci in 1916 Born Antonio Francesco Gramsci ( 1891-01-22 ) 22 January 1891 Ales, Sardinia, Kingdom of Italy Died 27 April 1937 (aged 46) Rome , Kingdom of Italy Education Alma mater University of Turin Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Western Marxism neo-Marxism Marxist humanism [ 1 ] Main interests Politics Economics ideology culture Notable works Prison Notebooks Notable ideas Cultural hegemony Americanism as Fordist bourgeoisie as the hegemonic group Organic crisis Passive revolution the subaltern building a counter-hegemony to challenge capitalist power Articulation war of position the distinction between traditional and organic intellectuals Secretary of the Communist Party of Italy In office 14 August 1924 – 8 November 1926 Preceded by Amadeo Bordiga Succeeded by Palmiro Togliatti Member of the Chamber of Deputies In office 24 May 1924 – 9 November 1926 Constituency Venice Personal details Political party PSI (1913–1921) PCd'I (1921–1937) Signature Antonio Francesco Gramsci ( UK : / ˈ ɡ r æ m ʃ i / GRAM -shee , [ 2 ] US : / ˈ ɡ r ɑː m ʃ i / GRAHM -shee ; [ 3 ] Italian: [anˈtɔːnjo franˈtʃesko ˈɡramʃi] ⓘ ; 22 January 1891 – 27 April 1937) was an Italian Marxist philosopher and politician. He was a founding member and one-time leader of the Italian Communist Party . A vocal critic of Benito Mussolini and fascism , he was imprisoned in 1926, and remained in prison until shortly before his death in 1937.

During his imprisonment, Gramsci wrote more than 30 notebooks and 3,000 pages of history and analysis. His Prison Notebooks are considered a highly original contribution to 20th-century political theory .

[ 4 ] Gramsci drew insights from varying sources—not only other Marxists but also thinkers such as Niccolò Machiavelli , Vilfredo Pareto , Georges Sorel , and Benedetto Croce . The notebooks cover a wide range of topics, including the history of Italy and Italian nationalism , the French Revolution , fascism , Taylorism and Fordism , civil society , the state , historical materialism , folklore , religion , and high and popular culture .

Gramsci is best known for his theory of cultural hegemony , which describes how the state and ruling capitalist class—the bourgeoisie —use cultural institutions to maintain wealth and power in capitalist societies. In Gramsci's view, the bourgeoisie develops a hegemonic culture using ideology rather than violence, economic force, or coercion. He also attempted to break from the economic determinism of orthodox Marxist thought, and so is sometimes described as a neo-Marxist .

[ 5 ] He held a humanistic understanding of Marxism, seeing it as a philosophy of praxis and an absolute historicism that transcends traditional materialism and traditional idealism .

Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Gramsci was born in Ales , in the province of Oristano , on the island of Sardinia , the fourth of seven sons of Francesco Gramsci (1860–1937) and Giuseppina Marcias (1861–1932).

[ 6 ] Francesco Gramsci was born in the small town of Gaeta , in the province of Latina , Lazio (today in the central Italian region of Lazio but at the time Gaeta was still part of Terra di Lavoro of Southern Italy ), to  a well-off family from the southern Italian regions of Campania and Calabria and of Arbëreshë (Italo-Albanian) descent.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Gramsci himself believed that his father's family had left Albania as recently as 1821.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Albanian origin of his father's family is attested in the surname Gramsci, an Italianised form of Gramshi , which stems from the definite noun of the placename Gramsh , a small town in central-eastern Albania.

[ 12 ] Gramsci's mother belonged to a Sardinian landowning family from Sorgono , in the province of Nuoro .

[ 13 ] Francesco Gramsci worked as a low-level official, [ 7 ] and his financial difficulties and troubles with the police forced the family to move about through several villages in Sardinia until they finally settled in Ghilarza .

[ 14 ] Former Gymnasium Carta-Meloni in Santu Lussurgiu , which Gramsci attended from 1905 to 1907 In 1898, Gramsci's father was convicted of embezzlement and imprisoned, reducing his family to destitution. The young Gramsci had to abandon schooling and work at various casual jobs until his father's release in 1904.

[ 15 ] As a boy, Gramsci suffered from health problems, particularly a malformation of the spine that stunted his growth, as his adult height was less than 5 feet, [ 16 ] and left him seriously hunchbacked. For decades, it was reported that his condition had been due to a childhood accident—specifically, having been dropped by a nanny—but more recently it has been suggested that it was due to Pott disease , [ 17 ] a form of tuberculosis that can cause deformity of the spine. Gramsci was also plagued by various internal disorders throughout his life.

Gramsci started secondary school in Santu Lussurgiu and completed it in Cagliari , [ 18 ] where he lodged with his elder brother Gennaro, a former soldier whose time on the mainland had made him a militant socialist . At the time, Gramsci's sympathies did not yet lie with socialism but rather with Sardinian autonomism, [ 19 ] as well as the grievances of impoverished Sardinian peasants and miners, whose mistreatment by the mainlanders would later deeply contribute to his intellectual growth.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] They perceived their neglect as a result of privileges enjoyed by the rapidly industrialising Northern Italy , and they tended to turn to a growing Sardinian nationalism , brutally repressed by troops from the Italian mainland, [ 23 ] as a response.

[ 24 ] Turin [ edit ] In 1911, Gramsci won a scholarship to study at the University of Turin , sitting the exam at the same time as Palmiro Togliatti .

[ 25 ] At Turin , he read literature and took a keen interest in linguistics , which he studied under Matteo Bartoli . Gramsci was in Turin while it was going through industrialization, with the Fiat and Lancia factories recruiting workers from poorer regions. Trade unions became established, and the first industrial social conflicts started to emerge.

[ 26 ] Gramsci frequented socialist circles as well as associating with Sardinian emigrants on the Italian mainland. Both his earlier experiences in Sardinia and his environment on the mainland shaped his worldview. Gramsci joined the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) in late 1913, where he would later occupy a key position and observe from Turin the Russian Revolution .

[ 27 ] The Rectorate at the University of Turin , where Gramsci studied Although showing a talent for his studies, Gramsci had financial problems and poor health. Together with his growing political commitment, these led to him abandoning his education in early 1915, at age 24. By this time he had acquired an extensive knowledge of history and philosophy. At university, he had come into contact with the thought of Antonio Labriola , Rodolfo Mondolfo , Giovanni Gentile , and most importantly, Benedetto Croce , possibly the most widely respected Italian intellectual of his day. Labriola especially propounded a brand of Hegelian Marxism that he labelled "philosophy of praxis ".

[ 28 ] Although Gramsci later used this phrase to escape the prison censors, his relationship with this current of thought was ambiguous throughout his life.

From 1914 onward, Gramsci's writings for socialist newspapers such as Il Grido del Popolo ( The Cry of the People [ it ] ) earned him a reputation as a notable journalist. In 1916 he became co-editor of the Piedmont edition of Avanti!

, the Socialist Party official organ. An articulate and prolific writer of political theory, Gramsci proved a formidable commentator, writing on all aspects of Turin's social and political events.

[ 29 ] Gramsci was at this time also involved in the education and organisation of Turin workers; he spoke in public for the first time in 1916 and gave talks on topics such as Romain Rolland , the French Revolution , the Paris Commune , and the emancipation of women . In the wake of the arrest of Socialist Party leaders that followed the revolutionary riots in August 1917, Gramsci became one of Turin's leading socialists; he was elected to the party's provisional committee and also made editor of Il Grido del Popolo .

[ 30 ] In April 1919, with Togliatti, Angelo Tasca and Umberto Terracini , Gramsci set up the weekly newspaper L'Ordine Nuovo (The New Order). In October of the same year, despite being divided into various hostile factions, the PSI moved by a large majority to join the Third International .

Vladimir Lenin saw the L'Ordine Nuovo group as closest in orientation to the Bolsheviks , and it received his backing against the anti-parliamentary programme of a left communist , Amadeo Bordiga .

[ 31 ] In the course of tactical debates within the party, Gramsci's group mainly stood out due to its advocacy of workers' councils , which had come into existence in Turin spontaneously during the large strikes of 1919 and 1920. For Gramsci, these councils were the proper means of enabling workers to take control of the task of organising production, and saw them as preparing "the whole class for the aims of conquest and government".

[ 32 ] Although he believed his position at this time to be in keeping with Lenin's policy of "All Power to the Soviets", [ 33 ] his stance that these Italian councils were communist rather than just one organ of political struggle against the bourgeoisie , was attacked by Bordiga for betraying a syndicalist tendency influenced by the thought of Georges Sorel and Daniel De Leon . By the time of the defeat of the Turin workers in spring 1920, Gramsci was almost alone in his defence of the councils.

Communist Party of Italy [ edit ] Julia Schucht with sons The failure of the workers' councils to develop into a national movement convinced Gramsci that a Communist party in the Leninist sense was needed. The group around L'Ordine Nuovo declaimed incessantly against the PSI's centrist leadership and ultimately allied with Bordiga's far larger abstentionist faction. On 21 January 1921, in the town of Livorno (Leghorn), the Communist Party of Italy ( Partito Comunista d'Italia , PCd'I) was founded. In opposition to Bordiga, Gramsci supported the Arditi del Popolo , a militant anti-fascist group which struggled against the Blackshirts . Gramsci would be a leader of the party from its inception but was subordinate to Bordiga, whose emphasis on discipline, centralism and purity of principles dominated the party's programme until the latter lost the leadership in 1924.

[ 34 ] In 1922, Gramsci travelled to Russia as a representative of the new party. Here, he met Julia Schucht (Yulia Apollonovna Schucht, 1896–1980), a young Jewish [ 35 ] violinist whom he married in 1923 and with whom he had two sons, Delio (1924–1982) and Giuliano (1926–2007).

[ 36 ] Gramsci never saw his second son.

[ 37 ] A commemorative plaque for Gramsci in Mokhovaya Street 16, Moscow. Translated, the inscription reads: "In this building in 1922–1923 worked the eminent figure of international communism and the labour movement and founder of the Italian Communist Party, Antonio Gramsci." The Russian mission coincided with the advent of fascism in Italy, and Gramsci returned with instructions to foster, against the wishes of the PCd'I leadership, a united front of leftist parties against fascism. Such a front would ideally have had the PCd'I at its centre, through which Moscow would have controlled all the leftist forces, but others disputed this potential supremacy, as socialists had a significant, while communists seemed relatively young and too radical. Many believed that an eventual coalition led by communists would have functioned too remotely from political debate, and thus would have run the risk of isolation.

In late 1922 and early 1923, Benito Mussolini 's government embarked on a campaign of repression against the opposition parties, arresting most of the PCd'I leadership, including Bordiga. At the end of 1923, Gramsci travelled from Moscow to Vienna , where he tried to revive a party torn by factional strife. In 1924, Gramsci, now recognised as head of the PCd'I, gained election as a deputy for the Veneto . He started organizing the launch of the official newspaper of the party, called L'Unità (Unity), living in Rome while his family stayed in Moscow. At its Lyon Congress in January 1926, Gramsci's theses calling for a united front to restore democracy to Italy were adopted by the party.

In 1926, Joseph Stalin 's manoeuvres inside the Bolshevik party moved Gramsci to write a letter to the Comintern in which he deplored the opposition led by Leon Trotsky but also underlined some presumed faults of the leader. Togliatti, in Moscow as a representative of the party, received the letter, opened it, read it, and decided not to deliver it. This caused a difficult conflict between Gramsci and Togliatti which they never completely resolved.

[ 38 ] Imprisonment and death [ edit ] Gramsci's grave at the Cimitero Acattolico in Rome On 9 November 1926, the Fascist government enacted a new wave of emergency laws, taking as a pretext an alleged attempt on Mussolini's life that had occurred several days earlier. The Fascist police arrested Gramsci, despite his parliamentary immunity , and brought him to the Roman prison Regina Coeli . At his trial, Gramsci's prosecutor stated: "For twenty years we must stop this brain from functioning." [ 39 ] He received an immediate sentence of five years in confinement on the island of Ustica , and the following year he received a sentence of 20 years' imprisonment in Turi, Apulia , near Bari .

Over 11 years in prison, his health deteriorated. Over this period, "his teeth fell out, his digestive system collapsed so that he could not eat solid food ... he had convulsions when he vomited blood and suffered headaches so violent that he beat his head against the walls of his cell." [ 40 ] [ 41 ] An international campaign, organised by Piero Sraffa at Cambridge University and Gramsci's sister-in-law Tatiana, was mounted to demand Gramsci's release.

[ 42 ] In 1933, he was moved from the prison at Turi to a clinic at Formia ; [ 43 ] he was still being denied adequate medical attention.

[ 44 ] Two years later, he was moved to the Quisisana clinic in Rome. He was due for release on 21 April 1937 and planned to retire to Sardinia for convalescence , but a combination of arteriosclerosis , pulmonary tuberculosis , high blood pressure , angina , gout , and acute gastric disorders meant that he was too ill to move.

[ 44 ] Gramsci died on 27 April 1937, at the age of 46. His ashes are buried in the Cimitero Acattolico in Rome. By moving Gramsci from prison to hospital when he became very ill, the Mussolini regime was attempting to avoid the accusation that it was his incarceration that caused his death. Nevertheless, his death was linked directly to prison conditions.

[ 45 ] Gramsci's grandson, Antonio Jr., speculated that Gramsci had been working with the Soviet government to facilitate a move to Moscow, but changed course as the political climate in Russia intensified in 1936.

[ 46 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Gramsci's many prison notebooks Gramsci was one of the most influential Marxist thinkers of the 20th century, and a particularly key thinker in the development of Western Marxism . He wrote more than 30 notebooks and 3,000 pages of history and analysis during his imprisonment. These writings, known as the Prison Notebooks , contain Gramsci's tracing of Italian history and nationalism , as well as some ideas in Marxist theory , critical theory , and educational theory associated with his name, such as: Cultural hegemony as a means of maintaining and legitimising the capitalist state The need for popular workers' education to encourage the development of intellectuals from the working class An analysis of the modern capitalist state that distinguishes between political society , which dominates directly and coercively, and civil society , where leadership is constituted through consent Absolute historicism A critique of economic determinism that opposes fatalistic interpretations of Marxism A critique of philosophical materialism Hegemony [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Further information: Cultural hegemony Hegemony was a term previously used by Marxists such as Vladimir Lenin to denote the political leadership of the working class in a democratic revolution.

[ 47 ] : 15–17 Gramsci greatly expanded this concept, developing an acute analysis of how the ruling capitalist class—the bourgeoisie —establishes and maintains its control.

[ 47 ] : 20 Classical Marxism had predicted that socialist revolution was inevitable in capitalist societies. By the early 20th century, no such revolution had occurred in the most advanced nations, and those revolutions of 1917–1923 , such as in Germany or the Biennio Rosso in Italy, had failed. As capitalism seemed more entrenched than ever, Gramsci suggested that it maintained control not just through violence and political and economic coercion but also through ideology . The bourgeoisie developed a hegemonic culture, which propagated its own values and norms so that they became the common sense values of all. People in the working class and other classes identified their own good with the good of the bourgeoisie and helped to maintain the status quo rather than revolting.

To counter the notion that bourgeois values represented natural or normal values for society, the working class needed to develop a culture of its own. While Lenin held that culture was ancillary to political objectives, Gramsci saw it as fundamental to the attainment of power that cultural hegemony be achieved first. In Gramsci's view, a class cannot dominate in modern conditions by merely advancing its own narrow economic interests, and neither can it dominate purely through force and coercion.

[ 48 ] Rather, it must exert intellectual and moral leadership, and make alliances and compromises with a variety of forces.

[ 48 ] Gramsci calls this union of social forces a historic bloc , taking a term from Georges Sorel . This bloc forms the basis of consent to a certain social order, which produces and re-produces the hegemony of the dominant class through a nexus of institutions, social relations , and ideas.

[ 48 ] Intellectuals and education [ edit ] Gramsci gave much thought to the role of intellectuals in society.

[ 49 ] He stated that all men are intellectuals, in that all have intellectual and rational faculties, but not all men have the social function of intellectuals.

[ 50 ] He saw modern intellectuals not as talkers but as practical-minded directors and organisers who produced hegemony through ideological apparatuses such as education and the media. Furthermore, he distinguished between a traditional intelligentsia , which sees itself (in his view, wrongly) as a class apart from society, and the thinking groups that every class produces from its own ranks organically.

[ 49 ] Such organic intellectuals do not simply describe social life in accordance with scientific rules but instead articulate, through the language of culture, the feelings and experiences which the masses could not express for themselves. To Gramsci, it was the duty of organic intellectuals to speak to the obscured precepts of folk wisdom, or common sense ( senso comune ), of their respective political spheres. These intellectuals would represent excluded social groups of a society, or what Gramsci referred to as the subaltern .

[ 51 ] In line with Gramsci's theories of cultural hegemony, he argued that capitalist power needed to be challenged by building a counter-hegemony . By this, he meant that, as part of the war of position , the organic intellectuals and others within the working-class, need to develop alternative values and an alternative ideology in contrast to bourgeois ideology. He argued that the reason this had not needed to happen in Russia was because the Russian ruling class did not have genuine cultural hegemony. So the Bolsheviks were able to carry out a war of manoeuvre (the Russian Revolution of 1917 ) relatively easily because ruling-class hegemony had never been fully achieved. He believed that a final war of manoeuvre was only possible, in the developed and advanced capitalist societies, when the war of position had been won by the organic intellectuals and the working class building a counter-hegemony.

[ citation needed ] The need to create a working-class culture and a counter-hegemony relates to Gramsci's call for a kind of education that could develop working-class intellectuals, whose task was not to introduce Marxist ideology into the consciousness of the proletariat as a set of foreign notions but to renovate the existing intellectual activity of the masses and make it natively critical of the status quo. His ideas about an education system for this purpose correspond with the notion of critical pedagogy and popular education as theorized and practised in later decades by Paulo Freire in Brazil, and have much in common with the thought of Frantz Fanon . For this reason, partisans of adult and popular education consider Gramsci's writings and ideas important to this day.

[ 52 ] State and civil society [ edit ] Gramsci's theory of hegemony is tied to his conception of the capitalist state. Gramsci does not understand the state in the narrow sense of the government. Instead, he divides it between political society (the police, the army, legal system, etc.)—the arena of political institutions and legal constitutional control—and civil society (the family, the education system, trade unions, etc.)—commonly seen as the private or non-state sphere, which mediates between the state and the economy.

[ 53 ] He stresses that the division is purely conceptual and that the two often overlap in reality.

[ 54 ] Gramsci posits that the capitalist state rules through force plus consent: political society is the realm of force and civil society is the realm of consent. He argues that under modern capitalism the bourgeoisie can maintain its economic control by allowing certain demands made by trade unions and mass political parties within civil society to be met by the political sphere. Thus, the bourgeoisie engages in passive revolution by going beyond its immediate economic interests and allowing the forms of its hegemony to change. Gramsci posits that movements such as reformism and fascism, as well as the scientific management and assembly line methods of Frederick Winslow Taylor and Henry Ford respectively, are examples of this.

Drawing from Niccolò Machiavelli , Gramsci argues that the modern Prince —the revolutionary party—is the force that will allow the working class to develop organic intellectuals and an alternative hegemony within civil society. For Gramsci, the complex nature of modern civil society means that a war of position, carried out by revolutionaries through political agitation, the trade unions, advancement of proletarian culture , and other ways to create an opposing civil society was necessary alongside a war of manoeuvre—a direct revolution—in order to have a successful revolution without danger of a counter-revolution or degeneration.

Despite his claim that the lines between the two may be blurred, Gramsci rejects the state worship that results from equating political society with civil society, as was done by the Jacobins and fascists. He believes the proletariat's historical task is to create a regulated society, where political society is diminished and civil society is expanded. He defines the withering away of the state as the full development of civil society's ability to regulate itself.

[ 53 ] Historicism [ edit ] Like the young Marx , Gramsci was an emphatic proponent of historicism .

[ 55 ] In Gramsci's view, all meaning derives from the relation between human practical activity (or praxis ) and the objective historical and social processes of which it is a part. Ideas cannot be understood outside their social and historical context, apart from their function and origin. The concepts by which we organise our knowledge of the world do not derive primarily from our relation to objects , but rather from the social relations between the users of those concepts. As a result, there is no such thing as an unchanging human nature but only historically variable social relationships. Furthermore, philosophy and science do not reflect a reality independent of man. Rather, a theory can be said to be true when, in any given historical situation, it expresses the real developmental trend of that situation.

For the majority of Marxists, truth was truth no matter when and where it was known, and scientific knowledge, which included Marxism, accumulated historically as the advance of truth in this everyday sense. In this view, Marxism (or the Marxist theory of history and economics) did not belong to the illusory realm of the superstructure because it is a science. In contrast, Gramsci believed Marxism was true in a socially pragmatic sense: by articulating the class consciousness of the proletariat , Marxism expressed the truth of its times better than any other theory. This anti- scientistic and anti- positivist stance was indebted to the influence of Benedetto Croce . At the same time, it should be underlined that Gramsci's absolute historicism broke with Croce's tendency to secure a metaphysical synthesis of historical destiny. Although Gramsci repudiates the charge, his historical account of truth has been criticised as a form of relativism .

[ 56 ] Critique of economism [ edit ] In a pre-prison article titled "The Revolution against Das Kapital ", Gramsci wrote that the October Revolution in Russia had invalidated the idea that socialist revolution had to await the full development of capitalist forces of production.

[ 57 ] This reflected his view that Marxism was not a determinist philosophy. The principle of the causal primacy of the forces of production was a misconception of Marxism. Both economic changes and cultural changes are expressions of a basic historical process, and it is difficult to say which sphere has primacy over the other.

The belief from the earliest years of the workers' movement that it would inevitably triumph due to historical laws was a product of the historical circumstances of an oppressed class restricted mainly to defensive action. This fatalistic doctrine must be abandoned as a hindrance once the working class becomes able to take the initiative. Because Marxism is a philosophy of praxis, it cannot rely on unseen historical laws as the agents of social change. History is defined by human praxis and therefore includes human will. Nonetheless, willpower cannot achieve anything it likes in any given situation: when the consciousness of the working class reaches the stage of development necessary for action, it will encounter historical circumstances that cannot be arbitrarily altered. It is not predetermined by historical inevitability as to which of several possible developments will take place as a result.

His critique of economic determinism extended to that practised by the syndicalists of the Italian trade unions. He believed that many trade unionists had settled for a reformist, gradualist approach in that they had refused to struggle on the political front in addition to the economic front. For Gramsci, much as the ruling class can look beyond its own immediate economic interests to reorganise the forms of its own hegemony, so must the working class present its own interests as congruous with the universal advancement of society. While Gramsci envisioned the trade unions as one organ of a counter-hegemonic force in a capitalist society, the trade union leaders simply saw these organizations as a means to improve conditions within the existing structure. Gramsci referred to the views of these trade unionists as vulgar economism, which he equated to covert reformism and liberalism .

Critique of materialism [ edit ] By virtue of his belief that human history and collective praxis determine whether any philosophical question is meaningful or not, Gramsci's views run contrary to the metaphysical materialism and copy theory of perception advanced by Friedrich Engels , [ 58 ] [ 59 ] and Lenin, [ 60 ] although he does not explicitly state this. For Gramsci, Marxism does not deal with a reality that exists in and for itself, independent of humanity.

[ 61 ] The concept of an objective universe outside of human history and human praxis was analogous to belief in God.

[ 62 ] Gramsci defined objectivity in terms of a universal intersubjectivity to be established in a future communist society.

[ 62 ] Natural history was thus only meaningful in relation to human history. In his view philosophical materialism resulted from a lack of critical thought, [ 63 ] and could not be said to oppose religious dogma and superstition.

[ 64 ] Despite this, Gramsci resigned himself to the existence of this arguably cruder form of Marxism. Marxism was a philosophy for the proletariat, a subaltern class, and thus could often only be expressed in the form of popular superstition and common sense.

[ 65 ] Nonetheless, it was necessary to effectively challenge the ideologies of the educated classes and to do so Marxists must present their philosophy in a more sophisticated guise and attempt to genuinely understand their opponents' views.

Legacy [ edit ] According to the American socialist magazine Jacobin , Gramsci "is one of the most cited Italian authors—certainly the most cited Italian Marxist ever—and one of the most celebrated Marxist philosophers of the twentieth century.", adding that the Prison Notebooks "allowed his unorthodox Marxism to spread worldwide." [ 66 ] Gramsci's thought emanates from the organised political left but has also become an important figure in current academic discussions within cultural studies and critical theory . Political theorists from the political centre and the political right have also found insight into his concepts; for instance, his idea of hegemony has become widely cited. His influence is particularly strong in contemporary political science , such as neo-Gramscianism . His critics charge him with fostering a notion of power struggle through ideas. They find the Gramscian approach to philosophical analysis, reflected in current academic controversies, to conflict with open-ended, liberal inquiry grounded in apolitical readings of the classics of Western culture. Some critics have argued that Gramsci's attempt to reconcile Marxism with intellectualism creates an ideological elitism that can be seen as at odds with individual liberty .

[ 67 ] His theory of hegemony has drawn criticism from those who believe that the promotion of state intervention in cultural affairs risks undermining the free exchange of ideas , which is essential for a truly open society .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] As a socialist, Gramsci's legacy has been met with a mixed reception.

[ 47 ] : 6–7 Togliatti, who led the party (renamed in 1943 as the Italian Communist Party , PCI) after World War II and whose gradualist approach was a forerunner to Eurocommunism , stated that the PCI's practices during this period were congruent with Gramscian thought.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] It is speculated that he would likely have been expelled from his party if his true views had been known, particularly his growing hostility towards Joseph Stalin .

[ 42 ] One issue for Gramsci related to his speaking on topics of violence and when it might be justified or not. When the socialist Giacomo Matteotti was murdered, Gramsci did not condemn the murder. Matteotti had already called for the rule of law and had been murdered by the fascists for that stance. The murder produced a crisis for the Italian fascist regime that Gramsci could have exploited.

[ 71 ] The historian Jean-Yves Frétigné argues that Gramsci and the socialists more generally were naïve in their assessment of the fascists and as a result underestimated the brutality of which the regime was capable.

[ 72 ] In Thailand, Piyabutr Saengkanokkul , an academic, democratic activist, and former Secretary-General of Future Forward Party , cited Gramsci's idea as the main key to establishing a party.

[ 73 ] Personal life [ edit ] Association football [ edit ] Like fellow Turinese and communist Palmiro Togliatti , Gramsci took an interest in association football , which was becoming a sport with massive following and was elected by the fascist regime in Italy as a national sport, and was said to have been a supporter of Juventus , as were other notable communist and left-wing leaders.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] On 16 December 1988, the PCI's newspaper l'Unità published an article on the front page titled "Gramsci Was Rooting for Juve". Signed by Giorgio Fabre, it contained some letters in which Gramsci asked Piero Sraffa for "news from our Juventus". Even though those letters later turned out to be false, the article remains part of the Gramscian bibliography and triggered numerous reactions, including from Giampiero Boniperti , who on behalf of the club the following day told at La Stampa : "We are pleased to know that among our fans there have been personalities who have marked an era from the political, economic, and intellectual point of view. This shows that Juventus truly have something special, a charm that has never lost strength over the years." Gramsci's interest in football dates back to a 16 August 1918 article for the PSI's newspaper Avanti!

, titled "Football and Scopone". Fifteen years later, he pointed at the degeneration of stadium cheering, which emerged with the advent of fascism and the consequent nationalisation of the sport that he said extinguished political and trade union commitment.

[ 77 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Collections [ edit ] Pre-Prison Writings (Cambridge University Press) The Prison Notebooks (three volumes) (Columbia University Press) Selections from the Prison Notebooks (International Publishers) Essays [ edit ] Newspapers and the Workers (1916) Men or machines?

(1916) One Year of History (1918) See also [ edit ] Articulation (sociology) Liberation theology Praxis School Subaltern (postcolonialism) Subaltern Studies Unification of Italy References [ edit ] ^ "Gramsci's Humanist Marxism" . 23 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2020 . Retrieved 17 January 2020 .

^ "Gramsci, Antonio" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 6 July 2023 .

^ "Gramsci" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ Sassoon 1991d , p. 446.

^ Haralambos & Holborn 2013 , p. 597.

^ "Italy, Oristano, Oristano. Civil Status (Tribunale), 1866–1940" .

FamilySearch . Archived from the original on 9 November 2016.

^ a b "IGSN 9 – Nuove notizie sulla famiglia paterna di Gramsci" .

International Gramsci Society .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Italiani di origine albanese che si sono distinti nei secoli" .

Il Torinese (in Italian). 8 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2021 . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .

^ Pipa, Arshi (1989).

The politics of language in socialist Albania . Boulder, Colorado: East European Monographs. p. 234.

ISBN 978-0-88033-168-5 .

"I myself have no race. My father is of recent Albanian origin. The family escaped from Epirus after or during the 1821 wars <of Greek Independence> and Italianized itself rapidly." Lettere dal carcere (Letters from Prison), ed. S. Capriogloi & E Fubini (Einaudi, Turin, 1965), pp. 507–508." ^ "IGSN 9 – Nuove notizie sulla famiglia paterna di Gramsci" .

www.internationalgramscisociety.org .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ "Genealogia dei Gramsci" .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2018 .

^ Manzelli, Gianguido (2004).

"Italiano e albanese: affinità e contrasti" . In Ghezzi, Chiara; Guerini, Federica; Molinelli, Piera (eds.).

Italiano e lingue immigrate a confronto: riflessioni per la pratica didattica, Atti del Convegno-Seminario, Bergamo, 23–25 giugno 2003 . Guerra Edizioni. p. 161.

ISBN 978-8877157072 .

"Antonio Gramsci, nato ad Ales (Oristano) nel 1891, fondatore del Partito Comunista d'ltalia nel 1921, arrestato nel 1926, morto a Roma nel 1937, portava nel proprio cognome la manifesta origine albanese della famiglia (Gramsh o Gramshi, con l'articolo determinativo finale in -i, è il nome di una cittadina dell'Albania centrale)." ^ Germino, Dante L. (1990).

Antonio Gramsci: Architect of a New Politics . Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press . p. 157.

ISBN 978-0-8071-1553-4 .

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xviii.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , pp. xviii–xix.

^ Crehan, Kate (2002).

Gramsci, Culture, and Anthropology . University of California Press. p. 14.

ISBN 0520236025 .

^ Markowicz, Daniel M. (2011) "Gramsci, Antonio," in The Encyclopedia of Literary and Cultural Theory , ed. Michael Ryan, ISBN 9781-405183123 ^ Santangelo 2021 , p. 216.

^ Antonio Gramsci, Dizionario di Storia Treccani Archived 24 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Treccani.it (8 November 1926). Retrieved on 24 April 2017.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xix.

^ Antonio Gramsci e la questione sarda , a cura di Guido Melis, Cagliari, Della Torre, 1975 ^ "Why Antonio Gramsci Matters to Sociologists" .

ThoughtCo .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 June 2020 .

^ Hall, Stuart (June 1986). " Gramsci's relevance for the study of race and ethnicity Archived 20 November 2023 at the Wayback Machine ".

Journal of Communication Inquiry 10 (2), 5–27, Sage Journals ^ (in Italian) Gramsci e l'isola laboratorio, La Nuova Sardegna Archived 25 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine . Ricerca.gelocal.it (3 May 2004). Retrieved on 24 April 2017.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xx.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xxv.

^ Deiana, Gian Luigi (23 June 2017).

"The Legacy of Antonio Gramsci" .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2019 . Retrieved 5 May 2019 .

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xxi.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xxx.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , pp. xxx–xxxi.

^ Kolakowski, Leszek (1978).

Main Currents of Marxism – Its Rise, Growth and, Dissolution – Volume III – The Breakdown . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press . pp.

223 .

ISBN 978-0-19-824570-4 .

^ Steven, Mark (2023).

Class War: A Literary History . London, England: Verso Books . pp.

197 .

ISBN 978-1-83976-069-3 .

^ Femia, J. (1998).

The Machiavellian Legacy: Essays in Italian Political Thought . London, England: Palgrave Macmillan . p. 107.

ISBN 978-0-230-37992-3 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 .

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xlvi.

^ Jnr, Antonio Gramsci (1 December 2016).

"My Grandfather" .

New Left Review (102): 68– 75.

^ Picture Archived 14 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine of Gramsci's wife and their two sons at the Italian-language Antonio Gramsci Website Archived 2 August 2002 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Crehan, Kate (2002).

Gramsci, Culture, and Anthropology . University of California Press. p. 17.

ISBN 0520236025 .

^ Vacca, Giuseppe (2012).

Vita e pensieri di Antonio Gramsci . Turin: Einaudi.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. lxxxix.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xcii.

^ Garrett, Paul Michael (4 July 2018). "Thinking with Antonio Gramsci".

Social Work and Social Theory . Policy Press. pp.

103– 122.

doi : 10.51952/9781447341925.ch006 .

ISBN 978-1-4473-4192-5 .

^ a b Jones 2006 , p. 25.

^ Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xciii.

^ a b Hoare & Smith 1971 , p. xciv.

^ Ebner 2011 , pp. 76, 105, 144, 150Ebner says that Mussolini "stage-managed the cases of prominent anti-Fascists like Gramsci" (p. 150) but that, in fact, the regime "rarely granted freedom to leading Communist Party militants" (p. 144). Liberal critics of Mussolini's imprisonment policies likened such policies to "dying a slow death" (p. 105). On Mussolini's pretence of having a benign regime see in particular Chapter 5, "The Politics of Pardons".

^ Gramsci Jr., Antonio (1 December 2016).

"Antonio Gramsci, Jnr, My Grandfather" .

New Left Review . No. 102.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2023 . Retrieved 8 July 2023 .

^ a b c Anderson, Perry (November–December 1976).

"The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci" .

New Left Review .

I (100). New Left Review: 5– 78.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2015 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

^ a b c Sassoon 1991c , p. 230.

^ a b Kiernan 1991 , p. 259.

^ Gramsci 1971 , p. 9.

^ Crehan, Kate (2016).

Gramsci's Common Sense: Inequality and Its Narratives . Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-6219-7 .

^ Mayo, Peter (June 2008).

"Antonio Gramsci and his Relevance for the Education of Adults" (PDF) .

Educational Philosophy & Theory .

40 (3): 418– 435.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-5812.2007.00357.x .

S2CID 143570823 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ a b Sassoon 1991b , p. 83.

^ Gramsci 1971 , p. 160.

^ Gramsci 1971 , pp. 404–407.

^ Leszek Kolakowski – Main Currents of Marxism – Its Rise, Growth and, Dissolution – Volume III – The Breakdown . Oxford University Press. 1978. pp.

228–231 .

ISBN 978-0-19-824570-4 .

^ Sassoon 1991a , p. 221.

^ Friedrich Engels: Anti-Duehring Archived 11 September 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ Friedrich Engels: Dialectics of Nature Archived 25 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lenin: Materialism and Empirio-Criticism Archived 3 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Gramsci 1971 , pp. 440–448.

^ a b Gramsci 1971 , p. 445.

^ Gramsci 1971 , pp. 444–445.

^ Gramsci 1971 , p. 420.

^ Gramsci 1971 , pp. 419–425.

^ Maccaferri, Marzia (1 November 2021).

"How Antonio Gramsci's Ideas Went Global" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 26 July 2023 .

^ a b Adamson, Walter L. (1983).

Hegemony and Revolution: A Study of Antonio Gramsci's Political and Cultural Theory . University of California Press.

^ Femia, Joseph V. (1981).

Cultural Hegemony in a Scientific World . Clarendon Press.

^ Femia, Joseph P. (April 1987). "A Peaceful Road to Socialism?".

Gramsci's Political Thought: Hegemony, Consciousness, and the Revolutionary Process (paperback ed.). University of Oxford Press. pp.

190– 216.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198275435.003.0006 .

ISBN 978-9-0045-0334-2 .

^ Liguori, Guido (21 December 2021). "Gramsci and the Italian Road to Socialism (1956–59)".

Gramsci Contested: Interpretations, Debates, and Polemics, 1922–2012 . Historical Materialism. Translated by Braude, Richard (E-book ed.). Brill. pp.

94– 123.

doi : 10.1163/9789004503342_005 .

ISBN 978-0-1982-7543-5 .

S2CID 245586587 .

^ Frétigné 2021 , pp. 156–159.

^ Frétigné 2021 , pp. 182–183.

^ " 'กรัมชี-ปิยบุตร' สงครามศาสดา" .

Bangkok Post .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ Romeo, Ilaria (7 February 2018).

"Tra la rivoluzione e la Juve. La passione dei leader Pci per il calcio" .

Striscia Rossa (in Italian) . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

Affermava in proposito l'avvocato Agnelli su 'La Stampa': 'Ho mandato al giornale una foto di una partita della Juventus del 1948, dove mi trovavo accanto a Togliatti. Lui, come tutti i leader comunisti di una certa generazione e di una certa classe, era juventino. Non ho mai avuto modo di verificare se Berlinguer amasse la Juventus; ma da alcune sue reazioni, che ho avuto occasione di vedere allo stadio, mi pare che anche il suo cuore fosse bianconero' (dalla lettera aperta a Luciano Lama Agnelli risponde a Lama sulla Juve, 'La Stampa', 6 marzo 1991, p. 33).

[In this regard, [Gianni] Agnelli stated in "La Stampa": "I sent the newspaper a photo of a Juventus match in 1948, where I was next to Togliatti. He, like all communist leaders of a certain generation and a certain class, was a Juventus fan. I've never had the opportunity to verify if Berlinguer loved Juventus, but from some of his reactions, which I had the opportunity to see at the stadium, it seems to me that his heart was Black and White too" (from the open letter to Luciano Lama, Agnelli replies to Lama on Juve, "La Stampa", 6 March 1991, p. 33).] ^ Coccia, Pasquale (25 September 2021).

"I comunisti scendono in campo" .

Il manifesto (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 8 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ Mainente, Andrea (3 August 2022).

"La Juventus comunista" .

Rivista Contrasti (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

^ Magno, Michele (25 September 2021).

"Gramsci e Togliatti, la rivoluzione e la Juventus" .

Start Magazine (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 8 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 July 2023 .

'E tu pretendi di fare la rivoluzione senza conoscere i risultati della Juve?.' Come a dire, senza conoscere gli umori del popolo a cui chiedi di insorgere? Il capo del Partito comunista, tifoso della 'Vecchia Signora', rimproverava così al suo vice di misconoscere l'importanza di un fenomeno di massa come il calcio, eletto dal fascismo a sport nazionale, in grado di influenzare mentalità e costumi dei ceti popolari. Un punto, questo, che aveva catturato l'attenzione di Antonio Gramsci già all'alba Novecento. Lo testimonia 'Il foot-ball e lo scopone', un celebre articolo pubblicato il 16 agosto 1918 sull'Avanti!.

["And you expect us to make the revolution without knowing the results of Juve?" As to say, without knowing the moods of the people, how do you ask [the people] to rise up? The head of the Communist Party, a fan of the "Old Lady", thus reproached his deputy for disregarding the importance of a mass phenomenon such as football, elected by fascism as a national sport, capable of influencing the mentality and customs of the working class. A point which had already captured the attention of Antonio Gramsci at the dawn of the twentieth century. Witness "Football and Scopone", a famous article published on 16 August 1918 on Avanti!] Cited sources [ edit ] Althusser, Louis (1971), Lenin and Philosophy , London: Monthly Review Press, ISBN 978-1583670392 , archived from the original on 18 June 2020 , retrieved 16 June 2020 .

Anderson, Perry (November–December 1976).

"The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci" .

New Left Review .

I (100). New Left Review: 5– 78.

Ebner, Michael (2011).

Ordinary Violence in Mussolini's Italy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 76, 105, 144, 150.

Frétigné, Jean-Yves (2021).

To Live is To Resist: The Life of Antonio Gramsci . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

156– 159, 182– 183.

Gramsci, Antonio (1971).

Selections from the Prison Notebooks . International Publishers.

ISBN 0-7178-0397-X .

Gramsci, Antonio (1971).

Selections from the Prison Notebooks . International Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7178-0397-2 .

Haralambos, Michael; Holborn, Martin (2013), Sociology Themes and Perspectives (8th ed.), New York: HarperCollins , ISBN 978-0-00-749882-6 Hoare, Quintin; Smith, Geoffrey Nowell (1971), Introduction, Selections from the Prison Notebooks , by Gramsci, Antonio, Hoare, Quentin; Smith, Geoffrey Nowell (eds.), New York: International Publishers, pp.

xvii– xcvi, ISBN 0-7178-0397-X Jones, Steven (2006), Antonio Gramsci , Routledge Critical Thinkers, Routledge, ISBN 0-415-31947-1 .

Kiernan, V. G.

(1991). "Intellectuals". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 259.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

Santangelo, Federico (2021). "Between Ceasarism and Cosmopolitanism: Julius Ceasar as an Historical Problem in Gramsci". In Zucchetti, Emilio; Cimino, Anna Maria (eds.).

Antonio Gramsci and the Ancient World . Taylor & Francis. pp.

201– 221.

ISBN 978-0429510359 .

Sassoon, Anne Showstack (1991a). "Antonio Gramsci". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G ; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp.

221– 223.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

Sassoon, Anne Showstack (1991b). "Civil Society". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G ; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp.

83– 85.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

Sassoon, Anne Showstack (1991c). "Hegemony". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp.

229– 231.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

Sassoon, Anne Showstack (1991d), "Prison Notebooks", in Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.), The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.), Blackwell Publishers Ltd., pp.

446– 447, ISBN 0-631-16481-2 Further reading [ edit ] Adamson, Walter L. (2014).

Hegemony and Revolution: Antonio Gramsci's Political and Cultural Theory . Brattleboro, VT: Echo Point Books & Media.

ISBN 9781626549098 .

Anderson, Perry (November–December 1976).

"The Antinomies of Antonio Gramsci" .

New Left Review .

I (100). New Left Review: 5– 78.

Aqueci, Francesco (September–December 2018).

"Il Gramsci di un nuovo inizio" (PDF) .

Rivista Internazionale di Studi Culturali, Linguistici e Letterari (in Italian) (Quaderno 12, Supplemento al n. 19): 223.

Boggs, Carl (1984).

The Two Revolutions: Gramsci and the Dilemmas of Western Marxism . London: South End Press .

ISBN 978-0-89608-226-7 .

Bottomore, Tom (1992).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought . Blackwell Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-631-18082-1 .

Dainotto, Roberto M.; Jameson, Fredric, eds. (28 August 2020).

Gramsci in the World . Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4780-0849-1 .

Davidson, Alastair (2018).

Antonio Gramsci: Towards an Intellectual Biography . Haymarket Books.

ISBN 9781608468256 .

Femia, Joseph V. (1981).

Gramsci's Political Thought: Hegemony, Consciousness, and the Revolutionary Process . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-827251-0 .

Filippini, Michele (2017).

Using Gramsci: A New Approach . Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0-7453-3568-1 .

Fonseca, Marco (2016).

Gramsci's Critique of Civil Society. Towards a New Concept of Hegemony . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-13-848649-2 .

Greaves, Nigel (2009).

Gramsci's Marxism: Reclaiming a Philosophy of History and Politics . Troubador Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84876-127-8 .

Hall, Stuart (June 1986). "Gramsci's relevance for the study of race and ethnicity".

Journal of Communication Inquiry .

10 (2): 5– 27.

doi : 10.1177/019685998601000202 .

S2CID 53782 .

Harman, Chris (9 April 2007).

"Gramsci, the Prison Notebooks and Philosophy" .

International Socialism .

Henderson, Hamish (Winter 1987–1988). Ross, Raymond J. (ed.). "Antonio Gramsci".

Cencrastus .

28 : 22– 26.

ISSN 0264-0856 .

Jay, Martin (1986).

Marxism and Totality: The Adventures of a Concept from Lukacs to Habermas . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-05742-5 .

Joll, James (1977).

Antonio Gramsci . New York: Viking Press.

ISBN 978-0-670-12942-3 .

Kolakowski, Leszek (1981).

Main Currents of Marxism, Vol. III: The Breakdown . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-285109-3 .

Liguori, Guido (2015).

Gramsci's Pathways . Haymarket Books.

ISBN 978-1-60846-692-4 .

Maitan, Livio (1978).

Il marxismo rivoluzionario di Antonio Gramsci . Milano: Nuove edizioni internazionali.

McNally, Mark (11 August 2015).

Antonio Gramsci . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-137-33418-3 .

Onnis, Omar; Mureddu, Manuelle (2019).

Illustres. Vita, morte e miracoli di quaranta personalità sarde (in Italian). Sestu: Domus de Janas.

ISBN 978-88-97084-90-7 .

OCLC 1124656644 .

Pastore, Gerardo (2011).

Antonio Gramsci: Questione sociale e questione sociologica . Gerardo Pastore.

ISBN 978-88-7467-059-8 .

Santucci, Antonio A. (2010).

Antonio Gramsci . Monthly Review Press.

ISBN 978-1-58367-210-5 .

Thomas, Peter D. (2009).

The Gramscian Moment: Philosophy, Hegemony and Marxism . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-16771-1 .

Cammett, John M. (1967).

Antonio Gramsci and the Origins of Italian Communism . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804701426 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Antonio Gramsci .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Antonio Gramsci .

Monumento casa natale di Antonio Gramsci, Ales, Sardinia (in Italian) Il dibattito recente su Gramsci. Tra "ortodossia" e revisionismo at Nitalenium Edizioni (in Italian) Institutes [ edit ] The International Gramsci Society Fondazione Instituto Gramsci Associazione Casa Natale Antonio Gramsci Antonio Gramsci , 1891–1937 (in Italian) Texts by Gramsci [ edit ] Gramsci's writings at the Marxists Internet Archive Library journal.telospress.com Gramsci: "Notes on Language" – Telos Articles on Gramsci [ edit ] Articles on Gramsci at journal.telospress.com Trudell, Megan; et al.: "Gramsci's revolutionary legacy" , International Socialism 2007, issue 117 Martin, James: Antonio Gramsci , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 13 January 2023.

Robaina, Roberto: "Gramsci and revolution: a necessary clarification" , International Socialism Jakopovich, Dan: "Revolution and the Party in Gramsci's Thought: A Modern Application" Gramsci's contribution to the field of adult and popular education – www.infed.org "The life and work of Antonio Gramsci" – www.theory.org.uk (Archived) Hedges, Chris : "Antonio Gramsci and the Battle Against Fascism" – Truthdig . 4 June 2017 Jessop, Bob : Lectures on Gramsci (Four sessions with audio).

Links to related articles v t e Italian Communist Party Leadership General Secretary Amadeo Bordiga (1922–1923) Executive Committee (1923–1924) Antonio Gramsci (1924–1927) Camilla Ravera (1927–1930) Palmiro Togliatti (1930–1934) Ruggero Grieco (1934–1938) Palmiro Togliatti (1938–1964) Luigi Longo (1964–1972) Enrico Berlinguer (1972–1984) Alessandro Natta (1984–1988) Achille Occhetto (1988–1991) President Luigi Longo (1972–1980) Alessandro Natta (1989–1990) Aldo Tortorella (1990–1991) Leader in the Chamber of Deputies Luigi Longo (1946–1947) Palmiro Togliatti (1947–1964) Pietro Ingrao (1964–1972) Alessandro Natta (1972–1979) Fernando Di Giulio (1979–1981) Giorgio Napolitano (1981–1986) Renato Zangheri (1986–1990) Giulio Quercini (1990–1991) Leader in the Senate Mauro Scoccimarro (1948–1958) Umberto Terracini (1958–1973) Edoardo Pema (1973–1986) Gerardo Chiaromonte (1983–1986) Ugo Pecchioli (1986–1991) Leader in the European Parliament Giorgio Amendola (1979–1980) Guido Fanti (1980–1984) Giovanni Cervetti (1984–1989) Luigi Alberto Colajanni (1989–1991) Publications l'Unità (1924–1991) Vie Nuove (1946–1978) Pattuglia (1948–1953) Rinascita (1944–1991) Related articles Italian Socialist Party Culturalists XII International Brigade ( Garibaldi Battalion ) Italian resistance movement National Liberation Committee May 1947 crises AvtoVAZ Tolyatti Italian Communist Youth Federation Marxism–Leninism Bordigism Eurocommunism Migliorismo Derivatives Internationalist Communist Party International Communist Party Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) / Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Italian (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party Democratic Party of the Left / Democrats of the Left / Democratic Party Communist Refoundation Party / Party of Italian Communists Alliances Popular Democratic Front (1947–1948) Historic Compromise (1976–1980) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Recipients of the Viareggio Prize 1930s Anselmo Bucci – Lorenzo Viani (1930) Corrado Tumiati (1931) Antonino Foschini (1932) Achille Campanile (1933) Raffaele Calzini (1934) Mario Massa – Stefano Pirandello (1935) Riccardo Bacchelli (1936) Guelfo Civinini (1937) Vittorio Giovanni Rossi – Enrico Pea (1938) Arnaldo Frateili – Orio Vergani – Maria Bellonci (1939) 1940s Silvio Micheli – Umberto Saba (1946) • Antonio Gramsci (1947) • Aldo Palazzeschi – Elsa Morante – Sibilla Aleramo (1948) • Arturo Carlo Jemolo – Renata Viganò (1949) 1950s Francesco Jovine – Carlo Bernari (1950) • Domenico Rea (1951) • Tommaso Fiore (1952) • Carlo Emilio Gadda (1953) • Rocco Scotellaro (1954) • Vasco Pratolini (1955) • Carlo Levi – Gianna Manzini (1956) • Italo Calvino – Pier Paolo Pasolini (1957) • Ernesto de Martino (1958) • Marino Moretti (1959) 1960s Giovanni Battista Angioletti (1960) • Alberto Moravia (1961) • Giorgio Bassani (1962) • Antonio Delfini – Sergio Solmi (1963) • Giuseppe Berto (1964) • Goffredo Parise - Angelo Maria Ripellino (1965) • Ottiero Ottieri – Alfonso Gatto (1966) • Raffaello Brignetti (1967) • Libero Bigiaretti (1968) • Fulvio Tomizza (1969) 1970s Nello Saito (1970) • Ugo Attardi (1971) • Romano Bilenchi (1972) • Achille Campanile (1973) • Clotilde Marghieri (1974) • Paolo Volponi (1975) • Mario Tobino – Dario Bellezza – Sergio Solmi (1976) • Davide Lajolo (1977) • Antonio Altomonte – Mario Luzi (1978) • Giorgio Manganelli (1979) 1980s Stefano Terra (1980) • Enzo Siciliano (1981) • Primo Levi (1982) • Giuliana Morandini (1983) • Gina Lagorio – Bruno Gentili (1984) • Manlio Cancogni (1985) • Marisa Volpi (1986) • Mario Spinella (1987) • Rosetta Loy (1988) • Salvatore Mannuzzu (1989) 1990s Luisa Adorno – Cesare Viviani – Maurizio Calvesi (1990) • Antonio Debenedetti (1991) • Luigi Malerba (1992) • Alessandro Baricco (1993) • Antonio Tabucchi (1994) • Maurizio Maggiani – Elio Pagliarani (1995) • Ermanno Rea – Alda Merini (1996) • Claudio Piersanti – Franca Grisoni – Corrado Stajano (1997) • Giorgio Pressburger – Michele Sovente – Carlo Ginzburg (1998) • Ernesto Franco (1999) 2000s Giorgio van Straten – Sandro Veronesi (2000) • Niccolò Ammaniti – Michele Ranchetti – Giorgio Pestelli (2001) • Fleur Jaeggy – Jolanda Insana – Alfonso Berardinelli (2002) • Giuseppe Montesano (2003) • Edoardo Albinati – Andrea Tagliapietra – Livia Livi (2004) • Raffaele La Capria – Alberto Arbasino – Milo de Angelis (2005) • Gianni Celati – Giovanni Agosti – Giuseppe Conte – Roberto Saviano (2006) • Filippo Tuena – Paolo Mauri – Silvia Bre – Simona Baldanzi – Paolo Colagrande – Paolo Fallai (2007) • Francesca Sanvitale – Miguel Gotor – Eugenio De Signoribus (2008) • Edith Bruck – Adriano Prosperi – Ennio Cavalli (2009) 2010s Nicola Lagioia – Michele Emmer – Pierluigi Cappello (2010) • Alessandro Mari – Mario Lavagetto – Gian Mario Villalta (2011) • Nicola Gardini – Franco Lo Piparo – Antonella Anedda (2012) • Paolo Di Stefano – Giulio Guidorizzi – Enrico Testa (2013) • Francesco Pecoraro – Alessandro Fo – Luciano Mecacci (2014) • Antonio Scurati – Massimo Bucciantini – Franco Buffoni (2015) • Franco Cordelli – Bruno Pischedda – Sonia Gentili (2016) • Gianfranco Calligarich – Giuseppe Montesano – Stefano Carrai (2017) • Fabio Genovesi – Giuseppe Lupo (2018) • Emanuele Trevi – Renato Minore – Saverio Ricci (2019) 2020s Paolo Di Paolo – Luciano Cecchinel – Giulio Ferroni (2020) • Edith Bruck - Flavio Santi - Walter Siti (2021) • Silvia Sciorilli Borrelli – Pietro Castellitto – Claudio Damiani – Wlodek Goldkorn – Agnese Pini – Veronica Raimo – Silvia Ronchey (2022) Portals : Anarchism Communism Environment Feminism Italy Organized Labour Politics Socialism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway 2 Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dhdtc
Cached time: 20250817183619
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.080 seconds
Real time usage: 2.419 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20549/1000000
Revision size: 72216/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 528900/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 106375/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 352179/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.240/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24154237/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1965.071      1 -total
 20.86%  410.011      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 18.20%  357.630      1 Template:Reflist
 12.39%  243.449     39 Template:Cite_book
 10.62%  208.780      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  7.46%  146.638      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.22%  141.808      1 Template:IPA
  7.15%  140.588      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.96%  136.830     39 Template:Sfn
  6.91%  135.692      1 Template:Marxism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:56244:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817183619 and revision id 1306431445. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antonio_Gramsci&oldid=1306431445 " Categories : Antonio Gramsci 1891 births 1937 deaths 20th-century Italian philosophers 20th-century Italian politicians Arbëreshë people Burials in the Protestant Cemetery, Rome Critics of religions Economics writers Ecofeminists Secular humanists Executive Committee of the Communist International Italian anti-capitalists Italian anti-fascists Italian atheists Italian Aventinian secessionists Italian critics of Christianity Italian environmentalists Italian feminists Italian male journalists Italian Marxists Italian newspaper editors Italian newspaper founders Italian people of Albanian descent Italian people of Arbëreshë descent Italian people who died in prison custody Italian political philosophers Italian socialists Italian Socialist Party politicians Journalists who died while in prison custody Marxist humanists Italian Marxist journalists Marxist feminists Marxist theorists Italian Marxist writers People from the Province of Oristano Prisoners who died in Italian detention University of Turin alumni Viareggio Prize winners Italian letter writers 20th-century letter writers Italian communists Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from July 2023 Use dmy dates from May 2022 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Italian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Commons link from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 18:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antonio Gramsci 96 languages Add topic

