Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification of Earth 2 Location of Earth 3 Movement of the Earth 4 Features of Earth Toggle Features of Earth subsection 4.1 Earth's spheres 4.1.1 Atmosphere of Earth 4.1.2 Earth's biosphere 4.1.3 Earth's geosphere 4.1.4 Earth's hydrosphere 4.1.4.1 Atmospheric water 4.1.4.2 Cryosphere (frozen water) 4.1.4.3 Surface water 4.1.4.4 Water, by salt content 4.2 Astronomical events on Earth 4.3 Natural satellites of Earth 5 History of Earth 6 Future of Earth 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of Earth 1 language සිංහල Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to Earth The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the planet Earth: Earth – third planet from the Sun , the densest planet in the Solar System , the largest of the Solar System's four terrestrial planets , and the only astronomical object known to harbor life .

Classification of Earth [ edit ] Astronomical object Gravitationally rounded object Planet Planet of the Solar System Inner planet Terrestrial planet Location of Earth [ edit ] Earth's location in the Universe Universe – all of time and space and its contents.

Observable universe – spherical region of the Universe comprising all matter that may be observed from Earth at the present time, because light and other signals from these objects have had time to reach Earth since the beginning of the cosmological expansion.

Laniakea Supercluster – galaxy supercluster that is home to the Milky Way and approximately 100,000 other nearby galaxies. Includes the prior defined local supercluster, the Virgo Supercluster, as an appendage.

Virgo Supercluster – one of the approximately 10 million superclusters in the observable universe. It spans 33 megaparsecs (110 million light-years), and contains at least 100 galaxy groups and clusters, including the Local Group.

Local Group – specific galaxy group that includes the Milky Way and at least 53 other  galaxies, most of them dwarf galaxies.

Milky Way Galaxy – a specific barred spiral galaxy Orion Arm – a spiral arm of the Milky Way Solar System – the Sun and the objects that orbit it, including eight planets, the third planet closest to the Sun being Earth Earth's orbit – path through which the Earth travels around the Sun . The average distance between the Earth and the Sun is 149.60 million kilometers (92.96 million miles) .

[ 1 ] Movement of the Earth [ edit ] Earth's orbit Earth's rotation Earth's precession Features of Earth [ edit ] Age of the Earth Figure of the Earth (size and shape) Earth radius Models of the Earth Globe World map Gravity of Earth Earth's magnetic field Natural environment Earth's spheres [ edit ] Atmosphere of Earth [ edit ] Earth's biosphere [ edit ] Ecosystems Biomes biogeographic realms Marine realms Bioregions Ecoregions ( list ) Anthroposphere Noosphere Earth's geosphere [ edit ] Structure of the Earth Earth's surface Lithosphere of Earth ( solid Earth ) Earth's crust Land Landforms ( list ) Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Pedosphere Ocean floor Earth's mantle Earth's core Outer core Inner core Earth's hydrosphere [ edit ] This sphere represents all water on Earth, wherever it is and in whatever form within the water cycle .

Water, by relative altitude Atmospheric water [ edit ] Water vapor Clouds Precipitation Cryosphere (frozen water) [ edit ] Polar ice caps Ice sheets Ice caps Glaciers Surface water [ edit ] Bodies of water ( list ) World Ocean Southern Ocean Oceans - This includes the Earth's five oceans: The Arctic Ocean , the Atlantic Ocean , the Indian Ocean , and the Pacific Ocean .

Groundwater Water, by salt content [ edit ] Fresh water Brackish water Seawater Astronomical events on Earth [ edit ] Meteor showers ( list ) Meteorite falls Tides Eclipse - This includes both a lunar eclipse and solar eclipse .

Equinox - This includes both the March equinox and the September equinox .

Solstice - This includes the Summer solstice , June solstice , Winter solstice , and December solstice Stonehenge Manhattanhenge Natural satellites of Earth [ edit ] Moon History of Earth [ edit ] History of Earth Age of the Earth Geocentric model Geological history of Earth Geologic time scale Early Earth Timeline of natural history Human history Future of Earth [ edit ] Future of Earth Climate change Global catastrophic risk See also [ edit ] Earth and atmospheric sciences journals Earth phase Earth sciences List of fields of science that study the Earth Geoscience organizations List of environmental organizations Outline of the Solar System World References [ edit ] ^ "Sun: Facts & Figures" .

Solar System Exploration . National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Archived from the original on July 3, 2015 . Retrieved July 29, 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Earth at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity National Geographic encyclopedic entry about Earth Earth – Profile – Solar System Exploration – NASA Earth – Climate Changes Cause Shape to Change – NASA United States Geological Survey – USGS Earth – Astronaut Photography Gateway – NASA Earth Observatory – NASA Earth – Audio (29:28) – Cain/Gay – Astronomy Cast (2007) Earth – Videos – International Space Station: Video (01:02) – Earth (time-lapse) Video (00:27) – Earth and Auroras (time-lapse) v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_Earth&oldid=1301888554 " Categories : Outlines of geography and places Outlines Earth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 06:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of Earth 1 language Add topic

