Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development of the idea Toggle Development of the idea subsection 1.1 Pre-scientific sources 1.2 19th-century thinkers 1.3 Modern creationists 2 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 2.1 Beginning of false creation 2.2 Deceptive creator 3 Similar formulations Toggle Similar formulations subsection 3.1 Five-minute hypothesis 3.2 Borges's Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius 3.3 Last Thursdayism 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Omphalos hypothesis 14 languages Български Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Five-minute hypothesis ) Creationist hypothesis Part of a series on Creationism History Types Young Earth Geocentric Old Earth day-age gap progressive Neo-creationism Biblical cosmology Book of Genesis creation narrative as an allegory Omphalos hypothesis Creation science Created kind Flood geology Creationist cosmologies Intelligent design Rejection of evolution by religious groups History Public education "Teach the Controversy" Religious views Non-creation Creator in Buddhism Jainism and non-creationism Evolution Theistic evolution Buddhist Catholic Hindu Islamic Jewish Mormon v t e The Omphalos hypothesis is one attempt to reconcile the scientific evidence that the Earth is billions of years old with a literal interpretation of the Genesis creation narrative , which implies that the Earth is only a few thousand years old.

[ 1 ] It is based on the religious belief that the universe was created by a divine being, within the past six to ten thousand years (in keeping with flood geology ), and that the presence of objective, verifiable evidence that the universe is older than approximately ten millennia is due to the creator introducing false evidence that makes the universe appear significantly older.

The idea was named after the title of an 1857 book, Omphalos by Philip Henry Gosse , in which Gosse argued that for the world to be "functional", God must have created the Earth with mountains and canyons, trees with growth rings, Adam and Eve with fully grown hair, fingernails, and navels [ 2 ] (ὀμφαλός omphalos is Greek for "navel"), and all living creatures with fully formed evolutionary features, etc., and that, therefore, no empirical evidence about the age of the Earth or universe can be taken as reliable.

[ 3 ] Various supporters of Young Earth creationism have given different explanations for their belief that the universe is filled with false evidence of the universe's age, [ 4 ] including a belief that some things needed to be created at a certain age for the ecosystems to function, or their belief that the creator was deliberately planting deceptive evidence.

[ 5 ] The idea was widely rejected in the 19th century, when Gosse published his aforementioned book.

[ 1 ] It saw some revival in the 20th century by some Young Earth creationists, who extended the argument to include visible light that appears to originate from far-off stars and galaxies (addressing the " starlight problem ").

[ 6 ] Development of the idea [ edit ] Pre-scientific sources [ edit ] Stories of the beginning of human life based on the creation story in Genesis have been published for centuries. The 4th-century theologian Ephrem the Syrian described a world in which divine creation instantly produced fully grown organisms: [ 7 ] Although the grasses were only a moment old at their creation, they appeared as if they were months old. Likewise, the trees, although only a day old when they sprouted forth, were nevertheless like ... years old as they were fully grown and fruits were already budding on their branches.

19th-century thinkers [ edit ] By the 19th century, scientific evidence of the Earth's age had been collected, and it disagreed with a literal reading of the biblical accounts.

[ 1 ] This evidence was rejected by some writers at the time, such as François-René de Chateaubriand . Chateaubriand wrote in his 1802 book, Génie du christianisme (Part I Book IV Chapter V), that "God might have created, and doubtless did create, the world with all the marks of antiquity and completeness which it now exhibits." In modern times, Rabbi Dovid Gottlieb supported a similar position, saying that the objective scientific evidence for an old universe is strong, but wrong, and that the traditional Jewish calendar is correct.

[ 8 ] In the middle of the 19th century, the disagreement between scientific evidence about the age of the Earth and the Western religious traditions was a significant debate among intellectuals.

[ 1 ] Gosse published Omphalos in 1857 to explain his answer to this question. He concluded that the religious tradition was correct. Gosse began with the earlier idea that the Earth contained mature organisms at the instant they were created, and that these organisms had false signs of their development, such as hair on mammals, which grows over time.

[ 1 ] He extended this idea of creating a single mature organism to creating mature systems, and concluded that fossils were an artifact of the creation process and merely part of what was necessary to make creation work. Therefore, he reasoned, fossils and other signs of the Earth's age could not be used to prove its age.

[ 1 ] Other contemporary proposals for reconciling the stories of creation in Genesis with the scientific evidence included the interval theory or gap theory of creation , in which a large interval of time passed in between the initial creation of the universe and the beginning of the Six Days of Creation . This idea was put forward by Archbishop John Bird Sumner of Canterbury in Treatise on the Records of Creation .

[ 1 ] Another popular idea, promoted by the English theologian John Pye Smith , was that the Garden of Eden described the events of only one small location.

[ 1 ] A third proposal, by French naturalist Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon , held that the six "days" of the creation story were arbitrary and large ages rather than 24-hour periods.

[ 1 ] Theologians rejected Gosse's proposal on the grounds that it seemed to make the divine creator tell lies—either lying in the scriptures, or lying in nature.

[ 1 ] Scientists rejected it on the grounds that it disagreed with uniformitarianism , an explanation of geology that was widely supported at the time, and the impossibility of testing or falsifying the idea.

[ 1 ] Modern creationists [ edit ] Some modern creationists still argue against scientific evidence in the same way. For instance, John D. Morris , president of the Institute for Creation Research wrote in 1990 about the "appearance of age", saying that: "...what [God] created was functionally complete right from the start—able to fulfill the purpose for which it was created".

[ 9 ] He does not extend this idea to the geological record, preferring to believe that it was all created in the Flood, but others such as Gerald E. Aardsma go further, with his idea of "virtual history". This appears to suggest that events after the creation have changed the "virtual history" we now see, including the fossils: [ 10 ] This raises one more major point of difference, the handling of the Fall . Briefly, Creation with Appearance of Age runs into a theological snag with things like fossils of fish with other smaller fish in their stomachs: "Do you mean that God chose to paint, of all things, a facade of SUFFERING and DEATH onto the creation when He gave it this arbitrary appearance of age at the time of creation?" The virtual history paradigm recognizes simply that all creation type miracles entail a virtual history, so the Fall, with its creation type miracles (by which the nature of the creation was changed—"subjected to futility") carried with it its own (fallen) virtual history, which is the virtual history we now see. We do not see the original utopian pre-Fall creation with its (presumably utopian) virtual history.

Criticisms [ edit ] Beginning of false creation [ edit ] Although Gosse's original Omphalos hypothesis specifies a popular creation story, others have proposed that the idea does not preclude creation as recently as five minutes ago, including memories of times before this created in situ .

[ 11 ] This idea is sometimes called Last Thursdayism by its opponents, as in "the world might as well have been created last Thursday." [ 9 ] Scientifically, the concept is both unverifiable and unfalsifiable through any conceivable scientific study—in other words, it is impossible to conclude the truth of the hypothesis, since it requires the empirical data itself to have been arbitrarily created to look the way it does at every observable level of detail.

[ 12 ] Deceptive creator [ edit ] From a religious viewpoint, it can be interpreted as God having created a "fake" universe, such as illusions of light emitted from supernovae that never really happened, or volcanic mountains that were never really volcanoes in the first place and that never actually experienced erosion.

In a rebuttal of the claim that God might have implanted a false history of the age of the universe to test our faith in the truth of the Torah , Rabbi Natan Slifkin , an author whose works have been banned by several Haredi rabbis for going against the tenets of the Talmud , [ 13 ] writes: [ 14 ] God essentially created two conflicting accounts of Creation: one in nature, and one in the Torah. How can it be determined which is the real story, and which is the fake designed to mislead us? One could equally propose that it is nature that presents the real story, and that the Torah was devised by God to test us with a fake history!
One has to be able to rely on God's truthfulness if religion is to function. Or, to put it another way—if God went to enormous lengths to convince us that the world is billions of years old, who are we to disagree?

Similar formulations [ edit ] Five-minute hypothesis [ edit ] The five-minute hypothesis is a skeptical hypothesis put forth by the philosopher Bertrand Russell , that proposes that the universe sprang into existence five minutes ago from nothing, with human memory and all other signs of history included. It is a commonly used example of how one may maintain extreme philosophical skepticism with regard to memory and trust in evidentially derived historical chronology.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Borges's Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius [ edit ] Jorge Luis Borges , in his 1940 work, Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius , describes a fictional world in which some essentially follow as a religious belief a philosophy much like Russell's discussion on the logical extreme of Gosse's theory: [ 17 ] One of the schools of Tlön goes so far as to negate time: it reasons that the present is indefinite, that the future has no reality other than as a present hope, the past none other than present memory.

Borges had earlier written a short essay, "The Creation and P. H. Gosse" [ 18 ] that explored the rejection of Gosse's Omphalos . Borges argued that its unpopularity stemmed from Gosse's explicit (if inadvertent) outlining of what Borges characterized as absurdities in the Genesis story.

Last Thursdayism [ edit ] The satirical "Last Thursday" version likely originated in the 1990s. In the early 21st century, a " church " of "Last Thursdayism" was established as a parody of religion and tenets of faith.

[ 19 ] The church sparked lively debates online.

[ 20 ] Last Thursdayism presents the Omphalos hypothesis as a parody religion. The "Church of Last Thursdayism" website attempted to equate belief in Last Thursdayism with an actual religion, listing "tenets of faith": The universe was created on Thursday and will expire on Thursday.

The universe was created by you as a test for yourself.
You will receive reward or punishment based on your actions in this test.

Left-handedness is a sinful temptation.
Everyone except you was placed here and pre-programmed to act as part of your test environment.
Everyone except you knows this.

The purpose of this one-week test is to discover your moral boundaries and character.

— Church of Last Thursdayism See also [ edit ] " A Clockwork Origin " – 9th episode of the 6th season of Futurama Boltzmann brain – Philosophical thought experiment Christian mythology – Body of myths associated with Christianity Conflict thesis – Concept in history of science Dark City – 1998 film by Alex Proyas Kabbalah – Type of Jewish mysticism " Omphalos " – 2019 short story by Ted Chiang Russell's teapot – Analogy devised by Bertrand Russell Strata – 1981 novel by Terry Pratchett References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Roizen, Ron (1982).

"The rejection of Omphalos: a note on shifts in the intellectual hierarchy of mid-nineteenth century Britain" .

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

21 (4): 365– 369.

doi : 10.2307/1385525 .

JSTOR 1385525 . Archived from the original on February 19, 2007.

^ Gardner, Martin (2000).

Did Adam and Eve Have Navels?: Debunking Pseudoscience . New York: W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

7– 14.

ISBN 9780393322385 .

^ "The Return of the Navel | National Center for Science Education" .

ncse.ngo . Retrieved March 3, 2022 .

^ "The Age of the Earth – Creationism and the Appearance of Age: Scott Pfahler" .

apps.usd.edu . Archived from the original on March 3, 2022 . Retrieved March 3, 2022 .

^ "Young Earth Creationism | National Center for Science Education" .

ncse.ngo . Retrieved March 3, 2022 .

^ Rice, Stanley (2019). "Creationist funhouse, episode one: The red shift".

Skeptical Inquirer .

43 (3): 57– 59.

^ Kathleen McVey, ed. (1994). "Commentary on Genesis. Section I.22".

St. Ephrem the Syrian: Selected Prose Works . The Fathers of the Church. Vol. 91. Washington: Catholic University of America. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1421-4 .

See also Louth, Andrew, ed. (2001).

Genesis 1-11 . Ancient Christian Commentary on Scripture. Vol. 1. Downers Grove, Illinois: InterVarsity Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0--8308-1471-8 .

^ Rabbi Dovid Gottlieb, "The Age of the Universe" .  "The solution to the contradiction between the age of the earth and the universe according to science and the Jewish date of 5755 years since Creation is this: the real age of the universe is 5755 years, but it has misleading evidence of greater age." ^ a b Isaac, Mark (2007).

The Counter-creationism Handbook .

University of California Press . p. 9.

ISBN 9780520249264 .

^ Aardsma, Gerald E.

"Correspondence: Virtual History" . Retrieved February 13, 2013 .

^ David L. Wilcox, God and Evolution: A Faith-Based Understanding , Valley Forge, PA: Judson Press, 2004, p. 30.

^ Prothero, Donald R.

(November 6, 2007).

Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters . Columbia University Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-231-51142-1 . Retrieved October 6, 2020 .

^ G. Safran, "Gedolei Yisroel Condemn Rabbi Nosson Slifkin's Books" .

Archived December 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine . Dei'ah veDibur, January 12, 2005.

^ Slifkin, Natan (2008) [2006].

The Challenge of Creation: Judaism's Encounter with Science, Cosmology, and Evolution . Torah universe (2nd ed.). Zoo Torah. p. 167.

ISBN 978-1-933143-15-6 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1921).

Analysis of Mind . G. Allen & Unwin.

^ Smith, Joseph Wayne; Ward, Sharyn (1984).

"Are We Only Five Minutes Old? Acock on the Age of the Universe" .

Philosophy of Science .

51 (3): 511– 513.

doi : 10.1086/289198 .

JSTOR 187498 .

^ "Borges – Tlön, Uqbar, Orbis Tertius" .

interglacial.com .

^ Borges, Jorge Luis (1964).

"The Creation and P.H. Gosse" .

Other Inquisitions, 1937–1952 . translated by Ruth L. C. Simms. University of Texas Press. pp.

22– 25 . Retrieved February 27, 2008 .

^ Church of Last Thursdayism , in Internet Archive .

^ For example, see the social network Reddit here and here , in English.

External links [ edit ] Mirror of the defunct "The Church Of Last Thursdayism" webpage (stored at www.archive.org) Archived Usenet Post containing the FAQ of "The Church of Last Thursdayism" (stored by Google.com) "The Church of Last Thursday" home v t e Creationism General Biblical cosmology Creation myth Creationism Creationist museum Genesis creation narrative History of creationism Book of Genesis Adam and Eve Allegorical interpretations of Genesis Flood geology Genesis flood narrative Noah Noah's Ark Tower of Babel Ussher chronology Types Creation science Gap creationism Hindu creationism Intelligent design Islamic creationism Neo-creationism Old Earth creationism Progressive creationism Theistic evolution Young Earth creationism Controversies Outline Creation–evolution controversy Creation and evolution in public education Edwards v. Aguillard Kansas evolution hearings Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Teach the Controversy Related Anthropic principle Biblical inerrancy Biblical literalism Created kind Creation science Nephilim Omphalos hypothesis Category:Creationism v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Creation science People Thomas G. Barnes John Baumgardner Walt Brown Harold W. Clark Raymond Vahan Damadian Robert V. Gentry Duane Gish Ken Ham John Hartnett Kent Hovind Dean H. Kenyon Frank Lewis Marsh Henry M. Morris John D. Morris Paul Nelson George McCready Price Georgia Purdom Marcus R. Ross John C. Sanford Jonathan Sarfati Andrew A. Snelling Walter Veith John C. Whitcomb Carl Wieland William A. Williams Kurt Wise Organizations Answers in Genesis (AIG) Anti-Evolution League of America Biblical Creation Society (BCS) Caleb Foundation Creation Ministries International (CMI) Creation Research Society (CRS) Creation Science Movement (CSM) Geoscience Research Institute (GRI) Institute for Creation Research (ICR) Facilities Creationist museums Lawsuits Hendren v. Campbell (1977) McLean v. Arkansas (1982) Edwards v. Aguillard (1987) Webster v. New Lenox School District (1990) Legal and philosophical Creation and evolution in public education Creation–evolution controversy Creationism Creationist cosmologies Cryptozoology Intelligent design movement Objections to evolution Omphalos hypothesis Pseudoscience "Teach the Controversy" NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dqbmr
Cached time: 20250817210634
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.495 seconds
Real time usage: 0.638 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3426/1000000
Revision size: 18829/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86168/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3783/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 113355/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.301/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22587019/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  543.466      1 -total
 29.55%  160.569      1 Template:Reflist
 26.13%  142.017      9 Template:Annotated_link
 19.37%  105.282      2 Template:Sidebar
 15.17%   82.438      1 Template:Creationism2
 13.10%   71.203      3 Template:Cite_journal
 10.10%   54.869      1 Template:Short_description
  8.11%   44.086      8 Template:Cite_book
  7.18%   39.003      4 Template:Navbox
  6.06%   32.931      1 Template:Creationism_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22700:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817210634 and revision id 1304577524. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Omphalos_hypothesis&oldid=1304577524#Five-minute_hypothesis " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Creationism Scientific skepticism Genesis creation narrative Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2022 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Omphalos hypothesis 14 languages Add topic

