Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of Karl Marx's theory 2 Class structure 3 Conflict as the nature of class relations 4 Class structure of capitalism 5 Proletarianisation 6 Prediction of socialist revolution 7 Objective and subjective factors in class in Marxism 8 Transnational capitalist class 9 See also 10 References Toggle the table of contents Marxian class theory 6 languages العربية Español Bahasa Indonesia Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class theory of Marxist philosophy and economics This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxian economics Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capital ( accumulation ) Capitalist mode of production Class process Commodity Constant capital Critique of political economy Exchange value Exploitation Labour power Labour theory of value Law of accumulation Law of value Means of production Mode of production Monopoly capitalism Organic composition of capital Productive forces Profit Prices of production Primitive accumulation Rate of exploitation Rate of profit Real prices and ideal prices Relations of production Reproduction Reserve army of labour Socially necessary labour time Socialist mode of production Socialization Simple commodity production Surplus value Surplus labour Surplus product Use value Wage labour Wage slavery Value-form Value product Variable capital Topics Capital controversy Crisis theory Economic determinism Immiseration thesis Imperialism Historical materialism Okishio's theorem Overaccumulation Overdetermination Overproduction Kondratiev wave Technological determinism Technological unemployment Temporal single-system interpretation Falling profit-rate tendency Transformation problem Underconsumption Value Variants Analytical Marxism Classical Marxism Orthodox Marxism Neo-Marxian economics Works A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 The Accumulation of Capital Monopoly Capital The Theory of Capitalist Development Finance Capital People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Vladimir Lenin Rosa Luxemburg Rudolf Hilferding Leon Trotsky Karl Kautsky Ernest Mandel Antonie Pannekoek János Kornai Andrew Kliman Richard D. Wolff Nikolai Kondratiev Paul Sweezy Nobuo Okishio Ian Steedman John Roemer David Laibman Paul A. Baran Stephen Resnick Michał Kalecki Journals Cambridge Journal of Economics International Journal of Political Economy Monthly Review New School Economic Review Real-World Economics Review Rethinking Marxism Science and Society Related topics Evolutionary economics Classical economics Marxism Marxist sociology Neoclassical economics Perspectives on capitalism Political economy Schools of economic thought Socialist economics Critiques of capitalism Communism portal Economics portal v t e Marxian class theory asserts that an individual's position within a class hierarchy is determined by their role in the production process, and argues that political and ideological consciousness is determined by class position.

[ 1 ] A class is a group of people who share a common position in the economy, [ 2 ] e.g. the working class . Within Marxian class theory, the structure of the production process forms the basis of class construction.

To Marx , a class is a group with intrinsic tendencies and interests that differ from those of other groups within society, the basis of a fundamental antagonism between such groups.

[ citation needed ] For example, it is in the laborer's best interest to maximize wages and benefits and in the capitalist's best interest to maximize profit at the expense of such, leading to a contradiction within the capitalist system , even if the laborers and capitalists themselves are unaware of the clash of interests .

Marxian class theory has been open to a range of alternate positions, most notably from scholars such as E. P. Thompson and Mario Tronti . Both Thompson and Tronti suggest class consciousness within the production process precedes the formation of productive relationships. In this sense, Marxian class theory often relates to discussion over pre-existing class struggles.

Origins of Karl Marx's theory [ edit ] Karl Marx 's class theory derives from a range of philosophical schools of thought including left Hegelianism, Scottish Empiricism, and Anglo-French political-economics. Marx's view of class originated from a series of personal interests relating to social alienation and human struggle, whereby the formation of class structure relates to acute historical consciousness.  Political-economics also contributed to Marx's theories, centering on the concept of "origin of income" where society is divided into three sub-groups: Rentiers , Capitalist, and Worker. This construction is based on David Ricardo 's theory of capitalism. Marx strengthened this with a discussion over verifiable class relationships.

Marx sought to define class as embedded in productive relations rather than social status. His political and economic thought developed towards an interest in production as opposed to distribution, and this henceforth became a central theme in his concept of class.

Class structure [ edit ] Marx distinguishes one class from another on the basis of two criteria: ownership of the means of production and control of the labor power of others. From this, Marx states "Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other": I. Capitalists, or bourgeoisie, own the means of production and purchase the labor power of others II. Workers, or proletariat, do not own any means of production or the ability to purchase the labor power of others. Rather, they sell their own labor power.

Class is thus determined by property relations, not by income or status. These factors are determined by distribution and consumption, which mirror the production and power relations of classes.

The Manifesto of the Communist Party describes two additional classes that “decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry”: III. A small, transitional class known as the petite bourgeoisie own sufficient means of production but do not purchase labor power.  Marx's Communist Manifesto fails to properly define the petite bourgeoisie beyond “smaller capitalists” (Marx and Engels, 1848, 25).

IV. The “dangerous class”, or Lumpenproletariat , “the social scum, that passively rotting mass thrown off by the lowest layers of the old society.” Conflict as the nature of class relations [ edit ] "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles… Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstruction of society at large, or in the common ruin of the contending classes.... The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but established new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms of struggle in place of the old ones. Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this distinctive feature: it has simplified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and Proletariat.” – Communist Manifesto Marx established conflict as the key driving force of history and the main determinant of social trajectories (Kingston).  However, in order to understand the nature of “ class conflict ,” we must first understand that such conflict arises from a unified class interest, also known as class consciousness.

Class consciousness is an aspect of Marxist theory, referring to the self-awareness of social classes, the capacity to act in its own rational interests, or measuring the extent to which an individual is conscious of the historical tasks their class (or class allegiance) sets for them.

Moreover, by definition, the objective interests of classes are fundamentally in opposition; consequently, these opposing interests and consciousnesses eventually lead to class conflict.

Marx first saw the development of class conflict confined to individual factories and capitalists.  However, given the maturation of capitalism, the life conditions of bourgeoisie and proletariat began to grow more disparate.  This increased polarization and homogenization within classes fostered an environment for individual struggles to become more generalized.  When increasing class conflict is manifested at the societal level, class consciousness and common interests are also increased.  Consequently, when class consciousness is augmented, policies are organized to ensure the duration of such interest for the ruling class.  Here begins the use of the struggle for political power and classes become political forces.

Since the distribution of political power is determined by power over production, or power over capital, it is no surprise that the bourgeois class uses their wealth to legitimatize and protect their property and consequent social relations.  Thus the ruling class is those who hold the economic power and make the decisions ( Dahrendorf ).

Class structure of capitalism [ edit ] In Marxist theory , the capitalist stage of production consists of two main classes: the bourgeoisie , the capitalists who own the means of production, and the much larger proletariat (or 'working class') who must sell their own labour power (See also: wage labour ). This is the fundamental economic structure of work and property (See also: wage labour ), a state of inequality that is normalised and reproduced through cultural ideology . Thus the proletariat, in itself, is forced into a subservient position by the power of capital, which has stripped the means of production from them. As the proletariat becomes conscious of its situation and power, organizes itself, and takes collective political action it becomes a class for itself which has the revolutionary potential to become the ruling class.

[ 2 ] Max Weber critiqued historical materialism , positing that stratification is not based purely on economic inequalities but on other status and power differentials. Social class pertaining broadly to material wealth may be distinguished from status class based on honour, prestige, religious affiliation, and so on. The conditions of capitalism and its class system came together due to a variety of "elective affinities".

[ citation needed ] Marxists explain the history of "civilized" societies in terms of a war of classes between those who control production and those who produce the goods or services in society. In the Marxist view of capitalism , this is a conflict between capitalists ( bourgeoisie ) and wage-workers (the proletariat ). For Marxists, class antagonism is rooted in the situation that control over social production necessarily entails control over the class which produces goods—in capitalism this is the exploitation of workers by the bourgeoisie .

[ citation needed ] Marx himself argued that it was the goal of the proletariat itself to displace the capitalist system with socialism , changing the social relationships underpinning the class system and then developing into a future communist society in which: "..the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all." ( Communist Manifesto ) This would mark the beginning of a classless society in which human needs rather than profit would be motive for production. In a society with democratic control and production for use , there would be no class, no state and no need for money.

[ citation needed ] For Marx, class has three primary facts: [ 3 ] Objective factors A class shares a common relationship to the means of production .  That is, all people in one class make their living in a common way in terms of ownership of the things that produce social goods.  A class may own things, own land, own people, be owned, own nothing but their labor.  A class will extract tax, produce agriculture, enslave and work others, be enslaved and work, or work for a wage.

Subjective factors The members will necessarily have some perception of their similarity and common interest. Marx termed this Class consciousness .  Class consciousness is not simply an awareness of one's own class interest (for instance, the maximisation of shareholder value; or, the maximization of the wage with the minimization of the working day), class consciousness also embodies deeply shared views of how society should be organized legally, culturally, socially and politically.

Reproduction of class relations Class as a set of social relationships that is reproduced from one generation to the next.

The first criterion divides a society into the owners and non-owners of means of production. In capitalism, these are capitalist (bourgeoisie) and proletariat . Finer divisions can be made, however: the most important subgroup in capitalism being petite bourgeoisie (small bourgeoisie), people who possess their own means of production but utilize it primarily by working on it themselves rather than hiring others to work on it. They include self-employed artisans , small shopkeepers, and many professionals . Jon Elster has found mention in Marx of 15 classes from various historical periods.

[ 4 ] Vladimir Lenin has defined classes as "large groups of people differing from each other by the place they occupy in a historically determined system of social production, by their relation (in most cases fixed and formulated in law) to the means of production, by their role in the social organization of labor, and, consequently, by the dimensions of the share of social wealth of which they dispose and the mode of acquiring it." [ 5 ] Proletarianisation [ edit ] The most important transformation of society for Marxists has been the massive and rapid growth of the proletariat over the last two hundred and fifty years. Starting with agricultural and domestic textile laborers in England and Flanders, more and more occupations only provide a living through wages or salaries. Private manufacturing, leading to self-employment, is no longer as viable as it was before the industrial revolution, because automation made manufacturing very cheap. Many people who once controlled their own labor-time were converted into proletarians through industrialization. Today groups which in the past subsisted on stipends or private wealth—like doctors, academics or lawyers—are now increasingly working as wage laborers.  Marxists call this process proletarianization , and point to it as the major factor in the proletariat being the largest class in current societies in the rich countries of the "first world." [ 6 ] Prediction of socialist revolution [ edit ] Marx predicts revolution in capitalist society into socialist society because of eventual discontent.

[ citation needed ] The socialization of labor, in the growth of large-scale production, capitalist interest groups and organizations, as well as in the enormous increase in the dimensions and power of finance capital provides the principal material foundation for the unavoidable arrival of socialism. The physical, intellectual and moral perpetrator of this transformation is the proletariat.  The proletariat's struggle against the bourgeoisie inevitably becomes a political struggle with the goal of political conquest by the proletariat. With the domination of the proletariat, the socialization of production cannot help but lead to the means of production becoming the property of society.  The direct consequences of this transformation are a drop in labor productivity, a shorter working day, and the replacement of small-scale unified production by collective and improved labor conditions.

[ citation needed ] Capitalism breaks for all time the ties between producer and owner, once held by the bond of class conflict.  Now a new union will be formed based on the conscious application of science and the concentration of collective labor.

[ attribution needed ] He also extended this redistribution to the structure of power in families.  Marx imagined that with socialism women's status would increase, leading to the break-up of the patriarchal family.

"Modern industry, by assigning as it does, an important part in the socially organized process of production, outside the domestic sphere , to women, to young persons, and to children of both sexes, creates a new economic foundation for a higher form of the family and of the relations between the sexes… Moreover, it is obvious that the fact of the collective working group being composed of individuals of both sexes and all ages, must necessarily, under suitable conditions, become a source of human development; although in its spontaneously developed, brutal, capitalistic form, where the laborer exists for the process of production, and not the process of production for the laborer, that fact is a pestiferous source of corruption and slavery." (Capital, Vol. I, Chapter 13).

Objective and subjective factors in class in Marxism [ edit ] Marxism has a rather heavily defined dialectic between objective factors (i.e., material conditions, the social structure) and subjective factors (i.e. the conscious organization of class members). While most forms of Marxism analyses sees people's class based on objective factors (class structure), major Marxist trends have made greater use of subjective factors in understanding the history of the working class.

E.P. Thompson 's The Making of the English Working Class is a definitive example of this "subjective" Marxist trend. Thompson analyses the English working class as a group of people with shared material conditions coming to a positive self-consciousness of their social position. This feature of social class is commonly termed class consciousness in Marxism, a concept which became famous with Georg Lukács ' History and Class Consciousness (1923). It is seen as the process of a "class in itself" moving in the direction of a "class for itself", a collective agent that changes history rather than simply being a victim of the historical process. In Lukács' words, the proletariat was the " subject – object of history", and the first class which could separate false consciousness (inherent to the bourgeois 's consciousness), which reified economic laws as universal (whereas they are only a consequence of historic capitalism).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ full citation needed ] [ non-primary source needed ] Transnational capitalist class [ edit ] Globalization theorists, such as William I. Robinson , Leslie Sklair , Kees Van Der Pijl , and Jerry Harris, argue that today a transnational capitalist class has emerged.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalist mode of production Economic inequality Exploitation (Marxism) Mode of production Relations of production Superstructure Surplus labor Surplus value References [ edit ] ^ Cohen, G. A. (1978).

Karl Marx's Theory of History: A Defence . New York: Princeton University Press. pp.

73– 77.

ISBN 0-691-07068-7 .

^ a b Andrew, Edward (September 1983). "Class in Itself and Class against Capital: Karl Marx and His Classifiers".

Canadian Journal of Political Science / Revue canadienne de science politique .

16 (3). Canadian Political Science Association: 577– 584.

doi : 10.1017/S0008423900023994 .

JSTOR 3227396 .

S2CID 145504985 .

^ Hanagan, Michael P. (1994).

"Class" . In Stearns, Peter N. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of social history . Taylor & Francis. p. 184.

ISBN 978-0-8153-0342-8 .

^ Elster, Jon (1986).

An Introduction to Karl Marx . Cambridge University Press. p. 124.

The classes are: "bureaucrats and theocrats in the Asiatic mode of production; freemen, slaves, plebeians, and patricians under slavery; lord, serf, guild master and journeyman under feudalism; industrial capitalists, financial capitalists, landlords, peasantry, petty bourgeoisie, and wage laborers under capitalism.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (28 June 1919).

"A Great Beginning" .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 July 2016 .

^ this is the main thesis of Marx's "Capital" ^ Thompson, E.P.

(1963).

The Making of the English Working Class .

^ Lukács, Georg (1923).

History and Class Consciousness .

^ Sprague, Jeb (2009).

"Transnational Capitalist Class in the Global Financial Crisis: A Discussion with Leslie Sklair" (PDF) .

Globalizations .

6 (4): 499– 507.

Bibcode : 2009Glob....6..499S .

doi : 10.1080/14747730903298835 .

S2CID 144307790 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 August 2010.

Blackledge, Paul (2011).

"Why workers can change the world" .

Socialist Review 364 . London. Archived from the original on 10 December 2011.

Dahrendorf, Ralf. Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1959.

David McLellan, ed., "Capital." The Marx-Engels Reader, 1977. Oxford University Press: Great Britain.

Kingston, Paul W.  The Classless Society. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2000.

Marx & Engels. The Communist Manifesto. New York: Penguin group, 1998.

Youth for International Socialism- NewYouth.com v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxian_class_theory&oldid=1299579868 " Categories : Marxism Social classes Marxian economics Marxist theory Sociological theories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from May 2021 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2012 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2012 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxian class theory 6 languages Add topic

