Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Purpose 3 History 4 Description Toggle Description subsection 4.1 Materials of construction 5 Theory 6 Astronomical Use 7 Filming location 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Jantar Mantar, Jaipur 44 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kernowek Magyar मैथिली മലയാളം Malti मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 26°55′29″N 75°49′28″E ﻿ / ﻿ 26.92472°N 75.82444°E ﻿ / 26.92472; 75.82444 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jantar Mantar (Jaipur) ) UNESCO World Heritage Site in Jaipur For other uses, see Jantar Mantar (disambiguation) .

Jantar Mantar Location Jaipur , Rajasthan, India Coordinates 26°55′29″N 75°49′28″E ﻿ / ﻿ 26.92472°N 75.82444°E ﻿ / 26.92472; 75.82444 Area 1.8652 ha (4.609 acres) Built 1728–1734 ; 291 years ago ( 1734 ) Governing body Government of Rajasthan UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name The Jantar Mantar, Jaipur Criteria Cultural: (iii), (iv) Designated 2010 (34th session ) Reference no.

1338 Region Southern Asia Location of Jantar Mantar in Jaipur Show map of Jaipur Location in Rajasthan Show map of Rajasthan Location in India Show map of India The Jantar Mantar is a collection of 19 astronomical instruments built by the Rajput king Sawai Jai Singh , the founder of Jaipur , Rajasthan. The monument was completed in 1734.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It features the world's largest stone sundial , and is a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] It is near City Palace and Hawa Mahal .

[ 4 ] The instruments allow the observation of astronomical positions with the naked eye.

[ 1 ] The observatory is an example of the Ptolemaic positional astronomy which was shared by many civilizations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The monument features instruments operating in each of the three main classical celestial coordinate systems : the horizon-zenith local system, the equatorial system, and the ecliptic system.

[ 2 ] The Kanmala Yantraprakara is one that works in two systems and allows transformation of the coordinates directly from one system to the other.

[ 5 ] It has the biggest sundial in the world.

The monument was damaged in the 19th century. Early restoration work was undertaken under the supervision of Major Arthur Garrett, a keen amateur astronomer, during his appointment as Assistant State Engineer for the Jaipur District.

[ 6 ] Name [ edit ] The name jantar is derived from "yantra" a Sanskrit word, meaning "instrument, machine", and mantar from " mantrana" also a Sanskrit word meaning "consult, calculate").

[ 7 ] Therefore, Jantar Mantar literally means 'calculating instrument'.

[ 3 ] Brihat Samrat Yantra Purpose [ edit ] Jai Singh noticed that the Zij , which was used for determining the position of celestial objects, did not match the positions calculated on the table. He constructed five new observatories in different cities in order to create a more accurate Zij. The astronomical tables Jai Singh created, known as the Zij-i Muhammad Shahi, were continuously used in India for a century. (However, the table had little significance outside of India.) Also, it was used to measure time.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] Exactly when Raja Jai Singh began construction in Jaipur is unknown, but several instruments had been built by 1728, and the construction of the instruments in Jaipur continued until 1738. During 1735, when construction was at its peak, at least 23 astronomers were employed in Jaipur, and due to the changing political climate, Jaipur replaced Delhi as Raja Jai Singh's main observatory and remained Jai Singh's central observatory until his death in 1743. The observatory lost support under Isvari Singh (r.1743-1750) because of a succession war between him and his brother. However, Mado Singh (r. 1750–1768), Isvari Singh's successor, supported the observatory, although it did not see the same level of activity as under Jai Singh. Although some restorations were made to the Jantar Mantar under Pratap Singh (r.1778-1803), activity at the observatory died down again. During this time, a temple was constructed and Pratap Singh turned the site of the observatory into a gun factory.

[ 9 ] Bhairav Temple - located within the Jantar Mantar Complex Ram Singh (r. 1835–1880) completed restoring the Jantar Mantar in 1876, and even made some of the instruments more durable by inserting lead into the instruments' lines and using stone to restore some of the plaster instruments. However, the observatory soon became neglected again, and was not restored until 1901 under Madho Singh II (r. 1880–1922) [ 8 ] Description [ edit ] Jantar Mantar deploys all three ancient coordinate systems of the five celestial coordinate systems known. In the image above, the red (ecliptic) and blue (equatorial) coordinate systems are two of the three classical systems that feature in the monument's instruments.

[ 2 ] Kapali Yantra at Jantar Mantar, Jaipur Laghu samrat yantra The observatory consists of nineteen instruments for measuring time, predicting eclipses , tracking location of major stars as the Earth orbits around the Sun, ascertaining the declinations of planets, and determining the celestial altitudes and related ephemerides. The instruments are (alphabetical): [ 2 ] Chakra Yantra (four semicircular arcs on which a gnomon casts a shadow, thereby giving the declination of the Sun at four specified times of the day. This data corresponds to noon at four observatories around the world (Greenwich in UK, Zurich in Switzerland, Notke in Japan and Saitchen [ clarification needed ] in the Pacific); this is equivalent of a wall of clocks registering local times in different parts of the world.) [ 10 ] Dakshin Bhitti Yantra (measures meridian, altitude and zenith distances of celestial bodies) [ 10 ] Digamsha Yantra (a pillar in the middle of two concentric outer circles, used to measure azimuth of the sun and to calculate the time of sunrise and sunset forecasts) [ 11 ] Disha Yantra (used to detect the direction) Dhruva Darshak Pattika (observe and find the location of pole star with respect to other celestial bodies) [ 11 ] Jai Prakash Yantra (two hemispherical bowl-based sundials with marked marble slabs that map inverted images of sky and allow the observer to move inside the instrument; measures altitudes, azimuths, hour angles, and declinations) [ 2 ] [ 10 ] Kapali Yantra (measures coordinates of celestial bodies in azimuth and equatorial systems; any point in sky can be visually transformed from one coordinate system to another) [ 5 ] Kanali Yantra Kranti Vritta Yantra (measures longitude and latitude of celestial bodies) Laghu Samrat Yantra (the smaller sundial at the monument, inclined at 27 degrees, to measure time, albeit less accurately than Vrihat Samrat Yantra) [ 11 ] Misra Yantra (meaning mixed instrument , it is a compilation of five different instruments) Nadi Valaya Yantra (two sundials on different faces of the instrument, the two faces representing north and south hemispheres; measuring the time to an accuracy of less than a minute) [ 11 ] Palbha Yantra Rama Yantra (an upright building used to find the altitude and the azimuth of the Sun) Rashi Valaya Yantra (12 gnomon dials that measure ecliptic coordinates of stars, planets and all 12 constellation systems) Shastansh Yantra (next to Vrihat Samrat Yantra) This instrument has a 60-degree arc built in the meridian plane within a dark chamber. At noon, the Sun's pinhole image falls on a scale below enabling the observer to measure the zenith distance, declination, and the diameter of the Sun.) [ 12 ] Unnatamsa Yantra (a metal ring divided into four segments by horizontal and vertical lines, with a hole in the middle; the position and orientation of the instrument allows measurement of the altitude of celestial bodies) [ 11 ] Unnatamsa Yantra Vrihat Samrat Yantra (world's largest gnomon sundial, measures time in intervals of 2 seconds using shadow cast from the sunlight) Yantra Raj Yantra (a 2.43-metre bronze astrolabe , one of the largest in the world, used only once a year, calculates the Hindu calendar) [ 13 ] Yantra Raj The Vrihat Samrat Yantra, which means the "great king of instruments", is 88 feet (27 m) high, making it one of the world's largest sundials .

[ 14 ] Its face is angled at 27 degrees, the latitude of Jaipur. It is purported to tell the time to an accuracy of about two seconds in Jaipur local time .

[ 15 ] Its shadow moves visibly at 1 mm per second, or roughly a hand's breadth (6 cm) every minute,  The Hindu chhatri (small cupola) on top is used as a platform for announcing eclipses and the arrival of monsoons.

Jai Prakash Yantra at Jantar Mantar, Jaipur The instruments are in most cases huge structures. The scale to which they have been built has been alleged to increase their accuracy. However, the penumbra of the sun can be as wide as 30 mm, making the 1mm increments of the Samrat Yantra sundial devoid of any practical significance. Additionally, the masons constructing the instruments had insufficient experience with construction of this scale, and subsidence of the foundations has subsequently misaligned them.

[ citation needed ] Materials of construction [ edit ] Observation deck of the vrihat samrat yantra (the world's largest sundial) Built from local stone and marble, each instrument carries an astronomical scale, generally marked on the marble inner lining. Bronze tablets, bricks and mortar were also employed in building the instruments in the monument spread over about 18,700 square metres.

[ 2 ] It was in continuous use until about 1800, then fell in disuse and disrepair.

[ 2 ] Restored again several times during the British colonial rule , particularly in 1902, the Jantar Mantar was declared a national monument in 1948. It was restored in 2006.

[ 2 ] The restoration process in early 20th century replaced some of the original materials of construction with different materials.

[ 2 ] Jantar Mantar is managed under the Archeological Sites and Monuments Act of Rajasthan since 1961, and protected as a National Monument of Rajasthan since 1968.

[ 16 ] Theory [ edit ] The Vedas mention astronomical terms, measurement of time and calendar, but do not mention any astronomical instruments.

[ 4 ] The earliest discussion of astronomical instruments, gnomon and clepsydra , is found in the Vedangas , ancient Sanskrit texts.

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] The gnomon (called Śaṅku, शङ्कु) [ 18 ] found at Jantar Mantar monument is discussed in these first millennium BCE Vedangas and in many later texts such as the Katyayana Sulbasutras.

[ 4 ] Other discussions of astronomical instruments are found in Hinduism texts such as the fourth century BCE [ 17 ] Arthashastra , Buddhist texts such as Sardulakarna-avadana, and Jainism texts such as Surya-prajnapti. The theories behind the instruments are found in texts by the fifth century CE Aryabhatta, sixth century CE Brahmagupta and Varahamihira, ninth century Lalla, eleventh century Sripati and Bhaskara. The texts of Bhaskara have dedicated chapters on instruments and he calls them Yantra-adhyaya .

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] The theory of chakra-yantra, yasti-yantra, dhanur-yantra, kapala-yantra, nadivalaya-yantra, kartari-yantra, and others are found in the ancient texts.

[ 4 ] Astronomical Use [ edit ] The full extent of how Jai Singh's instruments were used for astronomical observation remains unclear. While the instruments themselves were impressive, there is limited evidence of a dedicated observational program or a team of trained astronomers. This raises the question of whether the observatory's primary purpose was purely scientific or also served other symbolic or cultural functions.

The Zij Muhammad-Shahi , an astronomical handbook compiled under Jai Singh's patronage, does not appear to rely heavily on data collected from his observatories. Instead, it primarily utilizes existing tables from sources like the Zij-i Ulugh Beg and Philippe de la Hire 's astronomical tables . The Zij Muhammad-Shahi essentially adapts these tables by incorporating adjustments for the precession of the equinoxes and the difference in longitude between Paris and Delhi.

[ 19 ] Filming location [ edit ] It was used as a filming location for the 2006 film The Fall as a maze .

Storm Thorgerson photographed the sundial for the cover of Shpongle 's DVD, Live at the Roundhouse 2008 .

[ 20 ] It was photographed by Julio Cortázar with the collaboration of Antonio Gálvez for the book Prosa del Observatorio (Editorial Lumen: Barcelona, 1972).

See also [ edit ] General Jantar Mantar Yantra Mantra Tantra Gyarah Sidi UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists Research stations Indian Antarctic Program Bharati (research station) Dakshin Gangotri First Indian station 1983, converted to support base Maitri Second Indian station 1989 Defence Research and Development Organisation Defence Institute of High Altitude Research Indian Astronomical Observatory National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research Siachen Base Camp (India) List of Antarctic research stations List of Antarctic field camps List of astronomical observatories List of highest astronomical observatories References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "The Jantar Mantar, Jaipur - UNESCO World Heritage Centre" . Whc.unesco.org. 31 July 2010 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j The Jantar Mantar at Jaipur, India Archived 22 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine Portal to the Heritage of Astronomy, in partnership with UNESCO World Heritage Site ^ a b Smithsonian.

Timelines of Science . Penguin. p. 136.

ISBN 978-1465414342 .

^ a b c d e f Yukio Ohashi (Editor: H Selin) (1997).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine . Springer. pp.

83– 86.

ISBN 978-0792340669 .

{{ cite book }} : |last1= has generic name ( help ) ^ a b Sharma, VN (1991).

"The Kapala Yantras of Sawai Jai Singh" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

26 (2): 209– 216. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 May 2015.

^ Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society , Vol. 81, p. 257 ^ mantraNa, yantra.

"Sanskrit - English Dictionary" .

Spoken Sanskrit Germany . Koln University . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

^ a b Nath., Sharma, Virendra (2016).

Sawai Jai Singh and his astronomy . Jai Singh II, Maharaja of Jaipur, 1686-1743. (2nd ed.). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-208-1256-7 .

OCLC 32699670 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Johnson-Roehr, Susan N. (2014).

"Observatories of Sawai Jai Singh II" .

Handbook of Archaeoastronomy and Ethnoastronomy : 2017.

^ a b c David Kelly (2011).

Exploring Ancient Skies: A Survey of Ancient and Cultural Astronomy . Springer. p. 82.

ISBN 978-1441976239 .

^ a b c d e Lindsay Brown (2008).

Rajasthan, Delhi & Agra . p. 157.

ISBN 978-1741046908 .

^ Andreas Volwahsen (2001).

Cosmic architecture in India . Prestel. pp.

48– 73.

ISBN 978-3791325064 .

^ SC Bhatt (2006).

Land and People of Indian States and Union Territories . p. 362.

ISBN 978-8178353791 .

^ "Largest sundial world record" .

^ Barry Perlus.

"Architecture in the Service of Science: The Astronomical Observatories of Jai Singh II" (PDF) . Jantarmantar.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 February 2009 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ THE RAJASTHAN MONUMENTS ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND ANTIQUITIES RULES, 1968 ^ a b c David Edwin Pingree (1981).

A History of Indian Literature, Vol 6 .

Otto Harrassowitz Verlag . pp.

52– 54.

ISBN 978-3447021654 .

^ gnomon.

"Sanskrit - English Dictionary" .

Spoken Sanskrit Germany . Koln University . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

^ Yavari Ayin, Mostafa (2023). "Defenseless eyes against the sky. A narrative of some astronomical observations before the invention of the telescope".

Nojum Magazine [Iranian Magazine of Astronomy] .

32 (04): 36– 41.

^ "Twisted Music" . Twisted Music. 23 October 2009. Archived from the original on 20 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sharma, Virendra Nath and Aditya Sharma (1995).

Sawai Jai Singh and his astronomy . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Pvt. Ltd.

ISBN 81-208-1256-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jantar Mantar (Jaipur) .

Official website of Rajasthan government, India , Jantar Mantar Jantar Mantar - Section III Theory, Construction and Limitations, National University of Singapore Photos of Jantar Mantar Jantar Mantar (Jaipur) Jantar Mantar Articles and History Architecture in the Service of Science Archived 5 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine The Jantar Mantar at Jaipur, India at www3 .astronomicalheritage .net 542886857 Jantar Mantar, Jaipur on OpenStreetMap v t e World Heritage Sites in India Central Rock Shelters of Bhimbetka Khajuraho Group of Monuments Buddhist Monuments at Sanchi East Darjeeling Himalayan Railway ^ Mahabodhi Temple Complex at Bodh Gaya Archaeological Site of Nalanda Mahavihara Santiniketan Sun Temple, Konark Sundarbans National Park North Agra Fort Fatehpur Sikri Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area Humayun's Tomb, Delhi Keoladeo National Park Kalka–Shimla railway ^ Nanda Devi and Valley of Flowers National Parks Qutub Minar and its Monuments, Delhi Red Fort Complex Taj Mahal The Architectural Work of Le Corbusier, an Outstanding Contribution to the Modern Movement Complexe du Capitole Northeast Kaziranga National Park Khangchendzonga National Park Manas Wildlife Sanctuary Moidams – the Mound-Burial System of the Ahom Dynasty South Great Living Chola Temples Airavatesvara Temple Brihadisvara Temple, Gangaikonda Cholapuram Brihadisvara Temple, Thanjavur Group of Monuments at Hampi Group of Monuments at Mahabalipuram Group of Monuments at Pattadakal Nilgiri Mountain Railway ^ Kakatiya Rudreshwara (Ramappa) Temple, Telangana Sacred Ensembles of the Hoysalas Chennakeshava Temple Hoysaleswara Temple Keshava Temple Western Ghats West Ajanta Caves Champaner-Pavagadh Archaeological Park Chhatrapati Shivaji Terminus Churches and convents of Goa Dholavira:a Harappan city Elephanta Caves Ellora Caves Hill Forts of Rajasthan Amer Fort Chittor Fort Gagron Fort Jaisalmer Fort Kumbhalgarh Ranthambore Fort Historic City of Ahmadabad Jaipur City, Rajasthan Rani-ki-Vav (the Queen's Stepwell) at Patan, Gujarat The Jantar Mantar, Jaipur Western Ghats Victorian Gothic and Art Deco Ensembles of Mumbai Maratha Military Landscapes of India ^part of Mountain Railways of India v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna v t e Telescopes and Observatories in India Observatories Allahabad Observatory Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences Colaba Observatory Devasthal Observatory Gauribidanur Radio Observatory Girawali Observatory Gyarah Sidi India-based Neutrino Observatory Indian Astronomical Observatory Indian Initiative in Gravitational-wave Observations Indian Institute of Astrophysics Kodaikanal Solar Observatory Madhava Observatory Madras Observatory Mount Abu InfraRed Observatory National Centre for Radio Astrophysics Tara Wali Kothi Trivandrum Observatory Udaipur Solar Observatory Vainu Bappu Observatory Telescopes 3.6m Devasthal Optical Telescope Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope Jantar Mantar Jantar Mantar, Jaipur Jantar Mantar, New Delhi Jantar Mantar, Varanasi Major Atmospheric Cerenkov Experiment Telescope National Large Solar Telescope Ooty Radio Telescope Pachmarhi Telescope Array Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Portals : India Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jantar_Mantar,_Jaipur&oldid=1296379555 " Categories : Tourist attractions in Jaipur World Heritage Sites in India History of science and technology in India 1738 establishments in India Rajput architecture Ancient astronomical observatories Astronomical observatories in India Buildings and structures in Jaipur Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: generic name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2016 Use Indian English from June 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Coordinates on Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 17:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jantar Mantar, Jaipur 44 languages Add topic

