Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Small Is Beautiful 13 languages العربية Eesti Español Français 한국어 Igbo Italiano മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ தமிழ் Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1973 book by Ernst Friedrich Schumacher Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As If People Mattered 1973 cover Author Ernst Friedrich Schumacher Publisher Blond & Briggs (1973–2010), HarperCollins (2010–present) Publication date 1973 Media type Print ( Hardcover ) Pages 288 pages ISBN 978-0-06-091630-5 OCLC 19514463 Dewey Decimal 330.1 20 LC Class HB171 .S384 1989 Small Is Beautiful: A Study of Economics As If People Mattered is a collection of essays published in 1973 by German-born British economist E. F. Schumacher . The title "Small Is Beautiful" came from a principle espoused by Schumacher's teacher Leopold Kohr [ 1 ] (1909–1994) advancing small, appropriate technologies , policies, and polities as a superior alternative to the mainstream ethos of "bigger is better".

Overlapping environmental, social, and economic forces such as the 1973 energy crisis and popularisation of the concept of globalisation helped bring Schumacher's Small Is Beautiful critiques of mainstream economics to a wider audience during the 1970s. In 1995 The Times Literary Supplement ranked Small Is Beautiful among the 100 most influential books published since World War II .

[ 2 ] A further edition with commentaries was published in 1999.

[ 3 ] Honoring the 50th anniversary of Small is Beautiful in 2023, the Schumacher Center for a New Economics commissioned an updated study guide from British author and Journalist David Boyle .

[ 4 ] Synopsis [ edit ] Small Is Beautiful is divided into four parts: "The Modern World", "Resources", "The Third World", and "Organization and Ownership".

Part I – summarizes the economic world of the early 1970s from Schumacher's perspective. In the first chapter, "The Problem of Production", Schumacher argues that the modern economy is unsustainable.

Natural resources (like fossil fuels ), are treated as expendable income, when in fact they should be treated as capital , since they are not renewable, and thus subject to eventual depletion. He further argues that nature's resistance to pollution is limited as well. He concludes that government effort must be concentrated on sustainable development , because relatively minor improvements, for example, technology transfer to Third World countries, will not solve the underlying problem of an unsustainable economy. Schumacher's philosophy is one of "enoughness", appreciating both human needs and limitations, and appropriate use of technology. It grew out of his study of village-based economics, which he later termed Buddhist economics , which is the subject of the book's fourth chapter.

Part II – casts Education as the greatest resource, and discusses Land, Industry, Nuclear Energy and the human impact of Technology.

Part III – discusses the gap between the center of the World System and the developing world as it existed then, with a focus on village culture and unemployment in India.

Part IV – presents a sketch of a Theory of Large Scale Organization, takes issue with platitudes about capitalism as a social order and discusses alternatives. Chapter 3 of this part concludes with advice to socialists: "Socialists should insist on using the nationalised industries not simply to out-capitalise the capitalists – an attempt in which they may or may not succeed – but to evolve a more democratic and dignified system of industrial administration, a more humane employment of machinery, and a more intelligent utilization of the fruits of human ingenuity and effort. If they can do this, they have the future in their hands. If they cannot, they have nothing to offer that is worthy of the sweat of free-born men." (Part IV, Chapter 3 'Socialism') See also [ edit ] A Guide for the Perplexed Alter-globalisation Anti-globalisation movement Degrowth Distributism Green growth Happiness economics Humanistic economics Moderately prosperous society (literally small abundance/well being society AKA "The Chinese Dream") Post-growth Renewable energy Renewable resource Simple living Sustainability References [ edit ] ^ Dr. Leopold Kohr, 84; Backed Smaller States , New York Times obituary, 28 February 1994.

^ The Times Literary Supplement , October 6, 1995, p. 39 ^ Schumacher, E. F.; Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People Mattered : 25 Years Later...With Commentaries (1999).

Hartley & Marks Publishers ISBN 0-88179-169-5 ^ "Small is Beautiful Revisited 50 Years On" .

Schumacher Center For New Economics .

External links [ edit ] Full Text of Small is Beautiful at ditext.com The Schumacher Institute for Sustainable Systems home page v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany Poland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Small_Is_Beautiful&oldid=1288060640 " Categories : 1973 non-fiction books Appropriate technology advocates Blond & Briggs books Environmental non-fiction books Simple living Sustainability books 1973 neologisms 1973 quotations Quotations from literature Books in philosophy of technology 1973 oil crisis British essay collections Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 04:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Small Is Beautiful 13 languages Add topic

