Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Organization 3 Member countries 4 Reports, data and knowledge Toggle Reports, data and knowledge subsection 4.1 European Nature Information System 5 European environment information and observation network 6 Budget management and discharge 7 Executive directors 8 International cooperation 9 Official languages 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents European Environment Agency 39 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 55°40′52″N 12°35′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.681208°N 12.586609°E ﻿ / 55.681208; 12.586609 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Agency of the European Union European Environment Agency Agency overview Formed 30 October 1993 ( 1993-10-30 ) Jurisdiction European Union Headquarters Copenhagen , Denmark 55°40′52″N 12°35′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.681208°N 12.586609°E ﻿ / 55.681208; 12.586609 Agency executives Leena Ylä-Mononen , Executive Director Laura Burke , Chairwoman of Management Board Key document Regulation (EC) No 401/2009 Website www .eea .europa .eu Map Copenhagen European Environment Agency (European Union) European Environment Agency Building in Copenhagen in winter The European Environment Agency ( EEA ) is the agency of the European Union (EU) which provides independent information on the environment in climate policy, biodiversity conservation and other environmental goals set by the country.

Definition [ edit ] The European Environment Agency (EEA) is the agency of the European Union (EU) which provides independent information on the environment. 
Its goal is to help those involved in developing, implementing and evaluating environmental policy , and to inform the general public.

Organization [ edit ] The EEA was established by the European Economic Community (EEC) Regulation 1210/1990 (amended by EEC Regulation 933/1999 and EC Regulation 401/2009) and became operational in 1994, headquartered in Copenhagen , Denmark .

The agency is governed by a management board composed of representatives of the governments of its 32 member states, a European Commission representative and two scientists appointed by the European Parliament , assisted by its Scientific Committee.

The current Executive Director of the agency is Leena Ylä-Mononen, who has been appointed for a five-year term, starting on 1 June 2023. Ms Ylä-Mononen is the successor of professor Hans Bruyninckx .

Member countries [ edit ] The member states of the European Union are members; however other states may become members of it by means of agreements concluded between them and the EU.

It was the first EU body to open its membership to the 13 candidate countries (pre- 2004 enlargement ).

The EEA has 32 member countries and six cooperating countries. The members are the 27 European Union member states together with Iceland , Liechtenstein , Norway , Switzerland and Turkey .

Since Brexit in 2020, the UK is not a member of the EU anymore and therefore not a member state of the EEA.

The six Western Balkan countries are cooperating countries: Albania , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Montenegro , North Macedonia , Serbia as well as Kosovo under the UN Security Council Resolution 1244/99.

[ 1 ] These cooperation activities are integrated into Eionet and are supported by the EU under the "Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance".

The EEA is an active member of the EPA Network .

[ 2 ] EU Member countries non-EU Member countries Cooperating countries Austria Iceland Albania Belgium Liechtenstein Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Norway Kosovo [ 3 ] Croatia Switzerland Montenegro Czech Republic Turkey North Macedonia Cyprus Serbia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Ireland Italy Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Reports, data and knowledge [ edit ] The European Environment Agency (EEA) produces assessments based on quality-assured data on a wide range of issues from biodiversity, air quality, transport to climate change. These assessments are closely linked to the European Union's environment policies and legislation and help monitor progress in some areas and indicate areas where additional efforts are needed.

As required in its founding regulation, the EEA publishes its flagship report the State and Outlook of Europe's environment (SOER), which is an integrated assessment, analysing trends, progress to targets as well as outlook for the mid- to long-term. The agency publishes annually a report on Europe's most polluted provinces for air quality, detailing fine particulate matter PM 2.5 .

[ 4 ] The EEA shares this information, including the datasets used in its assessments, through its main website and a number of thematic information platforms such as Biodiversity Information System for Europe (BISE), Water Information System for Europe (WISE) and ClimateADAPT . The Climate-ADAPT knowledge platform presents information and data on expected climatic changes, the vulnerability of regions and sectors, adaptation case studies, and adaptation options, adaptation planning tools, and EU policy.

European Nature Information System [ edit ] The European Nature Information System (EUNIS) provides access to the publicly available data in the EUNIS database for species , habitat types and protected sites across Europe. It is part of the European Biodiversity data centre (BDC), and is maintained by the EEA.

The database contains data [ 5 ] on species, habitat types and designated sites from the framework of Natura 2000 , from material compiled by the European Topic Centre on Biological Diversity mentioned in relevant international conventions and in the IUCN Red Lists, collected in the framework of the EEA's reporting activities.

European environment information and observation network [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2018 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "European Environment Agency" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The European Environment Information and Observation Network (Eionet) is a collaboration network between EEA member countries and non-member, cooperating nations.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Cooperation is facilitated through different national environmental agencies, ministries, or offices. Eionet encourages the sharing of data and highlights specific topics for discussion and cooperation among participating countries.

[ 6 ] Eionet currently includes covers seven European Topic Centres (ETCs): ETC on Biodiversity and Ecosystems (ETC BE) ETC on Climate Change Adaptation and LULUCF (ETC CA) ETC on Climate Change Mitigation (ETC CM) ETC on Data Integration and Digitalisation (ETC DI) ETC on Human Health and the Environment (ETC HE) ETC on Circular Economy and Resource Use (ETC CE) ETC on Sustainability Transitions (ETC ST) The European Environment Agency (EEA) implements the "Shared Environmental Information System" principles and best practices via projects such as the "ENI SEIS II EAST PROJECT" & the "ENI SEIS II SOUTH PROJECT" to support environmental protection within the six eastern partnership countries (ENP) & to contribute to the reduction in marine pollution in the Mediterranean through the shared availability and access to relevant environmental information.

[ 8 ] Budget management and discharge [ edit ] As for every EU body and institution, the EEA's budget is subject to a discharge process, consisting of external examination of its budget execution and financial management, to ensure sound financial management of its budget. Since its establishment, the EEA has been granted discharge for its budget without exception. The EEA provides full access to its administrative and budgetary documents in its public documents register .

The discharge process for the 2010 budget required additional clarifications. In February 2012, the European Parliament 's Committee on Budgetary Control published a draft report, identifying areas of concern in the use of funds and its influence for the 2010 budget such as a 26%  budget increase from 2009 to 2010 to €50 600 000.

[ 9 ] : 8 and questioned that maximum competition and value-for-money principles were honored in hiring, also possible fictitious employees.

[ 9 ] : 10 The EEA's Executive Director refuted allegations of irregularities in a public hearing.

[ 10 ] On 27 March 2012 Members of the European Parliament (MEPs) voted on the report [ 11 ] and commended the cooperation between the Agency and NGOs working in the environmental area.

[ citation needed ] On 23 October 2012, the European Parliament voted and granted the discharge to the European Environment Agency for its 2010 budget.

[ 12 ] Executive directors [ edit ] Name Nationality Term(s) Domingo Jiménez-Beltrán Spain 1994–2003 Jacqueline McGlade United Kingdom 2003–2013 Hans Bruyninckx Belgium 2013–2023 Leena Ylä-Mononen Finland 2023– International cooperation [ edit ] In addition to its 32 members and six Balkan cooperating countries, the EEA also cooperates and fosters partnerships with its neighbours and other countries and regions, mostly in the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy : [ 13 ] Eastern Partnership member states: Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia Union for the Mediterranean member states: Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestinian Authority , Syria, Tunisia Other ENPI states: Russia Central Asian states: Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan Additionally the EEA cooperates with multiple international organizations and the corresponding agencies of the following countries: United States ( Environmental Protection Agency ) Canada ( Environment Canada ) Official languages [ edit ] The 26 official languages used by the EEA are: Bulgarian , Czech , Croatian , Danish , German , Greek , English , Spanish , Estonian , Finnish , French , Hungarian , Icelandic , Italian , Lithuanian , Latvian , Malti , Dutch , Norwegian , Polish , Portuguese , Romanian , Slovak , Slovene , Swedish and Turkish .

See also [ edit ] Agencies of the European Union Citizen Science , cleanup projects that people can take part in.

EU environmental policy List of atmospheric dispersion models List of environmental organizations Confederation of European Environmental Engineering Societies Coordination of Information on the Environment European Agency for Safety and Health at Work [ 14 ] Environment Agency References [ edit ] ^ Countries and Eionet , European Environment Agency, Retrieved on 24 July 2013.

^ "European Network of the Heads of Environment Protection Agencies" . Archived from the original on 30 May 2010 . Retrieved 15 April 2012 .

^ (under the UN Security Council Resolution 1244/99) ^ "European city air quality viewer" .

^ About EUNIS. Retrieved 2018-11-18.

^ a b "Our knowledge network — Eionet" .

www.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ "European Environment Information and Observation Network" .

Eionet Portal . Retrieved 25 September 2023 .

^ "ENI SEIS" .

^ a b Draft Report on discharge on the implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2010 14 pages, 6 February 2012, Archived 12 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Valentina Pop EU agencies rebuked over spending 2 March 2012. EU Observer website.

^ "Agenda for March 27, 2011 meeting of the Committee on Budgetary Control" .

^ 2012/804/EU: Decision of the European Parliament of 23 October 2012 on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Environment Agency for the financial year 2010 , 20 December 2012 , retrieved 13 May 2020 ^ "International Cooperation" .

eea.europa.eu . European Environment Agency. 22 July 2016 . Retrieved 23 April 2017 .

(scroll down to "European Neighborhood Project") ^ EU-OSHA .

External links [ edit ] Official website European Topic Centre on Land Use and Spatial Information (ETC LUSI) European Topic Centre on Air and Climate Change(ETC/ACC) European Topic Centre on Biological Diversity(ETC/BD) Archived 12 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine Model Documentation System (MDS) The European Environment Agency's near real-time ozone map (ozoneweb) The European Climate Adaptation Platform Climate-ADAPT EUNIS homepage v t e Agencies, bodies and joint undertakings of the European Union and Euratom EU decentralised agencies Single market Safety and Health at Work Vocational Training Labour Living and Working Conditions Environment Training Medicines Intellectual Property Plant Variety Translation Food Safety Maritime Safety Aviation Safety Disease Prevention and Control Space Programme Railways Fisheries Control Chemicals Cooperation of Energy Regulators Electronic Communications Regulators CSDP Defence Security Studies Satellite AFSJ Law Enforcement Training Law Enforcement Cooperation Judicial co-operation Border and Coast Guard Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the AFSJ Monitoring of Drugs and Drug Addiction Cybersecurity Asylum Gender Equality Fundamental Rights ESFS Banking Securities and Markets Insurance and Pensions BU ( SRM ) Resolution EU executive agencies Competitiveness and Innovation Cybersecurity Competence Education, Audiovisual and Culture Health and Digital Climate, Infrastructure and Environment Research Research Council Euratom agencies Euratom Supply EU decentralised independent bodies Innovation and Technology Public Prosecutor Other EU secondary-law corporate bodies Political Parties and Political Foundations Data Protection Board Joint undertakings EU Bio-based Industries Clean Sky Key Digital Technologies Fuel Cells and Hydrogen High-Performance Computing Innovative Medicines Initiative SESAR Shift-2-Rail Euratom Fusion for Energy Joint European Torus Former Reconstruction (transferred to DG NEAR ) Health and Consumers Schnell-Brüter- Kernkraftwerksgesellschaft mbH' (SBK) Euratom JU Hochtemperatur- Kernkraftwerk GmbH (HKG) Euratom JU Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Portugal 2 Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Environment_Agency&oldid=1297717916 " Categories : 1990 in the European Economic Community Agencies of the European Union Atmospheric dispersion modeling Environmental agencies in the European Union Government agencies established in 1990 Organizations based in Copenhagen 1994 establishments in Denmark Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles to be expanded from July 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Environment Agency 39 languages Add topic

