Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shutter glasses 2 Stereo driver Toggle Stereo driver subsection 2.1 History 2.2 Discontinuation of support 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nvidia 3D Vision 3 languages 한국어 Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discontinued stereoscopic gaming kit by Nvidia Nvidia 3D Vision (previously GeForce 3D Vision ) is a discontinued stereoscopic gaming kit from Nvidia which consists of LC shutter glasses and driver software which enables stereoscopic vision for any Direct3D game, with various degrees of compatibility. There have been many examples of shutter glasses. Electrically controlled mechanical shutter glasses date back to the middle of the 20th century. LCD shutter glasses appeared in the 1980s, one example of which is Sega's SegaScope. This was available for Sega's game console, the Master System. The NVIDIA 3D Vision gaming kit introduced in 2008 made this technology available for mainstream consumers and PC gamers.

[ 1 ] The kit is specially designed for 120 Hz LCD monitors , but is also compatible with CRT monitors (some of which may work at 1024×768×120 Hz and even higher refresh rates ), DLP-projectors, 3LCD projectors and others. It requires a compatible graphics card from Nvidia ( GeForce 200 series or later).

[ 2 ] Shutter glasses [ edit ] The glasses use wireless IR protocol and can be charged from a USB cable, allowing around 60 hours of continuous use.

[ 3 ] The wireless emitter connects to the USB port and interfaces with the underlying driver software. It also contains a VESA Stereo port for connecting supported DLP TV sets, although standalone operation without a PC with installed Nvidia 3D Vision driver is not allowed.

Nvidia includes one pair of shutter glasses in their 3D Vision kit, SKU 942-10701-0003. Each lens operates at 60 Hz, and alternate to create a 120 Hz 3-dimensional experience.

[ 1 ] Stereo driver [ edit ] The stereo driver software can perform automatic stereoscopic conversion by using the 3D models submitted by the application and rendering two stereoscopic views instead of the standard mono view. The automatic driver works in two modes: fully "automatic" mode, where 3D Vision driver controls Stereo Convergence (Pop Out) and Stereo Separation (Screen Depth), and "explicit" mode, where control over screen depth, separation, and textures is performed by the game developer with the use of proprietary NVAPI.

The quad-buffered mode allows developers to control the rendering, avoiding the automatic mode of the driver and just presenting the rendered stereo picture to left and right frame buffers with associated back buffers .

History [ edit ] The roots of the Nvidia stereo driver can be traced to the software supplied with the wired ELSA Revelator shutter glasses from 1990s. Nvidia has acquired the technology and has provided support for various stereoscopic display technologies, including stereoscopic shutter glasses, with their own version driver which only worked with Nvidia graphics cards.

In 2008, Nvidia undertook major rewrite of the driver which was converted to use Windows Display Driver Model , making it only compatible with Windows Vista and Nvidia's glasses. The stereo driver was renamed as 3D Vision driver.

Discontinuation of support [ edit ] On April 11, 2019, Nvidia announced that support for 3D Vision in drivers would be discontinued, [ 4 ] as well as support for 3DTV. Driver releases after version 425.31 do not include support for 3D Vision.

See also [ edit ] List of Nvidia 3D Vision Ready games AMD HD3D References [ edit ] ^ a b Olin Coles.

"NVIDIA GeForce 3D Vision Gaming Kit" . BenchmarkReviews.com . Retrieved 2009-01-08 .

^ 3D Vision System Requirements ^ "NVidia product specs" .

^ "NVidia driver v425.31 release notes" .

External links [ edit ] Intel Adaptive Stable Image Technology [IASIT] paper [1] 3D Vision product page at Nvidia at the Wayback Machine (archived May 16, 2019) (in Russian) iXBT.com ELSA Revelator stereo glasses review v t e Nvidia GeForce ( List of GPUs ) Fixed pixel pipeline Pre-GeForce NV1 NV2 RIVA 128 RIVA TNT TNT2 GeForce 256 2 4 MX Vertex and pixel shaders GeForce 3 4 Ti FX 6 7 Unified shaders GeForce 8 9 100 200 300 400 500 Unified shaders & NUMA GeForce 600 700 800M 900 10 16 Ray tracing & Tensor Cores GeForce 20 30 40 50 Software and technologies Multimedia acceleration NVENC (video encoding) NVDEC (video decoding) PureVideo (video decoding) Software Cg (shading language) CUDA Nvidia GameWorks OptiX (ray tracing API) PhysX (physics SDK) Nvidia Omniverse (3D graphics) Nvidia RTX (ray tracing platform) Nvidia System Tools VDPAU (video decode API) Technologies Nvidia 3D Vision (stereo 3D) Nvidia G-Sync (variable refresh rate) Nvidia Optimus (GPU switching) Nvidia Surround (multi-monitor) MXM (module/socket) SXM (module/socket) NVLink (protocol) Scalable Link Interface (multi-GPU) TurboCache (framebuffer in system memory) Video Super Resolution (live video upscaling) GPU microarchitectures Celsius Kelvin Rankine Curie Tesla Fermi Kepler Maxwell Pascal Volta Turing Ampere Hopper Ada Lovelace Blackwell Rubin Feynman Other products Graphics Workstation cards Nvidia Quadro Quadro Plex GPGPU software Nvidia Tesla DGX Console components NV2A ( Xbox ) RSX 'Reality Synthesizer' ( PlayStation 3 ) Tegra NX-SoC ( Nintendo Switch ) Nvidia Shield Shield Portable Shield Tablet Shield Android TV GeForce Now SoCs and embedded GoForce Drive Jetson Tegra CPUs Project Denver Computer chipsets nForce Company Key people Jen-Hsun Huang Chris Malachowsky Curtis Priem David Kirk Bill Dally Debora Shoquist Ranga Jayaraman Jonah M. Alben Acquisitions 3dfx Interactive Ageia ULi Bright Computing Cumulus Networks DeepMap Icera Mellanox Technologies Mental Images PortalPlayer Exluna MediaQ Stexar v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nvidia_3D_Vision&oldid=1282318567 " Categories : 3D imaging Nvidia Stereoscopy Video game development software Video game hardware Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 18:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nvidia 3D Vision 3 languages Add topic

