Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Culture 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Eastern world 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Eesti Ελληνικά فارسی Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska ქართული Lombard Bahasa Melayu پښتو Português Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Countries predominantly situated in Asia "Eastern powers", "Easterners", and "Eastern states" redirect here. For historical politics in Korea, see Easterners (Korean political faction) . For the region of the United States, see Eastern United States . For other uses, see Eastern Power (disambiguation) .

The Eastern world in a 1796 map, which included the continents of Asia and Australia (then known as New Holland ).

The Eastern world , also known as the East or historically the Orient , is an umbrella term for various cultures or social structures , nations and philosophical systems , which vary depending on the context. It most often includes Asia , the Mediterranean region and the Arab world , specifically in historical ( pre-modern ) contexts, and in modern times in the context of Orientalism .

[ 1 ] Occasionally, the term may also include countries in Eastern Europe and the Balkans . The Eastern world is often seen as a counterpart to the Western world .

The various regions included in the term are varied, hard to generalize, and do not have a single shared common heritage. Although the various parts of the Eastern world share many common threads, most notably being in the " Global South ", they have never historically defined themselves collectively. The term originally had a literal geographic meaning, referring to the eastern part of the Old World , contrasting the cultures and civilizations of Asia with those of Europe (or the Western world ). Traditionally, this includes East Asia , Southeast Asia , South Asia , Central Asia and West Asia .

Conceptually, the boundary between east and west is more cultural and historical, rather than geographical, as a result of which Australia and New Zealand , which were founded as British settler colonies , are typically grouped with the Western world despite being geographically closer to the Eastern world, while the Central Asian nations of the former Soviet Union , even with significant Western influence, are grouped in the East.

[ 2 ] Other than much of Asia and Africa , Europe has absorbed almost all of the societies of North Asia , the Americas , and Oceania into the Western world because of settler colonization .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Countries such as the Philippines , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] which are geographically located in the Eastern world, may be considered Western in some aspects of their society, culture and politics due to immigration and historical cultural influences from the United States and Western Europe .

Overview [ edit ] As with other regions of the world, Asia consists of many different, extremely diverse countries, ethnic groups and cultures.

[ 7 ] This concept is further debated because in some English-speaking countries , common vernacular associates the "Asian" identity to people of East Asian origin and Southeast Asian origin, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] while in some countries the "Asian" identity is associated with people of South Asian origin, and in other contexts, Asian regions such as the Indian subcontinent are included with East Asia.

West Asia (which includes Israel , part of the Arab world , Iran , etc.), which may or may not see themselves part of the Eastern world, are sometimes considered "Middle Eastern" and separate from Asia.

[ 10 ] The division between 'East' and 'West', formerly referred to as Orient and Occident , is a product of European cultural history and of the distinction between Christian Europe and the cultures beyond it to the East. With the European colonization of the Americas , the East-West dichotomy became global. The concept of an Eastern, "Indian" ( Indies ) or " Oriental " sphere was emphasized by ideas of racial as well as religious and cultural differences. Such distinctions were articulated by Westerners in the scholarly tradition known as Orientalism , which is notable in being a Western conception of a unified Eastern world not limited to any specific region(s), but rather all of Asia together.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Culture [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Eastern culture, also known as Eastern civilization, Asian civilization, Oriental culture, Eastern society, or simply the East, refers to the internally diverse culture of the Eastern world.  The term "Eastern" encompasses the social norms , ethical values , traditional customs , belief systems , political systems , artifacts and technologies primarily rooted in Asian history. There are subgroups within Eastern culture, such as countries within East Asia, Southeast Asia, or South Asia, as well as syncretism within these regions. These include the spread of Eastern religions such as Buddhism or Hinduism , the usage of Chinese characters or Brahmic scripts , language families, the fusion of cuisines, and traditions, among others.

See also [ edit ] Asia portal Civilizations portal World portal Arab world Asia-Pacific Buddhism by country Byzantine commonwealth Christendom Continental union East Asian cultural sphere East–West dichotomy Far East Globalization Global East Global North and Global South Greater India Greater Iran Greater Middle East Hinduism by country Muslim world Near East Western world Westernization References [ edit ] ^ Thompson, William; Joseph Hickey (2005).

Society in Focus . Boston: Pearson plc . 0-205-41365-X.

^ Meštrovic, Stjepan (1994).

Balkanization of the West: The Confluence of Postmodernism and Postcommunism .

Routledge . p. 61.

ISBN 0-203-34464-2 .

^ "Embassy of Brazil – Ottawa" . Brasembottawa.org. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011 . Retrieved 6 May 2011 .

^ Falcoff, Mark.

"Chile Moves On" . AEI. Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2011 .

^ Heydarian, Richard (12 January 2015).

"Philippines' Shallow Capitalism: Westernization Without Prosperity" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

^ Hunt, Chester L. (1956).

"The 'Americanization' Process in the Philippines" .

India Quarterly .

12 (2): 117– 130.

doi : 10.1177/097492845601200204 .

JSTOR 45071116 .

S2CID 152671922 . Retrieved 5 July 2022 .

^ Cartmill, Matt (September 1998).

"The Status of the Race Concept in Physical Anthropology" (PDF) . p. 651-660. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ For example, "Asian and Indian people" are referred to in the New Zealand Heart Foundation's BMI calculator Archived 2009-05-31 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Schiavenza, Matt (19 October 2016).

"Why Some 'Brown Asians' Feel Left Out of the Asian American Conversation" .

Asia Society . Retrieved 14 June 2022 .

And that, unfortunately, did not include any South Asians and only one Filipino. That caused a bit of an outcry. It raises a legitimate issue, of course, one about how 'brown Asians' often feel excluded from the Asian American conversation.

^ Khatib, Lina (2006).

Filming the modern Middle East: politics in the cinemas of Hollywood and the Arab world . Library of Modern Middle East Studies, Library of International Relations. Vol. 57.

I.B. Tauris . pp.

166– 167, 173.

ISBN 1-84511-191-5 .

^ Tromans, 6 ^ from the Latin oriens ; Oxford English Dictionary v t e Eastern world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Sinic world Iranic world Indic world Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Islamdom History Ancient history Silk Road Post-classical history (Middle Ages) Modern period Early modern period Industrial Revolution World War I Asian and Pacific Theatre Middle Eastern Theatre Interwar period World War II Pacific War Middle Eastern Theatre Cold War Post–Cold War era War on terror Culture Alphabet Hanzi Kanji Kana Hangul Hanja Brahmic Arabic Cyrillic Latin Architecture Art History Calendar Chinese Buddhist Hindu Cuisine Esotericism Folklore Chinese Japanese Korean Languages Literature Music Chant Folk Mythology Philosophy Religion Philosophy Chinese philosophy Japanese philosophy Korean philosophy Vietnamese philosophy Indian philosophy Iranian philosophy Buddhist ethics Islamic ethics Hindu philosophy Buddhist philosophy Jain philosophy Islamic philosophy Collectivism Values Japanese Philippine Religion Dharmic Buddhism Culture Southern/Eastern/Northern Theravada Mahayana Vajrayana Hinduism Culture Vaishnavism Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Sikhism Jainism Taoic Taoism Confucianism Shenism Shinto Muism Tengrism Iranian Zoroastrianism Yazidism Abrahamic Islam Culture Sunni Shia Christianity Culture Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Churches Judaism Culture Bábism Azali Baháʼí Druze Contemporary integration APEC Arab Customs Union Arab League ASEAN Asia and the Pacific Group Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council BIMSTEC CAREC CAU CSTO CPTPP Eastern Bloc Easternization EAEU EAEU Customs Union ECO GCC OTS RCEP SAARC SCO SEATO TCS Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eastern_world&oldid=1304381709 " Categories : Asia-Pacific Country classifications Cultural concepts Cultural regions Historiography of Asia Eastern culture Eurocentrism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 18:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eastern world 27 languages Add topic

