Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Origins 3 In 1960s counterculture 4 In corporate advertising 5 Other material 6 Digital age 7 Psychedelic artists 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Psychedelic art 13 languages العربية Asturianu Čeština Deutsch Español Italiano Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Psychedelic art" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Visual art inspired by psychedelic experiences A psychedelic artwork Part of a series on Psychedelia Arts Psychedelic art Algorithmic art Cyberdelic Diffraction Fractal art Liquid light show LSD art Paisley Phosphene Psychedelic music Acid house Acid jazz Acid rock Acid techno Acid trance Chillwave Cloud rap Hypnagogic pop Madchester Neo-psychedelia Palm Desert Scene Peyote song P-Funk Psychedelic folk Psychedelic funk Psychedelic pop Psychedelic rock Psychedelic soul Psychedelic trance Space rock Stoner rock Trip hop Psychedelic film Acid Western Hippie exploitation films Stoner film Psychedelic literature Culture Counterculture Entheogen Smart shop Trip sitter Psychedelic microdosing Drugs 25I-NBOMe 2C-B Ayahuasca Cannabis DMT Ibogaine Ketamine LSD Mescaline Peyote Psilocybin mushrooms San Pedro cactus List of psychedelic drugs List of psilocybin mushrooms Psychoactive cactus Trip killer Experience Bad trip Ecology Ego death Therapy Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder History Acid Tests Albert Hofmann Alexander Shulgin Counterculture of the 1960s History of LSD Owsley Stanley Psychedelic era Summer of Love Timothy Leary William Leonard Pickard Law Drug liberalization Drug policy of the Netherlands Drug policy of Oregon Drug policy of Portugal Drug policy reform Legality of cannabis Legal status of psilocybin mushrooms Neurolaw Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Related topics Addiction Cannabis Cognitive liberty Drug checking Harm reduction Hippie MDMA Neuroenhancement Neuroethics Philosophy of psychedelics Psychonautics Prohibition of drugs Rave Recreational drug use Regulation of therapeutic goods Self-experimentation Surrealism v t e Psychedelic art (also known as psychedelia ) is art , graphics or visual displays related to or inspired by psychedelic experiences and hallucinations known to follow the ingestion of psychedelic drugs such as LSD , psilocybin , and DMT . Coined by British psychologist Humphry Osmond , the term "psychedelic" means "mind revealing".  By that definition, all artistic efforts to depict the inner world of the psyche may be considered "psychedelic".

In common parlance "psychedelic art" refers above all to the art movement of the late 1960s counterculture and early 1970s counterculture . Featuring highly distorted or surreal visuals, bright colors and full spectrums and animation (including cartoons ) to evoke, convey, or enhance psychedelic experiences .

Psychedelic visual arts were a counterpart to psychedelic rock music .  Concert posters, album covers, liquid light shows , liquid light art, murals , comic books , underground newspapers and more reflected not only the kaleidoscopically swirling colour patterns typical of psychedelic hallucinations ,  but also revolutionary political, social and spiritual sentiments inspired by insights derived from these psychedelic states of consciousness. In the 2000s there has been a revival of psychedelics and psychedelic art with some prominent artists, like Raul Lopez Pomares.

Features [ edit ] A liquid oil projection Psychedelic visual art is a broad, widely-represented term, though it is commonly identifiable by its use of one or more of the listed subject matters: Fantastic, metaphysical, and surrealistic subject matter Kaleidoscopic , fractal , or paisley patterns Bright and/or highly contrasting colors Extreme depth of detail or stylization of detail, also called Horror vacui style Morphing of objects, themes, and/or collages Phosphenes , spirals, concentric circles, diffraction patterns, and other entoptic motifs Repetition of motifs Innovative typography and hand-lettering, including warping and transposition of positive and negative spaces Origins [ edit ] Psychedelic art is informed by the notion that altered states of consciousness produced by psychedelic drugs are a source of artistic inspiration. The psychedelic art movement is similar to the surrealist movement in that it prescribes a mechanism for obtaining inspiration. Whereas the mechanism for surrealism is the observance of dreams, a psychedelic artist turns to drug induced hallucinations. Both movements have strong ties to important developments in science. Whereas the surrealist was fascinated by Sigmund Freud 's theory of the unconscious, the psychedelic artist has been literally "turned on" by Albert Hofmann 's discovery of LSD .

Mikhail Bulgakov was the first writer to describe narcotic hallucinations .Art researchers Tim Lapetino and James Orok trace the connection of psychedelic art with Dadaism , Surrealism , Lettrism , and Situationism .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Notable figures within the psychedelic art movement include Lautreamont , Louis-Ferdinand Celine , Stanislav Witkevich , Antonin Artaud , Georges Bataille , William Burroughs , De Quincey , Terence McKenna , and Carlos Castaneda .

Early examples of "psychedelic art" are literary rather than visual, although there are some examples in the Surrealist art movement, such as Remedios Varo and André Masson . Other early examples include Antonin Artaud who writes of his peyote experience in Voyage to the Land of the Tarahumara (1937) and Henri Michaux who wrote of his experiments with mescaline and hashish in his 1956 novel, Misérable Miracle .

Aldous Huxley 's The Doors of Perception (1954) and Heaven and Hell (1956) remain definitive statements on the psychedelic experience.

Albert Hofmann and his colleagues at Sandoz Laboratories were convinced immediately after its discovery in 1943 of the power and promise of LSD.  For two decades following its discovery LSD was marketed by Sandoz as an important drug for psychological and neurological research.  Hofmann saw the drug's potential for poets and artists as well, and took great interest in the German writer Ernst Jünger 's psychedelic experiments.

Early artistic experimentation with LSD was conducted in a clinical context by Los Angeles–based psychiatrist Oscar Janiger .  Janiger asked a group of 50 different artists to each do a painting from life of a subject of the artist's choosing. They were subsequently asked to do the same painting while under the influence of LSD.  The two paintings were compared by Janiger and also the artist.  The artists almost unanimously reported LSD to be an enhancement to their creativity.

Ultimately it seems that psychedelics would be most warmly embraced by the American counterculture.  Beatnik poets Allen Ginsberg and William S. Burroughs became fascinated by psychedelic drugs as early as the 1950s as evidenced by The Yage Letters (1963). The Beatniks recognized the role of psychedelics as sacred inebriants in Native American religious ritual, and also had an understanding of the philosophy of the surrealist and symbolist poets who called for a "complete disorientation of the senses" (to paraphrase Arthur Rimbaud ).  They knew that altered states of consciousness played a role in Eastern Mysticism. They were hip to psychedelics as psychiatric medicine.  LSD was the perfect catalyst to electrify the eclectic mix of ideas assembled by the Beats into a cathartic, mass-distributed panacea for the soul of the succeeding generation.

In 1960s counterculture [ edit ] Cover of the San Francisco Oracle, Volume 1 No. 5, January 1967 Leading proponents of the 1960s psychedelic art movement were San Francisco poster artists such as: Rick Griffin , Victor Moscoso , Bonnie MacLean , Stanley Mouse & Alton Kelley , Bob Masse , and Wes Wilson .  Their psychedelic rock concert posters were inspired by Art Nouveau , Victoriana, Dada , and Pop Art . The "Fillmore Posters" were among the most notable of the time.  Richly saturated colors in glaring contrast, elaborately ornate lettering, strongly symmetrical composition, collage elements, rubber-like distortions, and bizarre iconography are all hallmarks of the San Francisco psychedelic poster art style.  The style flourished from about 1966 to 1972.  Their work was immediately influential to vinyl record album cover art, and indeed all of the aforementioned artists also created album covers.

Although San Francisco remained the hub of psychedelic art into the early 1970s, the style also developed internationally: British artist Bridget Riley became famous for her Op art paintings of psychedelic patterns creating optical illusions.

Mati Klarwein created psychedelic masterpieces for Miles Davis' Jazz-Rock fusion albums, and also for Carlos Santana's Latin rock .

Pink Floyd worked extensively with London-based designers, Hipgnosis to create graphics to support the concepts in their albums.

Willem de Ridder created cover art for Van Morrison. Los Angeles area artists such as John Van Hamersveld , Warren Dayton and Art Bevacqua and New York artists Peter Max and Milton Glaser all produced posters for concerts or social commentary (such as the anti-war movement) that were highly collected during this time. Life Magazine's cover and lead article for the September 1, 1967 issue at the height of the Summer of Love focused on the explosion of psychedelic art on posters and the artists as leaders in the hippie counterculture community.

Psychedelic light-shows were a new art-form developed for rock concerts. Using oil and dye in an emulsion that was set between large convex lenses upon overhead projectors the lightshow artists created bubbling liquid visuals that pulsed in rhythm to the music.  This was mixed with slideshows and film loops to create an improvisational motion picture art form to give visual representation to the improvisational jams of the rock bands and create a completely "trippy" atmosphere for the audience.  The Brotherhood of Light were responsible for many of the light-shows in San Francisco psychedelic rock concerts.

Out of the psychedelic counterculture also arose a new genre of comic books: underground comix .  "Zap Comix" was among the original underground comics, and featured the work of Robert Crumb , S. Clay Wilson , Victor Moscoso, Rick Griffin , and Robert Williams among others.  Underground Comix were ribald, intensely satirical, and seemed to pursue weirdness for the sake of weirdness.

Gilbert Shelton created perhaps the most enduring of underground cartoon characters, "The Fabulous Furry Freak Brothers ", whose drugged out exploits held a hilarious mirror up to the hippy lifestyle of the 1960s.

Psychedelic art was also applied to the LSD itself.  LSD began to be put on blotter paper in the early 1970s and this gave rise to blotter art , a specialized art form of decorating the blotter paper.  Often the blotter paper was decorated with tiny insignia on each perforated square tab, but by the 1990s this had progressed to complete four color designs often involving an entire page of 900 or more tabs. Mark McCloud is a recognized authority on the history of LSD blotter art.

In corporate advertising [ edit ] By the late 1960s, the commercial potential of psychedelic art had become hard to ignore. General Electric, for instance, promoted clocks with designs by New York artist Peter Max.  A caption explains that each of Max's clocks "transposes time into multi-fantasy colors." [ 3 ] In this and many other corporate advertisements of the late 1960s featuring psychedelic themes, the psychedelic product was often kept at arm's length from the corporate image: while advertisements may have reflected the swirls and colors of an LSD trip, the black-and-white company logo maintained a healthy visual distance. Several companies, however, more explicitly associated themselves with psychedelica: CBS, Neiman Marcus, and NBC all featured thoroughly psychedelic advertisements between 1968 and 1969.

[ 4 ] In 1968, Campbell's soup ran a poster promotion that promised to "Turn your wall souper-delic!" [ 5 ] The Art Of Peter Max The early years of the 1970s saw advertisers using psychedelic art to sell a limitless array of consumer goods. Hair products, cars, cigarettes, and even pantyhose became colorful acts of pseudo-rebellion.

[ 6 ] The Chelsea National Bank commissioned a psychedelic landscape by Peter Max, and neon green, pink, and blue monkeys inhabited advertisements for a zoo.

[ 7 ] A fantasy land of colorful, swirling, psychedelic bubbles provided the perfect backdrop for a Clearasil ad.

[ 8 ] As Brian Wells explains, "The psychedelic movement has, through the work of artists, designers, and writers, achieved an astonishing degree of cultural diffusion… but, though a great deal of diffusion has taken place, so, too, has a great deal of dilution and distortion." [ 9 ] Even the term "psychedelic" itself underwent a semantic shift, and soon came to mean "anything in youth culture which is colorful, or unusual, or fashionable." [ 10 ] Puns using the concept of "tripping" abounded: as an advertisement for London Britches declared, their product was "great on trips!" [ 11 ] By the mid-1970s, the psychedelic art movement had been largely co-opted by mainstream commercial forces, incorporated into the very system of capitalism that the hippies had struggled so hard to change.

Other material [ edit ] Examples of other psychedelic art material are tapestry, blacklight posters printed with fluorescent ink against backgrounds of velvet black which are intended for display under an ultraviolet lamp which causes the colors to glow in the dark, paisley printed cloths, tie-dyed or batiked curtains and stickers with designs and slogans written in loopy, art nouveau-like fonts, [ 12 ] clothing, [ 13 ] canvas and other printed artefacts [ 14 ] and furniture.

[ 15 ] Digital age [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Psychedelic art" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Cyberdelic and Algorithmic art Fractal artwork created using a Julia set Computer art has allowed for an even greater and more profuse expression of psychedelic vision.

Fractal generating software gives an accurate depiction of psychedelic hallucinatory patterns, but even more importantly 2D and 3D graphics software allow for unparalleled freedom of image manipulation.  Much of the graphics software seems to permit a direct translation of the psychedelic vision. The "digital revolution" was indeed heralded early on as the "New LSD" by none other than Timothy Leary .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] DeepDream modified toast sandwich The rave movement of the 1990s was a psychedelic renaissance fueled by the advent of newly available digital technologies.  The rave movement developed a new graphic art style partially influenced by 1960s psychedelic poster art , but also strongly influenced by graffiti art, and by 1970s advertising art, yet clearly defined by what digital art and computer graphics software and home computers had to offer at the time of creation. Conversely, the convolutional neural network DeepDream finds and enhances patterns in images purely via algorithmic pareidolia .

Concurrent to the rave movement, and in key respects integral to it, are the development of new mind-altering drugs, most notably, MDMA (Ecstasy).  Ecstasy, like LSD, has had a tangible influence on culture and aesthetics , particularly the aesthetics of rave culture .  But MDMA is (arguably) not a real psychedelic, but is described by psychologists as an entactogen .  Development of new psychedelics such as 2C-B and related compounds (developed primarily by chemist Alexander Shulgin ) which are truly psychedelic has provided a fertile ground for artistic exploration since many of the new psychedelics possess their own unique properties that will affect the artist's vision accordingly.

Even as fashions have changed, and art and culture movements have come and gone, certain artists have steadfastly devoted themselves to psychedelia.  Well-known examples are Amanda Sage , Alex Grey , and Robert Venosa .  These artists have developed unique and distinct styles that while containing elements that are "psychedelic", are clearly artistic expressions that transcend simple categorization.  While it is not necessary to use psychedelics to arrive at such a stage of artistic development, serious psychedelic artists are demonstrating that there is tangible technique to obtaining visions, and that technique is the creative use of psychedelic drugs.

Psychedelic artists [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pablo Amaringo Chuck Arnett Chris Dyer (artist) Doug Binder Brummbaer Mark Boyle and Joan Hills Laurence Caruana James Clifford Lee Conklin Robert Crumb Roger Dean Warren Dayton Scott Draves Donald Dunbar [ 18 ] M. C. Escher Karl Ferris William Finn The Fool (design collective) Ernst Fuchs Bob Gibson H. R. Giger Terry Gilliam Alex Grey Rick Griffin Gary Grimshaw Leif Podhajsky John Hurford Alton Kelley Mati Klarwein Oleg A. Korolev Abby Martin Bob Masse Peter Max Stanley "Mouse" Miller Victor Moscoso Vali Myers Martin Sharp Gilbert Shelton Grace Slick Harold Thornton Vernon Treweeke John Van Hamersveld David Vaughan Louis Wain James Herer Robert Williams Wes Wilson Raul Lopez Pomares See also [ edit ] Art portal Entoptic phenomena (archaeology) List of psychedelic rock artists Outsider art Persian carpet Surrealism Visionary art Notes and references [ edit ] ^ James Oroc (2018-01-16).

The New Psychedelic Revolution: The Genesis of the Visionary Age . Simon and Schuster. p. 636.

ISBN 9781620556634 .

^ Tim Lapetino (2016-10-26).

Art Of Atari . Dynamite Entertainment. p. 354.

ISBN 9781524101060 .

^ Heimann, Jim.

60s All American Ads . Cologne: Taschen , 2002. pg. 523 ^ Herdeg, Walter.

68/69 Graphics Annual . Zürich: The Graphics Press, 1968. pgs. 45, 75, 248 ^ Heimann, Jim.

60s All American Ads . Cologne: Taschen, 2002. pg. 798 ^ Heimann, Jim.

70s All American Ads . Cologne: Taschen, 2004. pgs. 443, 102, 76, 85, 484.

^ Herdeg, Walter.

71/72 Graphics Annual . Zürich: The Graphics Press, 1971. pgs. 39, 49.

^ Herdeg, Walter.

71/72 Graphics Annual . Zürich: The Graphics Press, 1971. pg. 78.

^ Wells, Brian.

Psychedelic Drugs . New York: Jason Aronson, 1974. pg. 19 ^ Wells, Brian.

Psychedelic Drugs . New York: Jason Aronson, 1974. pgs. 19-20 ^ Heimann, Jim.

70s All-American Ads . Cologne: Taschen, 2004. pg. 523 ^ "Hippie tapestries and cool wall hangings" .

TrippyStore.com . Retrieved 2016-08-07 .

^ "Rave Clothing, Festival Outfits and Crazy Shirts! – RaveNectar" .

Ravenectar.com . 2016-06-23 . Retrieved 2016-08-07 .

^ "Art – Ed's Amazing Liquid Light" .

Edsamazing.com . Retrieved 2016-08-07 .

^ Martinko, Katherine (2011-07-01).

"Pre-loved Fabrics Made Into Psychedelic Furniture: Design By Leftovers" .

TreeHugger.com . Retrieved 2016-08-07 .

^ Leary, Timothy ; Horowitz, Michael; Marshall, Vicky (1994).

Chaos and Cyber Culture . Ronin Publishing.

ISBN 0-914171-77-1 .

^ Ruthofer, Arno (1997).

"Think for Yourself; Question Authority" . Archived from the original on 2007-11-12 . Retrieved 2007-02-02 .

^ Abramson, Seth (30 January 2013). " November 2012 Contemporary Poetry Reviews ".

The Huffington Post .

Further reading [ edit ] Rubin, David S.

Psychedelic: Optical and Visionary Art since the 1960s MIT Press (April 2010) Masters, Robert E.L. and Houston, Jean.

Psychedelic Art . New York: Balance House, printed by Grove Press, Inc. (1968) Walker, John.

"Psychedelic Art" .

Glossary of Art, Architecture & Design since 1945 , 3rd. ed. (1992) Saputra, Ricky R.T "Psychedelic Art" .

Genjos.art, Pschedelic Designs Illustrations . (October 2024) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Psychedelic art .

Erowid Culture Vault: Visionary Arts Vault Plazmalab studio: A home for those who dream outside the lines of consciousness v t e Recreational drug use Major recreational drugs Depressants Barbiturates Benzodiazepines Carbamates Ethanol (alcohol) Alcoholic beverage Beer Wine Gabapentinoids GHB Inhalants Medical Nitrous oxide ( recreational use ) Hazardous solvents contact adhesives Gasoline nail polish remover Paint thinner Other Freon Kava Nonbenzodiazepines Quinazolinones Quaaludes Opioids Buprenorphine Suboxone Subutex Codeine Lean Desomorphine Krokodil Dextropropoxyphene Darvocet Darvon Fentanyl Diamorphine Heroin Hydrocodone Hydromorphone Dilaudid Methadone Mitragyna speciosa Kratom Morphine Opium Oxycodone /paracetamol Tramadol Stimulants Amphetamine Arecoline Areca Betel Caffeine Coffee Energy drinks Tea Cathinone Khat Cocaine Coca Cocaine paste Crack Ephedrine Ephedra MDPV Mephedrone Methamphetamine Methylone Methylphenidate Modafinil Nicotine Polacrilex Salt Tobacco Theobromine Cocoa Chocolate Entactogens 2C series 6-APB Benzofury AMT MDA MDMA Ecstasy Molly Hallucinogens Psychedelics 2C-B 25I-NBOMe 4-AcO-DMT 5-MeO-DMT Psychoactive toads Bufotenin Vilca Yopo DMT Ayahuasca LSA and iso-LSA Morning glory Ergot LSD Mescaline Peruvian torch Peyote San Pedro Psilocybin and psilocin Psilocybin mushrooms Dissociatives DXM ( recreational use ) Inhalants Nitrous oxide ( recreational use ) Ketamine MXE PCP Deliriants Atropine and Scopolamine Atropa belladonna Datura Hyoscyamus niger Mandragora officinarum Dimenhydrinate Diphenhydramine Cannabinoids THC Cannabis (Marijuana) Hashish Hash oil Synthetic cannabinoids JWH-018 APICA APINACA Spice Others Ibogaine Tabernanthe iboga Muscimol Amanita muscaria Oneirogens Calea zacatechichi Silene capensis Salvinorin A Salvia divinorum Drug culture Cannabis culture 420 Cannabis consumption Cannabis cultivation Cannabis edible Cannabis rights Cannabis rights leaders List of cannabis rights organizations Cannabis smoking Cannabis Social Club Cannabis tea Cannabis vaping Head shop Legal history of cannabis in the United States Legality of cannabis Marijuana Policy Project Medical cannabis NORML Cannabis and religion Stoner film Coffee culture Coffee break Coffeehouse Latte art Teahouse Drinking culture Bartending Beer culture Beer festival Binge drinking Diethyl ether Drinking games Drinking song Happy hour Hip flask Nightclub Oktoberfest Pub Pub crawl Sommelier Sports bar Tailgate party Wine bar Wine tasting Psychedelia Psychonautics Art Drug Era Experience Literature Music Microdosing Smart shop Therapy Trip report Smoking culture Cigarette card Fashion cigarettes Cloud-chasing Loosie Smokeasy Smoking fetishism Tobacco smoking Other Chasing the dragon Club drug Counterculture of the 1960s Dance party Drug paraphernalia Drug tourism Entheogen Hippie Needle sharing Nootropic Party and play Poly drug use Rave Religion and drugs Self-medication Sex and drugs Urban legends about drugs Whoonga Legality of drug use International International drug control conventions 1961 Narcotic Drugs 1971 Psychotropic Substances 1988 Drug Trafficking Other treaties addressing drugs Law of the Sea Convention Convention Against Doping Council of the European Union decisions on designer drugs State level Drug policy Decriminalization Legalization Prohibition Regulation Supply reduction Policy reform Demand reduction Drug Policy Alliance Harm reduction Law Enforcement Action Partnership Liberalization Latin America Students for Sensible Drug Policy Drug policy by country Australia Canada China Czech Republic Germany India Laos Netherlands Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia South Korea Soviet Union Sweden Switzerland United States Just Say No Office of National Drug Control Policy School district drug policies California Colorado Maryland Oregon Virginia United Kingdom Drug legality Alcohol legality Anabolic steroid legality Cannabis legality Cocaine legality Methamphetamine legality Psilocybin decriminalization in the U.S.

Psilocybin mushrooms legality Salvia legality Other Arguments for and against drug prohibition Cannabis rights Capital punishment for drug trafficking Cognitive liberty Designer drug Drug court Drug possession Drug test Narc Politics of drug abuse War on drugs Mexican drug war Plan Colombia Philippine drug war Zero tolerance Other Drug production and trade Drug production Coca production in Colombia Drug precursors Opium production in Afghanistan Rolling meth lab Drug trade Illegal drug trade Afghanistan Aruba Australia Bangladesh Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Brazil Burma Cambodia Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Cyprus Dominican Republic El Salvador Estonia Finland Germany Haiti Honduras India Indian Ocean region Iran Italy Japan Kenya Kosovo Kyrgyzstan Laos Latin America Latvia Malaysia Mauritius Moldova Nigeria Norway Oman Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Russia Saint Kitts and Nevis Seychelles Slovakia South Africa South Korea Spain Suriname Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Turkey Turks and Caicos Islands United Arab Emirates United States Venezuela Darknet market Pharmaceutical distribution Beer shop Cannabis shop Liquor store Liquor license Issues with drug use Abuse Addiction Date rape drug Dependence Driving impaired Drug harmfulness Effects of cannabis Drug-related crime Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Long-term effects of cannabis Neurotoxicity Overdose Passive smoking of tobacco or other substances Harm reduction Drug checking Drug legalization Drug rehabilitation Needle and syringe programmes Opioid replacement therapy Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Regulation of therapeutic goods Responsible drug use Substance abuse prevention Supervised injection site Trip killer Countries by drug use Alcohol consumption Cocaine use Cannabis Annual use Lifetime use Opiates use Tobacco consumption v t e Psychedelic music Genres By prefix and style Psychedelic Folk New Weird America Funk Pop Hip hop Rock Soul Cinematic soul Trance Goa trance Nitzhonot Psydub Suomisaundi Acid House Punk Rock Techno Trance Other Chillwave Dream-beat Freakbeat Hypnagogic pop Italian occult psychedelia Krautrock Madchester Neo-psychedelia Dream pop Shoegaze Paisley Underground Sampledelia Space rock Stoner rock Tropicália Zamrock Subcultures Beat Generation Cannabis culture Counterculture of the 1960s Deadhead Freak scene Grebo Hippies Jam band New Age travellers Rave culture San Francisco sound Second Summer of Love Summer of Love UK underground Lists Acid rock artists Neo-psychedelia artists Psychedelic folk artists Psychedelic pop artists Psychedelic rock artists See also Psychedelic rock in Australia and New Zealand Psychedelic rock in Latin America Psychedelia Psychedelic art LSD art Psychedelic drug Psychedelic era Psychedelic experience Psychedelic literature Category:Drug culture Category:Hippie movement Category:Psychedelic musical groups v t e Counterculture of the 1960s ( timeline ) Arts Black Arts Movement Psychedelic art Psychedelic music Youthquake Cultural events San Francisco Renaissance Beatlemania British Invasion Mods and rockers Swinging Sixties Hippie movement Human Be-In Summer of Love Bed-Ins for Peace Woodstock Social and political movements American Indian Movement Anti-nuclear movement Back-to-the-land movement Black Power movement Civil rights movement Dialoguero Free school movement Free Speech Movement Gay liberation Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War protests Second-wave feminism Women's liberation movement Sexual revolution United States Media Underground press newspapers Subcultures Discordianism Freak scene Hippie Mod Rocker Rude boy UK underground Yippies v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐cjmj4
Cached time: 20250812021905
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.673 seconds
Real time usage: 0.875 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2633/1000000
Revision size: 21846/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 270104/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1786/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88450/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.325/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7402810/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  532.474      1 -total
 22.65%  120.626      1 Template:Reflist
 15.49%   82.500      3 Template:Cite_book
 13.91%   74.048      1 Template:Psychedelic_sidebar
 13.52%   72.010      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.18%   70.201      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.20%   59.663      3 Template:Ambox
  8.69%   46.259      1 Template:Drug_use
  8.67%   46.190      1 Template:Short_description
  8.39%   44.680      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1172710:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021905 and revision id 1295842348. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychedelic_art&oldid=1295842348 " Categories : Psychedelic art 20th-century art movements Counterculture of the 1960s Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2012 Articles that may contain original research from February 2014 All articles that may contain original research Commons category link from Wikidata Articles prone to spam from August 2016 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 04:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychedelic art 13 languages Add topic

