Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ideologies 3 The development of Marxist criticism 4 Critiquing literary works through Marxist lens Toggle Critiquing literary works through Marxist lens subsection 4.1 Criteria 4.2 Application of criteria 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Marxist literary criticism 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Latviešu ਪੰਜਾਬੀ سنڌي தமிழ் Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marxist literary criticism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Soviet World Cultural Figures stamp of William Shakespeare , 1964.

Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Marxist literary criticism is a theory of literary criticism based on the historical materialism developed by philosopher and economist Karl Marx . Marxist critics argue that even art and literature themselves form social institutions and have specific ideological functions, based on the background and ideology of their authors. The English literary critic and cultural theorist Terry Eagleton defines Marxist criticism this way: "Marxist criticism is not merely a 'sociology of literature', concerned with how novels get published and whether they mention the working class. Its aims to explain the literary work more fully; and this means a sensitive attention to its forms, styles and, meanings. But it also means grasping those forms styles and meanings as the product of a particular history." [ 1 ] In Marxist criticism, class struggle and relations of production are the central instruments in analysis.

Most Marxist critics who were writing in what could chronologically be specified as the early period of Marxist literary criticism, subscribed to what has come to be called " vulgar Marxism ". In this thinking of the structure of societies, literary texts are one register of the superstructure , which is determined by the economic base of any given society. Therefore, literary texts reflect the economic base rather than "the social institutions from which they originate" for all social institutions, or more precisely human–social relationships, are in the final analysis determined by the economic base.

History [ edit ] This section may contain material unrelated to the topic of the article .

Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page .

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Karl Marx 's studies have provided a basis for much in socialist theory and research. Marxism aims to revolutionize the concept of work through creating a classless society built on control and ownership of the means of production . In such a society, the means of production (the base in the architectural metaphor Marx uses to analyze and describe the structure of any given society in written human history) are possessed in common by all people rather than being owned by an elite ruling class.  Marx believed that economic determinism , dialectical materialism and class struggle were the three principles that explained his theories. (Though Marx does attribute a teleological function to the economic, he is no determinist. As he and Friedrich Engels write in The Communist Manifesto , the class struggle in its capitalist phase could well end "in the common ruin of the contending classes," [ 2 ] and as Terry Eagleton argues in Why Marx Was Right , "Capitalism can be used to build socialism, but there is no sense in which the whole historical process is secretly laboring towards this goal.") [ 3 ] The bourgeoisie (dominant class who control and own the means of production) and the proletariat (subordinate class: ones who do not own and control the means of production) were the only two classes who engaged in hostile interaction to achieve class consciousness . (In Marx's thought, it is only the proletariat, the working class, that must achieve class consciousness. The bourgeoisie is already quite well aware of its position and power in the capitalist paradigm. As individuals, workers know that they are being exploited in order to produce surplus value , the value produced by the worker that the capitalists appropriate; however, the working class must realize that they are being exploited not only as individuals but as a class. It is upon this realization that the working class reaches class consciousness).  Marx believed that all history is a struggle between hostile and competing economic classes in a state of change.  Marx and Engels collaborated to produce a range of publications based on capitalism, class struggles, and socialist movements.

These theories and ideologies can be found within three published works: The Communist Manifesto (1848) Preface to the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) Das Kapital or Capital (1867) The core publication of the movement, the Communist Manifesto (1848), argues that 'the history of all hitherto existing societies is the history of class struggles'.

[ 4 ] As class struggle is the engine room of history, to understand the course of history, one must analyse the class relations that typify different historical epochs, the antagonisms, and forms of class struggle embodied in such class relations. This involves the development of class consciousness and follows the revolutionary movements that challenge the dominant classes. It extends to rating the success of these revolutions in developing new modes of production and forms of social organization.

[ 5 ] In contrast to the Manifesto , Preface to the Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) and Capital (1867) focus on the unfolding logic of a system, rather than class struggle. These provide an alternative account of historical development and emphasize the self-destructive contradictions and law of motion of specific modes of production.

[ 6 ] Preface argues that society's economic organization consists of a distinctive pattern of forces and relations of productions. From this foundation arises a complex political and ideological superstructure, [ 7 ] where economic development impacts societal progress.

Capital was more concerned with the genesis and dynamic of capitalism. As Mclellan (1971) states, "it refers to class struggle mainly in the context of the struggle between capital and labor, within capitalism, rather than over its suppression." [ 8 ] Capital was less concerned with forecasting how capitalism would be overthrown, than considering how it had developed and how it functioned.

[ 9 ] The key to understanding this logic was the 'commodity form of social relations – a form that was most fully developed only in capitalism.

Ideologies [ edit ] It is through the theories of class struggle, politics, and economics that Marxist literary criticism emerged. The thought behind Marxist criticism is that works of literature are mere products of history that can be analyzed by looking at the social and material conditions in which they were constructed.

[ 10 ] Marx's Capital states that "the mode of production of material life determines altogether the social, political, and intellectual life process. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but on the contrary their social being, that determines their consciousness." Put simply, the social situation of the author determines the types of characters that will develop, the political ideas displayed and the economical statements developed in the text.

The development of Marxist criticism [ edit ] Although Marx and Engels detailed theories of socialism in the mid-nineteenth century, it was not until the 1920s that Marxist literary theory was systematized. The greatest impetus for this standardization came after the October Revolution of 1917 in Russia. The event instigated a change in belief around socialist ideals in government and society.

[ 11 ] While these ideals developed, socialist realism was accepted as the highest form of literature – a theory based on an art movement that depicted and glorified the proletariat's struggle towards societal progress. These ideas guided both literary creation and official literary criticism in the Soviet Union , [ 12 ] where works focused on the lives of the different classes. In the years since then, the beliefs of some Marxist schools regarding literary theory have been modified to acknowledge that literary creation is a result of both subjective inspiration and the objective influence of the writer's surroundings.

[ 13 ] This system of belief relies on the social classes as well as the economic and political development of society. Thus, Marx's theories intertwined with the emerging ideologies of the new Russian movement and spread throughout the world.

Critiquing literary works through Marxist lens [ edit ] Pyramid of Capitalist System , a 1911 American caricature which originated from a Russian flyer of c.

1901 .

Criteria [ edit ] The viewpoint of Marxists toward literary works is that they are not "works created according to a perpetual artistic standard, but as "consequences" of economic and ideological factors that are specific to that time period".

[ 14 ] Critiquing literary work in the perspective of a Marxist involves asking these questions: What is the role of class in the said literary work?

How do the protagonists/characters fight against oppression?

Does the work advocate for Marxist values (whether implicitly or explicitly) or does the work oppose them?

How is oppression discussed by the work; are impeding issues in society brushed aside or are they condemned elsewhere?

Are there any proposed idealistic answers to the issues faced in the literary work?

Ultimately, the core foundation of Marxist critique is established on these questions since Marx once said that "the writer may very well serve a movement of history as its mouthpiece, but he cannot of course create it".

[ 15 ] Application of criteria [ edit ] "Karl Marx's sociological explanation of social conflict is one of the most powerful explanations, he has put forward that the notion of a class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, is inevitable within a capitalist system.

[ 16 ] The brewing social conflict amongst classes is well represented within Lu Xun's An Incident , where Xun describes his "ill tempered" experience within the capital Peking (pinyin Beijing) during the winter of 1917; he begins by talking about how an old woman who is dressed in "ragged clothing" got caught in the shaft due to the strong winds "fluttering" her "unbuttoned and tattered jacket". Xun describes how he felt "disgusted" and in disbelief that the old woman who was lying on the ground was helped by the rickshaw man; he believed that the old woman was "acting injured" to gain sympathy and help from the rickshaw man. Towards the end of the incident, in an attempt to quench his feelings of shame and guilt, he gives the policeman a "handful of coppers" to be given to the rickshaw man as a form of "reward" for his Samaritan behavior.

[ 17 ] Xun's attitude towards the old woman and the rickshaw man is representative of the classist bourgeois view towards the proletariat who are the "old woman and the rickshaw man" in this case; an apathetic and selfish attitude towards people in distress.

See also [ edit ] Literary criticism Marxist aesthetics Literature and Revolution Notes [ edit ] ^ T Eagleton, Marxism and Literary Criticism, Berkeley, U of California P, 1976 ^ Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels (2013).

The Communist Manifesto . New York: Norton. p. 61.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Eagleton, Terry (2011).

Why Marx Was Right . New Haven: Yale UP. p. 60.

^ Quoted Marx – W Duiker & J Spielvogel, The Essential World History, vol, II: since 1500, 3rd ed, Thomson Higher Education, Belmont, 2008, p. 428 ^ D Mclellan, The Thought of Karl Marx, Macmillan Press, London, 1971, p. 42 ^ R Stones, Key Sociological Thinkers, Macmillan Press, London, 1998, p. 24 ^ D Mclellan, p. 124 ^ As quoted in D Mclellan, p. 67 ^ I McIntosh, Classical Sociological Theory: A Reader, Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1997, p. 73 ^ K Siegel, 'Introduction to Modern Literary Theory', viewed 15 March 2011, http://www.kristisiegel.com/theory.htm ^ K Siegel ^ K Siegel ^ K Siegel ^ Abrams, M. H. (1998).

A Glossary Of Literary Terms (7 ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 149.

ISBN 978-0155054523 .

^ Marx, Engels, Karl, Friedrich (1976).

The collected works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . Progress Publishers.

ISBN 978-0717805068 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Rummel, Rudolph Joseph (1975–1981).

Understanding conflict and war . Sage.

ISBN 0-470-15123-4 .

OCLC 781219038 .

^ "An Incident" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 25 April 2022 .

References [ edit ] Austen, Jane.

Pride and Prejudice.

Oxford UP, 1990.

Duiker, W & Spielvogel, J, The Essential World History, vol, II: since 1500, 3rd ed, Thomson Higher Education, Belmont, 2008.

Eagleton, Terry.

Marxism and Literary Criticism , Berkeley, U of California P, 1976.

---.

Why Marx Was Right . Yale UP, 2011.

Hobsbawm, EJ , The Age of Capital , Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1975.

Marx, Karl, and Friedrich Engels.

The Communist Manifesto.

Norton, 2013.

McIntosh, I, Classical Sociological Theory: A Reader , Edinburgh University Press, Great Britain, 1997.

Mclellan, D, The Thought of Karl Marx , Macmillan Press, London, 1971.

Siegal, K, ' Introduction to Modern Literary Theory ', viewed 15 March 2011, Stones, R, Key Sociological Thinkers , Macmillan Press, London, 1998.

Further reading [ edit ] Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels (2004) [1848].

Manifesto of the Communist Party .

Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved on 14 March 2015.

Capital (Volumes I–III) (Marx, Engels).

The German Ideology (Marx).

Theses on Feuerbach (Marx).

Alex Callinicos (2012).

The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx . Haymarket Books.

ISBN 978-1608461387 .

External links [ edit ] Marx and Engels on Literature and Art marxists.org The Georg Lukacs Internet Archive marxists.org Marxist Approach to Literature: An Introduction Journal of Teaching and Research in English Literature v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐7qmp5
Cached time: 20250812021422
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.446 seconds
Real time usage: 0.592 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1214/1000000
Revision size: 14877/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104713/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 446/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58988/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.262/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6335664/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  431.808      1 -total
 30.12%  130.076      1 Template:Marxism
 29.30%  126.532      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 22.27%   96.160      5 Template:Cite_book
 15.50%   66.928      1 Template:Additional_citations
 14.60%   63.060      1 Template:Short_description
 14.53%   62.723      2 Template:Ambox
 14.26%   61.592      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.27%   35.690      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.18%   35.308      5 Template:Portal-inline Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40980061:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021422 and revision id 1303574202. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxist_literary_criticism&oldid=1303574202 " Categories : Literary criticism Marxism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2023 Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from October 2024 All articles that may have off-topic sections This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxist literary criticism 12 languages Add topic

