Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 History 3 Classification 4 Writing system 5 Extent of use 6 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 6.1 Consonants 6.2 Vowels 7 Grammar 8 Vocabulary 9 Varieties and related languages Toggle Varieties and related languages subsection 9.1 Usages 10 Examples 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Malay language 141 languages Acèh Afrikaans አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiZulu Italiano עברית Jawa Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Коми Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Simple English سنڌي Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Kadazandusun Jaku Iban Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikifunctions Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austronesian language This article is about the language on which standard Indonesian and standard Malay are based. For the standard Malay used in Brunei, Malaysia, and Singapore also called "Malay", see Malaysian Malay . For the vernacular varieties and dialects of Malay, see Malayic languages .

Not to be confused with Malayalam , a Dravidian language.

Malay Bahasa Melayu بهاس ملايو Pronunciation [baˈha.sa məˈla.ju] Native to Brunei , Christmas Island , Cocos (Keeling) Islands , Timor-Leste , Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , South Thailand Ethnicity Malays Various ethnic groups in Brunei , Indonesia (as Indonesian ), Malaysia and Singapore (see also Malayophones ) Speakers L1 : 82 million (2004–2010) [ 1 ] Total (L1 and L2 ): 290 million (2009) [ 2 ] (the number includes " Indonesian " speakers) Language family Austronesian Malayo-Polynesian Malayic Malay Early forms Old Malay Classical Malay Pre-Modern Malay Standard forms Indonesian Standard Malay Writing system Latin ( Malay alphabet ) Arabic ( Jawi script ) [ 3 ] Arabic ( Pegon script ) (In Indonesia ) [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Thai alphabet (in Thailand ) Malay Braille Historically Pallava script , Kawi script , Ulu scripts , Rejang script Signed forms Manually Coded Malay Official status Official language in Brunei Indonesia (as Indonesian ) Malaysia Singapore UNESCO (as Indonesian ) [ 6 ] Recognised minority language in East Timor (beside Dili Malay , Indonesian used as a working language and a trade language with Indonesia ) [ 7 ] Indonesia (beside the national standard of Indonesian , Local Malay enjoys the status of a regional language in Sumatra and Kalimantan ) Sri Lanka (as Sri Lankan Malay ) Thailand (as Pattani Malay , Syburi Malay , and Bangkok Malay ) Regulated by Agency for Language Development and Cultivation in Indonesia Institute of Language and Literature in Malaysia Language and Literature Bureau in Brunei Malay Language Council in Singapore MABBIM (a trilateral joint venture) Language codes ISO 639-1 ms ISO 639-2 may ( B ) msa ( T ) ISO 639-3 msa – inclusive code Individual codes: zlm – Malay (individual language) ind – Indonesian zsm – Standard Malay abs – Ambon Malay mbf – Baba Malay pea – Baba Indonesian mhp – Balinese Malay bjn – Banjarese mfb – Bangka btj – Bacan bew – Betawi bve – Berau kxd – Brunei Malay ccm – Chetty Malay coa – Cocos Malay liw – Col goq – Gorap hji – Haji jax – Jambi Malay vkk – Kaur meo – Kedah Malay mfa – Kelantan-Pattani Malay kvr – Kerinci mqg – Kota Bangun Kutai mkn – Kupang Malay mfp – Makassar Malay xmm – Manado Malay min – Minangkabau mui – Musi zmi – Negeri Sembilan max – North Moluccan Malay pmy – Papuan Malay pel – Pekal msi – Sabah Malay sci – Sri Lanka Malay language pse – South Barisan Malay vkt – Tenggarong Kutai Malay Glottolog nucl1806 Linguasphere 31-MFA-a Areas where Malay is spoken: Indonesia Malaysia Singapore and Brunei, where Standard Malay is an official language East Timor, where Dili Malay is a Malay creole language and Indonesian is used as a working language Southern Thailand and the Cocos Isl., where other varieties of Malay are spoken Varieties of Malay in Southeast Asia: Malay language as the majority Malay language as the minority Malay-based creole languages Malay ( UK : / m ə ˈ l eɪ / mə- LAY , US : / ˈ m eɪ l eɪ / MAY -lay ; [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Malay: bahasa Melayu , Jawi : بهاس ملايو ) is an Austronesian language spoken primarily by Malays in several islands of Maritime Southeast Asia and the Malay Peninsula on mainland Asia.

[ 10 ] The language is an official language of Brunei , Malaysia , and Singapore .

Indonesian , a standardized variety of Malay, is the official language of Indonesia and one of the working languages of Timor-Leste . Malay is also spoken as a regional language of ethnic Malays in Indonesia and the southern part of Thailand . Altogether, it is spoken by 60 million people across Maritime Southeast Asia .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The language is pluricentric and a macrolanguage , i.e., a group of mutually intelligible speech varieties, or dialect continuum , that have no traditional name in common, and which may be considered distinct languages by their speakers. Several varieties of it are standardized as the national language ( bahasa kebangsaan or bahasa nasional ) of several nation states with various official names: in Malaysia, it is designated as either Bahasa Melayu ("Malay language") or in some instances, Bahasa Malaysia ("Malaysian language"); [ 13 ] in Singapore and Brunei, it is called Bahasa Melayu ("Malay language") where it in the latter country refers to a formal standard variety set apart from its own vernacular dialect ; [ a ] [ 14 ] in Indonesia, an autonomous normative variety called Bahasa Indonesia (" Indonesian language ") is designated the bahasa persatuan/pemersatu ("unifying language" or lingua franca ) whereas the term "Malay" ( bahasa Melayu ) refers to vernacular varieties of Malay indigenous to areas of Central to Southern Sumatra and West Kalimantan as the ethnic languages of Malay in Indonesia.

[ 13 ] [ b ] Classical Malay , also called Court Malay, was the literary standard of the pre-colonial Malacca and Johor Sultanates and so the language is sometimes called Malacca, Johor or Riau Malay (or various combinations of those names) to distinguish it from the various other Malayic languages . According to Ethnologue 16, several of the Malayic varieties they currently list as separate languages, including the Orang Asli varieties of the Malay Peninsula , are so closely related to standard Malay that they may prove to be dialects. There are also several Malay trade and creole languages (e.g.

Ambonese Malay ) based on a lingua franca derived from Classical Malay as well as Makassar Malay , which appears to be a mixed language .

Origin [ edit ] Malay historical linguists agree on the likelihood of the Malayic homeland being in western Borneo .

[ 17 ] A form known as Proto-Malayic was spoken in Borneo at least by 1000 BCE, it has been argued to be the ancestral language of all subsequent Malayic languages . Its ancestor, Proto-Malayo-Polynesian , a descendant of the Proto-Austronesian language , began to break up by at least 2000 BCE, possibly as a result of the southward expansion of Austronesian peoples into Maritime Southeast Asia from the island of Taiwan .

[ 18 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the Malay language Map of the expansion of the Srivijaya empire, beginning in Palembang in the 7th century, then extending to most of Sumatra , then expanding to Bangka Belitung , Riau Islands , Malay Peninsula , Singapore , Java , Thailand , Cambodia , South Vietnam , Sarawak , Brunei , Sabah , West Kalimantan , and ended as the Melayu Kingdom in Jambi in the 13th century.

The history of the Malay language can be divided into five periods: Old Malay, the Transitional Period, Classical Malay, Late Modern Malay and Modern Malay. Old Malay is believed to be the actual ancestor of Classical Malay.

[ 19 ] Old Malay was influenced by Sanskrit , the ancient Indo-Aryan language of India . Sanskrit loan words can be found in Old Malay vocabulary. The earliest known stone inscription in the Old Malay language was found on the island of Sumatra . Written in the Pallava variety of the Grantha alphabet , [ 20 ] it is dated 1 May 683. Known as the Kedukan Bukit inscription , it was discovered by the Dutchman C. J. Batenburg on 29 November 1920 at Kedukan Bukit, on the banks of the Tatang River, a tributary of the Musi River , near Palembang , in what is now South Sumatra , Indonesia . The stone measures approximately 45 by 80 centimetres (18 by 31 in). For centuries, Srivijaya , a maritime empire based on the island from the 7th to the 11th centuries, was responsible for the spread of Old Malay throughout the Malay Peninsula and the Malay Archipelago through its expansion and economic power. Old Malay served as the lingua franca of traders and was widely used in various ports and marketplaces across the region.

[ 21 ] The Tanjung Tanah Law [ 22 ] was a 14th-century pre-Islamic legal text that was produced during the reign of Adityawarman (1345–1377) of the Melayu Kingdom (also known as Malayu or Dharmasraya Kingdom), a Hindu-Buddhist kingdom that arose after the end of Srivijayan rule in Sumatra . The laws were for the Minangkabau people , who today still live in the highlands of Sumatra, Indonesia .

The Terengganu Inscription Stone (Malay: Batu Bersurat Terengganu ; Jawi: باتو برسورت ترڠݢانو ) is a granite stele bearing an inscription in Jawi script , discovered in Terengganu , on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula (in what is now Malaysia ). It is considered the earliest evidence of Classical Malay. Dated approximately to 702 AH (1303 CE ), it represents the oldest known evidence of Jawi writing in the Malay world and stands as one of the earliest testimonies to the advent of Islam as a state religion in the region. The inscription contains a proclamation issued by a ruler of Terengganu, referred to as Seri Paduka Tuan , urging his subjects to uphold and propagate Islam, while outlining 10 basic Sharia laws as guidance.

Classical Malay came into widespread use as the lingua franca of the region during the Malacca Sultanate era (1402–1511), a powerful maritime kingdom strategically located along the Strait of Malacca that became a hub of international trade and Islamic learning in the region. During this period, the Malay language developed rapidly under the influence of Islamic literature , which brought about significant linguistic changes, including a massive infusion of Arabic vocabulary, as well as continued influence from Sanskrit and Tamil . This enriched form of the language came to be known as Classical Malay. It was during this time the language evolved into a form recognisable to speakers of modern Malay.

[ citation needed ] After the Capture of Malacca by the Portuguese in 1511, marking the fall of the Malacca Sultanate , the royal court re-established itself as the Johor Sultanate . The court continued to use Classical Malay as its literary and administrative language. Over time, this literary tradition became strongly associated with the territories under the sultanate, including the present-day Malaysian state of Johor and the Indonesian province of Riau Islands . As a result, many assumed that the spoken Malay of Johor and Riau was closely related to Classical Malay. However, while the literary language used in the region reflects the classical tradition, the local spoken dialects differ.

[ 23 ] The fall of Malacca led to the dispersal of Malay literary centres, as many literati and scholars sought refuge in areas outside the immediate control of European colonial powers. As a result, new Malay literary works began to emerge from Aceh , Java , Makassar , the Moluccas , Champa , and other regions.

[ 24 ] Among the oldest surviving letters written in Malay are the letters from Sultan Abu Hayat of Ternate , in the Maluku Islands of present-day Indonesia , dated around 1521–1522. The text is addressed to the king of Portugal , following contact with Portuguese explorer Francisco Serrão .

[ 25 ] The letters show a sign of non-native usage, as the Ternateans used (and still use) the unrelated Ternate language , a West Papuan language , as their first language . Malay was used solely as a lingua franca for inter-ethnic communications.

[ 25 ] The 19th century marked a period of strong Western political and commercial domination in the Malay Peninsula and the Malay Archipelago . The colonial demarcation brought by the 1824 Anglo-Dutch Treaty led to Dutch East India Company effectively colonising the East Indies in the south, while the British Empire held several colonies and protectorates in the Malay peninsula and Borneo in the north. Both colonial powers used the Malay language as a tool of centralisation and modernisation. They made use of each other's scholarly publications in developing the standardised versions of the Malay language.

[ 24 ] The flourishing of pre-modern Malay literature in the 19th century led to the rise of intellectual movements among the locals and the emergence of new communities of Malay linguists .

Classification [ edit ] See also: Austronesian languages § Comparison charts Malay is a member of the Austronesian family of languages, which includes languages from Southeast Asia and the Pacific Ocean , with a smaller number in continental Asia .

Malagasy , a geographic outlier spoken in Madagascar in the Indian Ocean , is also a member of this language family. Although these languages are not necessarily mutually intelligible to any extent, their similarities are often quite apparent. In more conservative languages like Malay, many roots have come with relatively little change from their common ancestor, Proto-Austronesian language . There are many cognates found in the languages' words for kinship, health, body parts and common animals. Numbers, especially, show remarkable similarities.

Within Austronesian, Malay is part of a cluster of numerous closely related forms of speech known as the Malayic languages , which were spread across Malaya and the Indonesian archipelago by Malay traders from Sumatra. There is disagreement as to which varieties of speech popularly called "Malay" should be considered dialects of this language, and which should be classified as distinct Malay languages. The vernacular of Brunei— Brunei Malay —for example, is not readily intelligible with the standard language , and the same is true with some lects on the Malay Peninsula such as Kedah Malay . However, both Brunei and Kedah are quite close.

[ 26 ] Writing system [ edit ] Main article: Malay alphabet The Rencong alphabet , a native writing system found in central and South Sumatra . The text reads (Voorhoeve's spelling): "haku manangis ma / njaru ka'u ka'u di / saru tijada da / tang [hitu hadik sa]", which is translated by Voorhoeve as: "I am weeping, calling you; though called, you do not come" (hitu adik sa- is the rest of 4th line.

Kedukan Bukit Inscription , using Pallava alphabet , is the oldest surviving specimen of the Old Malay language in South Sumatra , Indonesia.

Malay is now written using the Latin script , known as Rumi in Brunei, Malaysia and Singapore or Latin in Indonesia, although an Arabic script called Arab Melayu or Jawi also exists. Latin script is official in Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia. Malay uses Hindu-Arabic numerals .

Final pages of the Taj al-Salatin, The Crown of Kings , a Malay " mirror for princes ", copied by Muhammad bin Umar Syaikh Farid on 31 July 1824 CE in Penang in Jawi script.

British Library Rumi (Latin) and Jawi are co-official in Brunei only. Names of institutions and organisations have to use Jawi and Rumi (Latin) scripts. Jawi is used fully in schools, especially the religious school, sekolah agama , which is compulsory during the afternoon for Muslim students aged from around 6–7 up to 12–14.

Efforts are currently being undertaken to preserve Jawi in Malaysia, and students taking Malay language examinations in Malaysia have the option of answering questions using Jawi.

The Latin script, however, is the most commonly used in Brunei and Malaysia, both for official and informal purposes.

Historically, Malay has been written using various scripts. Before the introduction of Arabic script in the Malay region, Malay was written using the Pallava , Kawi and Rencong scripts; these scripts are no longer frequently used, but similar scripts such as the Cham alphabet are used by the Chams of Vietnam and Cambodia . Old Malay was written using Pallava and Kawi script, as evident from several inscription stones in the Malay region. Starting from the era of kingdom of Pasai and throughout the golden age of the Malacca Sultanate, Jawi gradually replaced these scripts as the most commonly used script in the Malay region. Starting from the 17th century, under Dutch and British influence, Jawi was gradually replaced by the Rumi script.

[ 27 ] Extent of use [ edit ] See also: Malay trade and creole languages and Pluricentric language A Malay traffic sign in Malaysia Indonesian road signs in Soekarno–Hatta International Airport . The blue sign reads " Lajur Khusus Menurunkan Penumpang " which means "Lane for dropping passengers only" and the small no-parking sign on the left reads " Sampai Rambu Berikutnya " which means "until next sign" in Indonesian.

Malay is spoken in Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , Timor-Leste , Singapore and southern Thailand .

[ 28 ] Indonesian is the national language in Indonesia by Article 36 of the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia, while "Malay" ( bahasa Melayu ) has been recognised as the ethnic languages of Malay in Indonesia alongside Malay-based trade and creole languages and other ethnic languages . Malaysia and Singapore use a common standard Malay.

[ 29 ] Brunei, in addition to Standard Malay, uses a distinct vernacular dialect called Brunei Malay . In Timor-Leste, Indonesian is recognised by the constitution as one of two working languages (the other being English ), alongside the official languages of Tetum and Portuguese .

[ 7 ] The extent to which Malay is used in these countries varies depending on historical and cultural circumstances. Malay is the national language in Malaysia by Article 152 of the Constitution of Malaysia , and became the sole official language in Peninsular Malaysia in 1968 and in East Malaysia gradually from 1974.

English continues, however, to be widely used in professional and commercial fields and in the superior courts. Other minority languages are also commonly used by the country's large ethnic minorities. The situation in Brunei is similar to that in Malaysia. In the Philippines , Indonesian is spoken by the overseas Indonesian community concentrated in Davao City . Functional phrases are taught to members of the Armed Forces of the Philippines as well as local students.

Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian) exercises in the development of Malay as an international language as well as a language of science.

[ 30 ] The VOA and BBC use Indonesian as one of their standard language for broadcasting.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] In Australia , Indonesian is one of three Asian target languages, together with Japanese and Mandarin , taught in some schools as part of the Languages Other Than English programme.

[ 33 ] Indonesian has been taught in Australian schools and universities since the 1950s.

[ 34 ] Indonesian has been recognised as an official language of the General Conference of UNESCO since 2013.

[ 6 ] Phonology [ edit ] Main article: Malay phonology Malay, like most Austronesian languages, is not a tonal language .

Consonants [ edit ] The consonants of Malaysian [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] and also Indonesian [ 38 ] are shown below. Non-native consonants that only occur in borrowed words, principally from Arabic, Dutch and English, are shown in brackets.

Malay consonant phonemes Labial Dental / Alveolar Post‑alv.

/ Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ɲ ŋ Stop / Affricate voiceless p t t͡ʃ k ( ʔ ) voiced b d d͡ʒ ɡ Fricative voiceless ( f ) s ( ʃ ) ( x ) h voiced ( v ) ( z ) ( ɣ ) Approximant semivowel w j lateral l Trill r Orthographic note :
The sounds are represented orthographically by their symbols as above, except: / ð / is 'z', the same as the / z / sound (only occurs in Arabic loanwords originally containing the / ð / sound, but the writing is not distinguished from Arabic loanwords with / z / sound, and this sound must be learned separately by the speakers).

/ ɲ / is 'ny'; 'n' before 'c' and 'j' / ŋ / is 'ng' / θ / is represented as 's', the same as the / s / sound (only occurs in Arabic loanwords originally containing the / θ / sound, but the writing is not distinguished from Arabic loanwords with / s / sound, and this sound must be learned separately by the speakers). Previously (before 1972), this sound was written 'th' in Standard Malay (not Indonesian) the glottal stop / ʔ / is final 'k' or an apostrophe ' (although some words have this glottal stop in the middle, such as rakyat ) / tʃ / is 'c' / dʒ / is 'j' / ʃ / is 'sy' / x / is 'kh' / j / is 'y' / q / is 'k' Loans from Arabic : Phonemes which occur only in Arabic loans may be pronounced distinctly by speakers who know Arabic. Otherwise they tend to be replaced with native sounds.

Table of borrowed Arabic consonants Distinct Assimilated Example / x / / k / , / h / khabar, kabar "news" / ð / / d / , / l / redha, rela "good will" /zˤ/ / l / , / z / lohor, zuhur "noon (prayer)" / ɣ / / ɡ / , / r / ghaib, raib "hidden" / ʕ / / ʔ / saat, sa'at "second (time)" / θ / / s / Selasa "Tuesday" / q / / k / makam "grave" Vowels [ edit ] Malay originally had four vowels, but in many dialects today, including Standard Malay, it has six, with /i/ split into /i, e/ and /u/ split into /u, o/ .

[ 35 ] Many words are commonly pronounced variably, with either [i, u] or [e, o] , and relatively few words require a mid vowel [e, o] .

Table of vowel phonemes of Standard Malay Front Central Back Close i u Mid e ə o Open a Orthographic note : both /e/ and /ə/ are written with ⟨e⟩ . Orthographic /e, o/ are relatively rare, so the letter ⟨e⟩ usually represents /ə/ . There are some homographs; for example, perang is used for both /pəraŋ/ "war" and /peraŋ ~ piraŋ/ "blond". (In Indonesia, "blond" is written as pirang instead of perang .) Some analyses regard /ai, au, oi/ as diphthongs.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] However, [ai] and [au] can only occur in open syllables, such as cukai ("excise") and pulau ("island"). Words with a phonetic diphthong in a closed syllable, such as baik ("good") and laut ("sea"), are actually two syllables. An alternative analysis therefore treats the phonetic diphthongs [ai] , [au] and [oi] as a sequence of a monophthong plus an approximant: /aj/ , /aw/ and /oj/ respectively.

[ 41 ] There is a rule of vowel harmony : the non-open vowels /i, e, u, o/ in bisyllabic words must agree in height, so hidung ("nose") is allowed but * hedung is not.

[ 42 ] Comparison of several standard pronunciations of Malay–Indonesian [ 43 ] Example Standard Pronunciation Indonesian– Baku Johor–Riau ( Piawai ) Northern Peninsular ⟨a⟩ in final open syllable ⟨keret a ⟩ /a/ /ə/ /a/ ⟨i⟩ in final closed syllable with final ⟨n⟩ and ⟨ng⟩ ⟨kamb i ng⟩ /i/ /e/ /i/ ⟨i⟩ in final closed syllable with other final consonants ⟨it i k⟩ /i/ /e/ /e/ ⟨u⟩ in final closed syllable with final ⟨n⟩ and ⟨ng⟩ ⟨tah u n⟩ /u/ /o/ /u/ ⟨u⟩ in final closed syllable with other final consonants ⟨lump u r⟩ /u/ /o/ /o/ final ⟨r⟩ ⟨lumpu r ⟩ /r/ silent /r/ Study by Uri Tadmor which was published in 2003 shows that mutation of ⟨a⟩ in final open syllable is an areal feature. Specifically, it is an areal feature of Western Austronesia. Uri Tadmor classify those types into four groups as below.

[ 44 ] Final /a/ mutation in Malay-Indonesian dialects and nearby Austronesian languages Types Phonemes "Malay" homeland Native languages area [a] (origin) [a] Kedah , Brunei Arekan (eg.

Tengger ), Sarawak , Sabah , Kalimantan (except Pontianak), East Indonesia Raised [ə], [ɨ] Johor , Pontianak , Tanah Abang ( Jakarta ) Bali Rounded [o], [ɔ] Pattani , Palembang Minangkabau , Mataraman (eg.

Yogyakarta ) Fronted [ɛ], [e] Perak , Jakarta , Sambas Grammar [ edit ] Main article: Malay grammar Malay is an agglutinative language , and new words are formed by three methods: attaching affixes onto a root word ( affixation ), formation of a compound word (composition), or repetition of words or portions of words ( reduplication ). Nouns and verbs may be basic roots, but frequently they are derived from other words by means of prefixes , suffixes and circumfixes .

Malay does not make use of grammatical gender , and there are only a few words that use natural gender; the same word is used for 'he' and 'she' which is dia or for 'his' and 'her' which is dia punya . There is no grammatical plural in Malay either; thus orang may mean either 'person' or 'people'. Verbs are not inflected for person or number, and they are not marked for tense; tense is instead denoted by time adverbs (such as 'yesterday') or by other tense indicators, such as sudah 'already' and belum 'not yet'. On the other hand, there is a complex system of verb affixes to render nuances of meaning and to denote voice or intentional and accidental moods .

Malay does not have a grammatical subject in the sense that English does. In intransitive clauses, the noun comes before the verb. When there is both an agent and an object , these are separated by the verb (OVA or AVO), with the difference encoded in the voice of the verb. OVA, commonly but inaccurately called "passive", is the basic and most common word order.

[ citation needed ] Vocabulary [ edit ] Main articles: List of loanwords in Malay and List of loanwords in Indonesian This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2019 ) The Malay language has many words borrowed from Arabic (in particular religious terms), Sanskrit , Tamil , certain Sinitic languages , Persian (due to historical status of Malay Archipelago as a trading hub), and more recently, Portuguese , Dutch and English (in particular many scientific and technological terms).

Indonesian has inclination toward Sanskrit in formulation of new words due to extensive Javanese and Balinese speaking community, while Malaysian and Bruneian Malay prefer Arabic as source for neologism due to acceptance of Islamic Arabic practices.

[ 45 ] Arabic in Indonesian tends to reside in (Islamic) religious sphere.

[ 45 ] The presence of Sanskritised neologism in Malaysian and Bruneian Malay is a result of "importation" from Indonesian.

[ 45 ] Terminology for various subjects such as administration, business, and law was derived from the languages of respective colonial master, those are Dutch for Indonesian and English for Malaysian and Bruneian Malay.

[ 45 ] Although the rule for scientific terms development is agreed, the result can be differ because of (1) the difference in traditional vocabulary (such as Dutch vs English and Sanskritic Javanese vs Arabised Malay) and (2) the loan-shift difference on semantics and grammatical feature choice.

[ 45 ] The divergence between Indonesian and "Standard" Malay are systemic in nature and, to a certain extent, contribute to the way the two sets of speakers understand and react to the world, and are more far reaching with a discernible cognitive gap than the difference between dialects.

[ 45 ] Varieties and related languages [ edit ] Main articles: Malayic languages and Malay trade and creole languages Mural of Mark 1 :9-11 written in Betawi language There is a group of closely related languages spoken by Malays and related peoples across Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , Singapore , Southern Thailand , Timor-Leste , and the far southern parts of the Philippines . They have traditionally been classified as Malay, Para-Malay, and Aboriginal Malay, but this reflects geography and ethnicity rather than a proper linguistic classification. The Malayic languages are mutually intelligible to varying extents, though the distinction between language and dialect is unclear in many cases.

Para-Malay includes the Malayic languages of Sumatra . They are: Minangkabau , Central Malay (Bengkulu), Pekal , Talang Mamak, Musi (Palembang), Negeri Sembilan (Malaysia), and Duano’ .

[ 46 ] Aboriginal Malay are the Malayic languages spoken by the Orang Asli ( Proto-Malay ) in Malaya . They are Jakun , Orang Kanaq , Orang Seletar , and Temuan .

[ citation needed ] The other Malayic languages, included in neither of these groups, are associated with the expansion of the Malays across the archipelago. They include Riau-Johor Malay ( Malaysian and Indonesian ), Kedah Malay , Brunei Malay , Berau Malay , Bangka Malay , Jambi Malay , Kutai Malay , Terengganu Malay , Riau Malay, Loncong , Pattani Malay , Bacan Malay , and Banjarese .

Menterap may belong here.

There are also several Malay-based creole languages , such as Betawi Malay , Cocos Malay , Makassar Malay , Ambonese Malay , Dili Malay , Kupang Malay , Manado Malay , Papuan Malay , Thousand Islands Malay , Larantuka Malay , Alor Malay , Balinese Malay , and Sabah Malay , which may be more or less distinct from standard (Malaccan) Malay.

Due to the early settlement of a Cape Malay community in Cape Town , who are now known as Coloureds , numerous Classical Malay words were brought into Afrikaans .

Usages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Alamat Langkapuri from British Ceylon (present-day Sri Lanka ). Initially published between 1869 and 1870 and written in Jawi script , it is noted to be among the first Malay-language newspaper. The readership consist of the Malay-diaspora in Ceylon as well as in the Malay archipelago.

The extent to which Malay and related Malayan languages are used in the countries where it is spoken varies depending on historical and cultural circumstances. Malay is the national language in Malaysia by Article 152 of the Constitution of Malaysia , and became the sole official language in West Malaysia in 1968, and in East Malaysia gradually from 1974.

English continues, however, to be widely used in professional and commercial fields and in the superior courts. Other minority languages are also commonly used by the country's large ethnic minorities. The situation in Brunei is similar to that of Malaysia.

In Singapore, Malay was historically the lingua franca among people of different nationalities. Although this has largely given way to English, Malay still retains the status of national language and the national anthem , Majulah Singapura , is entirely in Malay. In addition, parade commands in the military, police and civil defence are given only in Malay.

Most residents of the five southernmost provinces of Thailand —a region that, for the most part, used to be part of an ancient Malay kingdom called Pattani —speak a dialect of Malay called Yawi (not to be confused with Jawi), which is similar to Kelantanese Malay, but the language has no official status or recognition.

Owing to earlier contact with the Philippines , Malay words—such as dalam hati (sympathy), luwalhati (glory), tengah hari (midday), sedap (delicious)—have evolved and been integrated into Tagalog and other Philippine languages .

The Youth Pledge was the result of the Second Youth Congress held in Batavia in October 1928. On the last pledge, there was an affirmation of Indonesian language as a unifying language throughout the archipelago.

Indonesian speaker By contrast, Indonesian has successfully become the lingua franca for its disparate islands and ethnic groups, in part because the colonial language, Dutch, is no longer commonly spoken. (In East Timor , which was governed as a province of Indonesia from 1976 to 1999, Indonesian is widely spoken and recognized under its Constitution as a 'working language'.) Malaysian speaker Besides Indonesian , which developed from the Riau Malay dialect, [ 47 ] there are many Malay varieties spoken in Indonesia; they are divided into western and eastern groups. Western Malay dialects are predominantly spoken in Sumatra and Borneo , which itself is divided into Bornean and Sumatran Malay; some of the most widely spoken Sumatran Malay dialects are Riau Malay , Langkat , Palembang Malay and Jambi Malay .

Minangkabau , Kerinci and Bengkulu are believed to be Sumatran Malay descendants. Meanwhile, the Jakarta dialect (known as Betawi ) also belongs to the western Malay group.

A young man speaks Kedah Malay.

The eastern varieties, classified either as dialects or creoles , are spoken in the eastern part of the Malay or Nusantara archipelago and include Makassar Malay , Manado Malay , Ambonese Malay , North Moluccan Malay , Kupang Malay , Dili Malay , and Papuan Malay .

The differences among both groups are quite observable. For example, the word kita means 'we, us' in western, but means 'I, me' in Manado, whereas 'we, us" in Manado is torang and Ambon katong (originally abbreviated from Malay kita orang 'we people'). Another difference is the lack of possessive pronouns (and suffixes) in eastern dialects. Manado uses the verb pe and Ambon pu (from Malay punya 'to have') to mark possession. So 'my name' and 'our house" are translated in western Malay as namaku and rumah kita but kita pe nama and torang pe rumah in Manado and beta pu nama , katong pu rumah in Ambon dialect.

The pronunciation may vary in western dialects, especially the pronunciation of words ending in the vowel 'a'. For example, in some parts of Malaysia and in Singapore, kita (inclusive 'we, us, our') is pronounced as /kitə/ , in Kelantan and Southern Thailand as /kitɔ/ , in Riau as /kita/ , in Palembang as /kito/ , in Betawi and Perak as /kitɛ/ and in Kedah and Perlis as /kitɑ/.

Batavian and eastern dialects are sometimes regarded as Malay creole, because the speakers are not ethnically Malay.

Examples [ edit ] Despite that statement of "all Malay speakers should be able to understand either of the translations below, which differ mostly in their choice of wording," the divergence between Indonesian and "Standard" Malay are systemic in nature and, to a certain extent, contribute to the way the two sets of speakers understand and react to the world, and are more far reaching with a discernible cognitive gap than the difference between dialects.

[ 45 ] The words for 'article', pasal and perkara , and for 'declaration', pernyataan and perisytiharan , are specific to the Indonesian and Malaysian standards, respectively, but otherwise all the words are found in both (and even those words may be found with slightly different meanings).

Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights English Malay–Indonesian Indonesian [ 48 ] Standard "Malay" [ 49 ] Universal Declaration of Human Rights Pernyataan Umum tentang Hak Asasi Manusia (General Declaration about Human Rights) Perisytiharan Hak Asasi Manusia Sejagat (Universal Declaration of Human Rights) Article 1 Pasal 1 Perkara 1 All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another in a spirit of brotherhood.

Semua orang dilahirkan merdeka dan mempunyai martabat dan hak-hak yang sama. Mereka dikaruniai akal dan hati nurani dan hendaknya bergaul satu sama lain dalam semangat persaudaraan.

Semua manusia dilahirkan bebas dan sama rata dari segi maruah dan hak-hak. Mereka mempunyai pemikiran dan perasaan hati dan hendaklah bertindak di antara satu sama lain dengan semangat persaudaraan.

(All human beings are born free and have the same dignity and rights. They are endowed with reason and conscience and should get along with each other in a spirit of brotherhood.) (All human beings are born free and are equal in dignity and rights. They have thoughts and feelings and should get along with a spirit of brotherhood.) See also [ edit ] Comparison of Standard Malay and Indonesian Indonesian language Jawi script , an Arabic alphabet for Malay Languages of Indonesia List of English words of Malay origin Malajoe Batawi Malaysian English , the English used formally in Malaysia Malaysian language Notes [ edit ] ^ also described as "Standard Brunei Malay" ^ Since the standardized varieties of Indonesia, Malaysia, Brunei and Singapore are structurally largely identical and mostly differ in lexicon and to a lesser degree in phonetic details, the umbrella terms "Malay/Indonesian" [ 15 ] or "Malay-Indonesian" [ 16 ] are often used in the linguistic literature when discussing the structure or history of the language.

References [ edit ] ^ Malay at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Malay (individual language) at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Indonesian at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Standard Malay at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Ambon Malay at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Baba Malay at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) Baba Indonesian at Ethnologue (27th ed., 2024) (Additional references under 'Language codes' in the information box) ^ Uli, Kozok (10 March 2012).

"How many people speak Indonesian" . University of Hawaii at Manoa . Retrieved 20 October 2012 .

James T. Collins ( Bahasa Sanskerta dan Bahasa Melayu , Jakarta: KPG 2009) gives a conservative estimate of approximately 200 million, and a maximum estimate of 250 million speakers of Malay (Collins 2009, p. 17).

^ "Kedah MB defends use of Jawi on signboards" .

The Star . 26 August 2008. Archived from the original on 29 October 2012.

^ Dahlan, H. Abdullah  Zaini. Kitabati, Practical Methods for Learning to Read & Write Pegon (Kitabati, Metode Praktis Belajar Membaca & Menulis Pegon). Zaini Press. Accessed April 19, 2023.

https://ia903106.us.archive.org/22/items/etaoin/Kitabati.pdf .

^ Estuningtiyas, Retna Dwi (2 May 2021).

"Rijal Dakwah: KH. Abdullah Syafi'ie (1910-1985)" .

The International Journal of Pegon: Islam Nusantara Civilization .

5 (1): 81– 96.

doi : 10.51925/inc.v5i01.45 .

ISSN 2621-4946 .

^ a b "Recognition of Bahasa Indonesia as an official language of the General Conference of UNESCO" .

unesco.org / document no. 42 C/28 . Retrieved 20 November 2023 .

^ a b "East Timor Languages" .

East Timor Government . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 July 2018 .

^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ Jones, Daniel (2011).

Roach, Peter ; Setter, Jane ; Esling, John (eds.).

Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary (18th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-15255-6 .

^ Lowenberg, Peter (1988). "Malay in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Singapore: Three Faces of a National Language". In Coulmas, Florian (ed.).

With Forked Tongues: What are National Languages Good For?

. Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma. p. 146–79.

ISBN 978-0-89720-084-4 .

^ 10 million in Malaysia as either "Malay" or " Malaysian ", 5 million in Indonesia as "Malay" plus 260 million as " Indonesian ", etc.

^ Wardhana, Dian Eka Chandra (2021).

"Indonesian as the Language of ASEAN During the New Life Behavior Change 2021" .

Journal of Social Work and Science Education .

1 (3): 266– 280.

doi : 10.52690/jswse.v1i3.114 (inactive 1 July 2025) . Retrieved 29 January 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Asmah Haji Omar (1992). "Malay as a pluricentric language". In Clyne, Michael J.

(ed.).

Malay as a pluricentric language Pluricentric Languages: Differing Norms in Different Nations . Berlin & New York: Mouton de Gruyte. pp.

403– 4.

ISBN 3-11-012855-1 .

^ See: Clynes, Adrian (2001). "Brunei Malay: An Overview".

Occasional Papers in Language Studies .

7 . Department of English Language and Applied Linguistics, Universiti Brunei Darussalam: 11– 2.

Clynes, Adrian; Deterding, David (2011).

"Standard Malay (Brunei)" .

Journal of the International Phonetic Association .

41 (2): 259– 268.

doi : 10.1017/S002510031100017X .

ISSN 0025-1003 .

JSTOR 44527038 .

^ Blust, Robert (2013).

The Austronesian Languages (revised ed.). Australian National University.

hdl : 1885/10191 .

ISBN 978-1-922185-07-5 .

^ Tadmor, Uri (2009). "Malay-Indonesian". In Bernard Comrie (ed.).

The World's Major Languages (2nd ed.). London: Routledge. pp.

791– 818.

^ Adelaar (2004) ^ Andaya, Leonard Y. (2001).

"The Search for the 'Origins' of Melayu" (PDF) .

Journal of Southeast Asian Studies .

32 (3): 315– 330.

doi : 10.1017/S0022463401000169 .

S2CID 62886471 .

^ Wurm, Stephen ; Mühlhäusler, Peter ; Tryon, Darrell T.

(1996).

Atlas of Languages of Intercultural Communication in the Pacific, Asia, and the Americas: Vol I: Maps. Vol II: Texts . Walter de Gruyter. p. 677.

ISBN 978-3-11-081972-4 .

^ "Bahasa Melayu Kuno" . Bahasa-malaysia-simple-fun.com. 15 September 2007. Archived from the original on 26 December 2010 . Retrieved 22 December 2010 .

^ Southeast Asia Digital Library: About Malay Archived 16 June 2007 at archive.today ^ Surakhman, M. Ali (23 October 2017).

"Undang-Undang Tanjung Tanah: Naskah Melayu Tertua di Dunia" .

kemdikbud.go.id (in Indonesian).

^ Sneddon, James N. (2003).

The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society . UNSW Press. p. 70.

ISBN 978-0-86840-598-8 .

^ a b Adelaar, K. Alexander (1999).

"Malay: A short history" .

South Pacific Journal of Psychology .

10 (1): 14– 24.

doi : 10.1017/S025754340000095X .

ISSN 0257-5434 .

^ a b Sneddon, James N. (2003).

The Indonesian Language: Its History and Role in Modern Society . UNSW Press. p. 62.

ISBN 978-0-86840-598-8 .

^ Ethnologue 16 classifies them as distinct languages, ISO3 kxd and meo , but states that they "are so closely related that they may one day be included as dialects of Malay".

^ "Malay (Bahasa Melayu)" .

Omniglot . Retrieved 30 August 2008 .

^ "Malay Can Be 'Language of ASEAN' " . brudirect.com. 24 October 2010 . Retrieved 22 December 2010 .

^ Salleh, Muhammad Haji (2008).

An introduction to modern Malaysian literature . Kuala Lumpur: Institut Terjemahan Negara Malaysia Berhad. pp. xvi.

ISBN 978-983-068-307-2 .

^ Omar, Asmah Haji (1971).

"Standard Language and the Standardization of Malay" .

Anthropological Linguistics .

13 (2): 75– 89.

ISSN 0003-5483 .

JSTOR 30029277 .

^ "Voice of America Bahasa Indonesia" .

Voice of America .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 April 2012 .

^ "Languages: News and Analysis in your Language" .

BBC World Service .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 April 2012 .

^ Wesley, Michael (10 June 2009).

Building an Asia-literate Australia: an Australian strategy for Asian language proficiency (Report). Australian Policy Online. Archived from the original on 2 July 2012 . Retrieved 10 July 2012 .

^ "Indonesian" .

www.australiancurriculum.edu.au .

^ a b Clynes, Adrian; Deterding, David (2011).

"Standard Malay (Brunei)" .

Journal of the International Phonetic Association .

41 (2): 259– 268.

doi : 10.1017/S002510031100017X .

.

^ Karim, Nik Safiah; M. Onn, Farid; Haji Musa, Hashim; Mahmood, Abdul Hamid (2008).

Tatabahasa Dewan (in Malay) (3 ed.). Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka . pp.

297– 303.

ISBN 978-983-62-9484-5 .

^ Hassan, Abdullah (1972).

The Morphology of Malay . University of Edinburgh.

^ Soderberg, Craig D.; Olson, Kenneth S. (2008).

"Indonesian" .

Journal of the International Phonetic Association .

38 (2): 209– 213.

doi : 10.1017/S0025100308003320 .

ISSN 1475-3502 .

^ Asmah Haji, Omar (1985).

Susur galur bahasa Melayu . Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.

^ Ahmad, Zaharani (1993).

Fonologi generatif: teori dan penerapan . Kuala Lumpur: Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka.

^ Clynes, Adrian (1997). "On the Proto-Austronesian "Diphthongs" ".

Oceanic Linguistics .

36 (2): 347– 361.

doi : 10.2307/3622989 .

JSTOR 3622989 .

^ Adelaar, K. A. (1992).

Proto Malayic: the reconstruction of its phonology and parts of its lexicon and morphology (PDF) . Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.

doi : 10.15144/pl-c119 .

ISBN 0858834081 .

OCLC 26845189 .

^ Abu Bakar, Mukhlis (18 December 2019).

"Sebutan Johor-Riau dan Sebutan Baku dalam Konteks Identiti Masyarakat Melayu Singapura" .

Issues in Language Studies .

8 (2).

doi : 10.33736/ils.1521.2019 .

ISSN 2180-2726 .

S2CID 213343934 .

^ Uri, Tadmor (2003).

"Final /a/ mutation: a borrowed areal feature in Western Austronesia" (PDF) .

Issues in Austronesian Historical Phonology (PL-550). CRCL, CRCL, And/Or The Author(S). Pacific Linguistics, The Australian National University: 15– 36.

doi : 10.15144/PL-550.15 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 – via sealang.net/CRCL.

^ a b c d e f g Omar, Asmah Haji (2008).

"MABBIM and the development of Malay minimizing geopolitical divergences" .

Malay/Indonesian as a Language of Knowledge and Practical Communication: Appraisal, Challenges and the Future . Leiden, The Netherlands.

^ Ethnologue 16 also lists Col, Haji, Kaur, Kerinci, Kubu, Lubu'.

^ "Bahasa Melayu Riau dan Bahasa Nasional" . Melayu Online. Archived from the original on 22 November 2011 . Retrieved 29 March 2012 .

^ Standard named as stated in: "Universal Declaration of Human Rights - Bahasa Indonesia (Indonesian)" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . Retrieved 17 March 2021 .

^ The other language standard aside from "Indonesian" is named simply as "Malay", as stated in: "Universal Declaration of Human Rights (Bahasa Melayu (Malay))" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .

Further reading [ edit ] Adelaar, K. Alexander (2004).

"Where does Malay come from? Twenty years of discussions about homeland, migrations and classifications" .

Bijdragen tot de Taal-, Land- en Volkenkunde .

160 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.1163/22134379-90003733 .

hdl : 11343/122869 .

JSTOR 27868100 .

B., C. O. (1939). "Corrigenda and Addenda: A Chinese Vocabulary of Malacca Malay Words and Phrases Collected between A.D. 1403 and 1511 (?)".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London .

10 (1).

JSTOR 607921 .

Braginsky, Vladimir, ed. (2013) [First published 2002].

Classical Civilizations of South-East Asia . Oxford: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-136-84879-7 .

Edwards, E. D.; Blagden, C. O. (1931). "A Chinese Vocabulary of Malacca Malay Words and Phrases Collected between A. D. 1403 and 1511 (?)".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental Studies, University of London .

6 (3): 715– 749.

doi : 10.1017/S0041977X00093204 .

JSTOR 607205 .

S2CID 129174700 .

Wilkinson, Richard James (1901–1903).

A Malay-English Dictionary . Singapore: Kelly & Walsh.

External links [ edit ] Malay  edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia Indonesian  edition of Wikipedia , the free encyclopedia Wikimedia Commons has media related to Malay language .

Wikivoyage has a phrasebook for Malay .

Look up Category:Malay language or Category:Malay derivations in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Swadesh list of Malay words Digital version of Wilkinson's 1926 Malay-English Dictionary Pusat Rujukan Persuratan Melayu , online Malay language database provided by the Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka Kamus Besar Bahasa Indonesia dalam jaringan (Online Great Dictionary of the Indonesian Language published by Pusat Bahasa, in Indonesian only) Dewan Bahasa dan Pustaka (Institute of Language and Literature Malaysia, in Malay only) The Malay Spelling Reform , Asmah Haji Omar, (Journal of the Simplified Spelling Society, 1989-2 pp. 9–13 later designated J11) Malay Chinese Dictionary Malay English Dictionary Malay English Translation Links to related articles v t e Languages of Indonesia Western Malayo-Polynesian languages Official language Indonesian Slang Malayo-Sumbawan Bali–Sasak–Sumbawa Balinese Bali Aga Lombok Nusa Penida Sasak Sumbawa Chamic Acehnese Daya South Ibanic Iban Mualang Seberuang Keninjal Madurese Bangkalan Bawean Kangean Pendalungan Banyuwangi Lumajang Pasuruan Situbondo Sapudi Sumenep Malayic Akit Ampenan Malay Anambas–Natuna Malay Asahan Malay Bangka Malay Banjarese Hulu Kuala Samarinda Batubara Malay Belitung Malay Bengkayang Malay Berau Malay Bilah Malay Bonai Bukit Deli Malay Medan Duano' Haji Jambi Malay Kuala Tungkal Jaring Halus Malay Kapuas Hulu Malay Kendayan Kerinci Kota Pinang Malay Kotawaringin Malay Kualuh Malay Kubu Kutainese Kota Bangun Tenggarong Landak Malay Langkat Malay Lom Loncong Lubu Malayic Dayak Arut Bamayo Banana' Belantikan Delang Gerunggang Ketapang/Kayong Lamandau Mentebah-Suruk Pesaguan Hulu Pesaguan Kiri Riam Semitau Suhaid Sukamara Tamuan-Tomun Tapitn Melawi Malay Mempawah Malay Musi Belide Col/Lembak Lematang Musi Palembang Pegagan Penesak Penukal Rawas Minangkabau Jamee Kampar Kuantan Mukomuko Pesisir Rao Tapan Ulu Muara Sipongi Orang Laut Barok Galang Mantang Palu Malay Panai Malay Petalangan Pontianak Malay Riau Malay Pangaraian Riau Coastal Rokan Hilir Siak Tembilahan Sakai Sambas Malay Sanggau Malay Sekadau Malay Serdang Malay Sintang Malay Sokop South Barisan Malay Benakat Bengkulu Besemah Enim Lematang Ulu Lintang Kaur Ogan Pekal Rambang Semende Serawai Talang Mamak Tamiang Malay Tolitoli Malay Sundanese Baduy Banten Brebes Cirebon Northern Coast Bekasi Priangan Javanese Arekan Banyumasan Cirebonese Indramayu Kawi Osing Samin Serang Tegal Tenggerese Celebic Andio Bada Bahonsuai Balaesang Balantak Banggai Batui Behoa Boano Bobongko Bonerate Bungku Busoa Cia-Cia Dampelas Dondo Kalao Kaili Ledo Kaimbulawa Kamaru Kodeoha Kulisusu Kumbewaha Lasalimu Laiyolo Lauje Liabuku Lindu Mbelala Moronene Mori Bawah Mori Atas Moma Muna Napu Padoe Pancana Pendau Rahambuu Rampi Saluan Sarudu Sedoa Pamona Taje Tajio Tukang Besi Tolaki Tomadino Topoiyo Tomini Totoli Uma Waru Wawonii Wolio Wotu Lampungic Api/Pesisir Cikoneng Komering Kayuagung Nyo/Pepadun Northwest Sumatra– Barrier Islands Batak Alas Angkola Dairi Karo Mandailing Simalungun Toba Enggano Gayo Mentawai Nasal Nias Simeulue Devayan Haloban Leukon Simolol Sigulai South Sulawesi Aralle-Tabulahan Bambam Bentong Budong-Budong Buginese Campalagian Coastal Konjo Dakka Duri Embaloh Enrekang Highland Konjo Kalumpang Lemolang Maiwa Makassarese Malimpung Mamasa Pattae' Mamuju Mandar Panasuan Pannei Selayar Seko Padang Seko Tengah Tae’ Talondo’ Taman Toraja-Sa’dan Ulumanda’ Barito Ampanang Bakumpai Berangas Bajau Deyah Kohin Lawangan Ma'anyan Dusun Balangan Malang Ngaju Ot Danum Sama Ot Siang Tunjung Witu Pakau Kayan–Murik Aoheng Aput Bahau Hovongan Kayan Krio Modang Punan Merah Segai Land Dayak Bakati’ Biatah Bukar Sadong Jangkang Kembayan Laraʼ Nyadu’ Rejangese Ribun Sanggau Sara Semandang Beginci Gerai Tringgus North Bornean Bah-Biau Basap Bukat Bukitan Kelabit Kenyah Mainstream Lengilu Lun Bawang Murut Okolod Selungai Sembakung Tagol Punan Merap Punan Tubu Sa'ban Sajau Tidung Burusu Kalabakan Nonukan Philippine languages Central Philippine Tausug Gorontalo-Mongondow Bintauna Bolango Buol Gorontaloan Polahi Kaidipang Lolak Mongondow Ponosakan Suwawa Minahasan Tombulu Tondano Tonsawang Tonsea Tontemboan Sangiric Bantik Ratahan Sangir Talaud Miangas Central–Eastern Malayo-Polynesian languages Aru Barakai Batuley Dobel Karey Koba Kola-Kompane Lola Lorang Manombai Mariri Tarangan Ujir Central Maluku Alune Amahai Ambelau Asilulu Banda Bati Benggoi Boano Bobot Buru Geser Haruku Hulaliu Kailolo Pelauw Rohomoni-Kabauw Hitu Hoti † Huaulu Hukumina † Hulung † Kaibobo Kamarian † Kayeli Kowiai Laha Larike-Wakasihu Latu Liana-Seti Lisabata-Nuniali Lisela Loun † Luhu † Mangole Manipa Manusela Masiwang Naka'ela Nuaulu Nusa Laut † Paulohi Salas Saleman Saparua Seit-Kaitetu Sepa-Teluti Sula Taliabo Teor-Kur Tulehu Watubela Wemale Yalahatan Flores–Lembata Alorese Kedang Lamaholot Adonara Ile Ape Lamalera Lamatuka Levuka Lewo Eleng Lewotobi South Lembata West Lembata Sika Halmahera- Cenderawasih Ambai Ambel Ansus Arguni As Bedoanas Biak Biga Buli Busami Dusner Erokwanas Gane Irarutu Iresim Kuri Kurudu Maba Maden Matbat Ma'ya Munggui Marau Meoswar Mor Papuma Patani Pom Roon Sawai Serui-Laut Taba Tandia † Wabo Wamesa Wandamen Waropen Woi Yaur Yeretuar Yeresiam Kei-Tanimbar Fordata Kei Onin Sekar Uruangnirin Yamdena Micronesian Mapia † Selaru Selaru Seluwasan Sumba–Flores Anakalangu Baliledo Bima Donggo Dhao Ende Gaura Hawu Kambera Kéo Kodi Komodo Lamboya Lio Mamboru Manggarai Nage Ngadha Palu'e Pondok Rajong Rembong Riung Rongga So'a Kepo' Wae Rana Wanukaka Wejewa Timor–Babar Amarasi Bekais Bilba Dai Dawera-Daweloor Dela-Oenale Dengka East Damar Emplawas Galoli Helong Imroing Kemak Kisar Leti Lole Luang Masela Nila North Babar Ringgou Romang Serili Serua Southeast Babar Tela'a Termanu Tetum Te'un Tii Uab Meto West Damar Welaun Wetar Western Oceanic Anus Bonggo Kayupulau Liki Masimasi Ormu Podena Kaptiau Sobei Tarpia Tobati Wakde Yamna Papuan languages North Halmahera Galela Gamkonora Kao Loloda Modole Pagu Sahu Tabaru Ternate Tidore Tobelo Togutil Waioli West Makian Timor–Alor–Pantar Abui Adang Blagar Bunak Kaera Kafoa Kamang Klon Kui Kula Nedebang Oirata Retta Sawila Teiwa Wersing Western Pantar Woisika Asmat–Mombum Buruwai Casuarina Coast Asmat Central Asmat North Asmat Citak Mombum Kamberau Kamoro Koneraw Sempan West Bird's Head Kalabra Kuwani Moi Moraid Seget Tehit South Bird's Head Arandai Dombano Duriankari Inanwatan Kaburi Kais Kemberano Kokoda Konda Kovojab Puragi Yahadian East Bird's Head Hatam Mansim Meyah Moskona Sougb West Bomberai Baham Iha Karas Dani Grand Valley Dani Hupla Nduga Nggem Silimo Walak Wano Western Dani Yali Paniai Lakes Auye Dao Ekari Moni Wolani Digul River Aghu Awbono Bayono Densar Edera Jair Kombai Komyandaret Korowai Mandobo Pisa Sawi Shiaxa Tsaukambo Wambon Foja Range Airoran Bagusa Berik Betaf Bonerif Dabe Dineor Edwas Gresi Isirawa Itik Kapori Kauwera Keijar Kemtuik Kwerba Kwerba Mamberamo Kwesten Kwinsu Mander Massep Mawes † Mekwei Mlap Namblong Nimboran Orya Sause Oksapmin Samarokena Trimuris Vitou Lakes Plain Awera Biritai Doutai Duvle Eritai Fayu Foau Iau Kaiy Keuw Kirikiri Kwerisa Obokuitai Papasena Rasawa Sikaritai Tause Taworta Waritai East Cenderawasih Bay Baropasi Bauzi Burate Demisa Kofei Nisa-Anasi Sauri Tefaro Tunggare Woria Yawa Saweru Yawa Demta–Sentani Demta Nafri Sentani Tabla Ok Burumakok Faiwol Iwur Kopka Muyu Nakai Ngalum Ninggerum Tangko Tifal Yonggom Momuna–Mek Eipo Goliath Ketengban Kosarek Korupun Nalca Nipsan Somahai Skou Sangke Skou South Pauwasi Biksi-Yetfa Kembra Kimki Lepki Murkim East Pauwasi Emem Zorop West Pauwasi Namla Tebi Tofanma Towei Usku Kaure–Kosare Kaure Kosare Marind–Yaqai Bipim Marind Yaqay Bulaka River Maklew Yelmek Kayagar Atohwaim Kayagar Tamagario Border Awyi Elseng Taikat Manem Sowanda Viid Waris Senagi Dera Mairasi Mairasi Mer Semimi Kolopom Kimaghama Morori Ndom Riantana Yam Ngkolmpu Kanum Rema Smerki Tamer Yei Lower Mamberamo Warembori Yoke Unclassfied or language isolates Abinomn Abun Amung Burmeso Dem Kanum Maklew Maybrat Molof Momina Mor Mpur Pyu Saponi † Sumuri Tambora † Uhunduni Other languages Creoles and Pidgins Malay-based creoles Alor Malay Ambonese Malay Aru Tenggara Jauh Banda Malay Balinese Malay Betawi Gorap Gorontalo Malay Kupang Malay Larantuka Malay Manado Malay Makassar Malay Maumere Malay North Moluccan Malay Sula Ternate Orang Pulo Papuan Malay Northwest Serui Peranakan Surabayan Other creoles and pidgins Bidau Creole Portuguese † Flores Creole Portuguese † Javindo Mardijker † Petjo Pidgin Iha Pidgin Onin Pidgin Tukang Besi Portugis † Tansi Tiong Pa Immigrant languages Chinese Cantonese Fuqing Fuzhounese Hainanese Hakka Acehnese Bangka-Belitung Pontianak Singkawang Haklau Hokkien Bagan Batam Medan Hinghwa Mandarin Indonesian Siantar Teochew Batam Jambi Ketapang Pontianak European Dutch Indonesian Dutch English Portuguese Indian Bengali Gujarati Odia Pali Punjabi Sanskrit Sindhi Tamil Telugu Urdu Middle Eastern Arabic Indonesian Arabic Hadhrami Arabic Modern Standard Arabic Others Tagalog Filipino Japanese Korean Sign languages Indonesian Sign Languages Kata Kolok † indicate extinct languages v t e Languages of Malaysia Main Official Malaysian English comparison with British English Arabic Families Austroasiatic Aslian Austronesian North Bornean Kayan–Murik Land Dayak Malayic Philippine Sama–Bajaw Tai-Kadai Tai Natives & Indigenous Nationwide Malay Peninsular Malaysia Batek Cheq Wong Duanoʼ Jah Hut Jahai Jakun Jedek Johor–Riau Malay Johor Malay Malacca Malay Selangor Malay Judeo-Malay 2 Kedah Malay Kelantan-Pattani Malay Kenaboi 1 Kensiu Kintaq Kristang Lanoh Mah Meri Minriq Mintil Negeri Sembilan Malay Mos Orang Kanaq Orang Seletar Pahang Malay Perak Malay Reman Malay Sabüm 1 Semai Semaq Beri Semelai Semnam Southern Thai Temiar Temoq 2 Temuan Terengganu Malay Wila' 1 East Malaysia Abai Bahau Bajau Belait Berawan Biatah Bintulu Bonggi Bookan Bruneian/Kedayan Malay Brunei Bisaya Bukar–Sadong Bukitan Coastal Kadazan Daro-Matu Dumpas Dusun Eastern Kadazan Ganaʼ Iban Ida'an Jagoi Jangkang Kajaman Kalabakan Kanowit Kayan Kelabit Kendayan Keningau Murut Kinabatangan Kiput Klias River Kadazan Kota Marudu Talantang Kuijau Lahanan Lelak 1 Lengilu 1 Lotud Lun Bawang Mainstream Kenyah Melanau Momogun Murik Kayan Narom Nonukan Tidong Okolod Paluan Papar Punan Bah-Biau Punan Batu 2 Penan Remun Sa'ban Sabah Bisaya Sama Sarawak Malay Sebop Sekapan Selungai Murut Sembakung Seru 1 Serudung Sian Sungai Tagol Timugon Tombonuwo Tring Tringgus Tutoh Ukit 2 Umaʼ Lasan Significant minority Chinese Sino-Tibetan Yue Cantonese Malaysian Cantonese Hakka Min Eastern Min Fuqing Fuzhou Hainanese Pu-Xian Min Southern Min Hokkien Southern Peninsular Malaysian Hokkien Penang Hokkien Chaoshan Min Teochew Mandarin Chinese Malaysian Mandarin Indian Dravidian Malayalam Tamil Malaysian Tamil Telugu Indo-European Gujarati Hindi Punjabi Urdu Indonesian archipelago Acehnese Banjar Madurese Bawean Buginese Javanese Kerinci Mandailing Minangkabau Rawa Philippine Philippine Iranun Maranao Molbog Suluk Others Cham Creoles Chavacano Kristang Manglish Malay trade and creole languages Baba Malay Chetty Malay Cocos Malay Sabah Malay Mixed & Others Rojak Tanglish Esperanto Immigrants African Arabic Bengali Burmese Khmer East Timorese Filipino Indonesian comparison with Malaysian Persian Japanese Korean Lao Nepalese Urdu Sri Lankan Thai Vietnamese Signs Main Malaysian Sign Language Manually Coded Malay By states Penang Sign Language Selangor Sign Language 1 Extinct languages 2 Nearly extinct languages v t e Languages of Singapore Main languages National Malay Official English Malay Mandarin Tamil Indigenous languages Johor-Riau Malay Orang Seletar Creole languages Baba Malay Bazaar Malay Chitty Malay Kristang Singlish Immigrant languages Chinese Sinitic Cantonese Hainanese Hakka Henghwa Hokchew Hokkien Teochew Indian Dravidian Malayalam Telugu Indo-Aryan Bengali Gujarati Hindi Punjabi Sindhi Sinhala Indonesian Acehnese Banjarese Batak Angkola Mandailing Toba Baweanese Buginese Javanese Minangkabau Other Arabic Armenian Burmese Filipino Japanese Korean Nepali Thai Vietnamese Sign languages Singaporean Sign Language v t e Languages of Sri Lanka Official languages Sinhala Tamil Others Sri Lankan Tamil Sri Lankan English 1 Sri Lankan Malay Pali 2 Sri Lankan Portuguese Creole Vedda Sri Lankan sign languages Formerly spoken and extinct Arwi Ceylon Creole Dutch Rodiya 3 1 Recognized as a "link" language 2 a liturgical language 3 a dialect of Sinhala v t e Languages of Brunei Official language Malay Lingua franca Brunei Malay English Minority languages Belait Chinese Dusun Bisaya Iban Lun Bawang Melanau Berawan Tutong Tamil Sian Penan-Nibong v t e Languages of Thailand Official language Thai Other Thais Lao–Phutai Isan Phu Thai Chiang Saen Northern Thai Tai Lü Phuan Thai Song Sukhothai Southern Thai Northwestern Khün Shan Tai Nüa Minority by languages groups Austroasiatic Bru Chong Chung Jahai Kensiu Khmer Northern Western Kintaq Kuy Mlabri Mon Nyah Kur Palaung Ten'edn Thavung Vietnamese Austronesian Cham Malay Bangkok Malay Pattani Malay Satun Malay Moken Moklen Urak Lawoi’ Hmong–Mien Hmong Iu Mien Sino-Tibetan Akha Eastern Pwo Lisu Sinitic Cantonese Teochew Hakka Hokkien Hainanese Hokchew Nuosu Mpi Northern Pwo Phrae Pwo Red Karen (Eastern Kayah) S'gaw Karen Ugong Non-Indigenous Immigrant language Burmese Hindi Punjabi Russian Southwestern Mandarin Working language English Japanese Korean Sign languages Thai Sign Language Ban Khor Sign v t e Nuclear Malayo-Polynesian languages Malayo-Sumbawan Sundanese Sundanese ( Bantenese , Baduy ) Madurese Kangean Madurese Malayo-Chamic Chamic Acehnese Cham dialects Chru Haroi Jarai Rade Roglai Tsat (Utsat) Malayic Bamayo Banjar Brunei/Kedayan Malay Berau Malay Bangka Malay Bengkulu Col Duano' Haji Iban Jambi Malay Jakun Kedah Malay Kutai Malay Kaur Kerinci Kelantan-Pattani Malay (Yawi) Kendayan Keninjal Kubu Orang Laut Lubu Malay ( Malaysian & Indonesian ) Minangkabau Musi Mualang Orang Kanaq Orang Seletar Pahang Malay Pekal Perak Malay Remun Sarawak Malay Seberuang Temuan Terengganu Malay Urak Lawoi' Bali–Sasak Balinese Sasak Sumbawa Northwest Sumatra– Barrier Islands Enggano Gayo Mentawai Nias Sikule Simeulue Batak Alas Batak Angkola Batak Dairi Batak Karo Batak Simalungun Batak Toba Mandailing Lampungic Lampung Api Lampung Nyo Komering Celebic Andio Badaic Bahonsuai Balaesang Balantak Banggai Batui Boano Bobongko Bonerate Bungku Busoa Cia-Cia Dampelas Dondo Kalao Kaili Kaimbulawa Kamaru Kodeoha Kulisusu Kumbewaha Lasalimu Laiyolo Lauje Liabuku Mbelala Moronene Mori Bawah Mori Atas Moma Muna Padoe Pancana Pendau Rahambuu Rampi Saluan Sarudu Sedoa Pamona Taje Tajio Tukang Besi Tolaki Tomadino Topoiyo Tomini Totoli Uma Waru Wawonii Wolio Wotu South Sulawesi Aralle-Tabulahan Bambam Bentong Budong-Budong Buginese Campalagian Coastal Konjo Dakka Duri Embaloh Enrekang Highland Konjo Kalumpang Lemolang Maiwa (Sulawesi) Makassarese Malimpung Mamasa Mamuju Mandar Panasuan Pannei Selayar Seko Padang Seko Tengah Tae’ Talondo’ Taman Toraja-Sa’dan Ulumanda’ Moklenic Moken Moklen Javanese Arekan Banyumasan Mataraman Kawi ( Old Javanese ) Kedu Osing Tenggerese Central–Eastern Malayo-Polynesian (over 700 languages) Eastern Malayo-Polynesian groups South Halmahera–West New Guinea Oceanic languages Central Malayo-Polynesian linkages Aru Central Maluku Kei-Tanimbar Kowiai Selaru Sumba–Flores Teor–Kur Timoric West Damar Unclassified Chamorro Hukumina † Palauan Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Malay_language&oldid=1305350946 " Categories : Malay language Languages attested from the 7th century Lingua francas Agglutinative languages Languages of Brunei Languages of Indonesia Languages of Malaysia Languages of Thailand Languages of Singapore Languages of Sumatra Languages of Aceh Hidden categories: Language articles citing Ethnologue 27 CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 Indonesian-language sources (id) CS1 Malay-language sources (ms) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2014 Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Pages with Malay (macrolanguage) IPA Language articles with Linguasphere code Languages with ISO 639-2 code Languages with ISO 639-1 code ISO language articles citing sources other than Ethnologue Articles containing Indonesian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Pages with plain IPA Articles with unsourced statements from March 2012 Articles to be expanded from July 2019 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles needing additional references from February 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Malay language 141 languages Add topic

