Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Blood agar 2.1.1 Blood agar plate 2.1.2 Chocolate agar 2.1.3 Thayer–Martin agar 2.1.4 Thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose agar 2.2 General bacterial media 2.3 Fungal media 2.4 Moss media 2.5 Yeast media 2.6 Mega Plate 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Agar plate 17 languages العربية Dansk Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa മലയാളം 日本語 Polski Simple English Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Petri dish with agar used to culture microbes Agar plate An agar culture of E. coli colonies Uses Microbiological culture Art Related items Petri dish Growth medium Contamination on an agar plate An agar plate is a Petri dish that contains a growth medium solidified with agar , used to culture microorganisms . Sometimes selective compounds are added to influence growth, such as antibiotics .

[ 1 ] 96 pinner used to perform spot assays with yeast, fungal or bacterial cells Individual microorganisms placed on the plate will grow into individual colonies , each a clone genetically identical to the individual ancestor organism (except for the low, unavoidable rate of mutation ). Thus, the plate can be used either to estimate the concentration of organisms in a liquid culture or a suitable dilution of that culture using a colony counter , or to generate genetically pure cultures from a mixed culture of genetically different organisms.

Several methods are available to plate out cells. One technique is known as " streaking ". In this technique, a drop of the culture on the end of a thin, sterile loop of wire, sometimes known as an inoculator, is streaked across the surface of the agar leaving organisms behind, a higher number at the beginning of the streak and a lower number at the end. At some point during a successful "streak", the number of organisms deposited will be such that distinct individual colonies will grow in that area which may be removed for further culturing, using another sterile loop.

Another way of plating organisms, next to streaking, on agar plates is the spot analysis . This type of analysis is often used to check the viability of cells and is performed with pinners (often also called froggers). A third technique is using sterile glass beads to plate out cells. In this technique, cells are grown in a liquid culture, in which a small volume is pipetted on the agar plate and then spread out with the beads.

Replica plating is another technique used to plate out cells on agar plates. These four techniques are the most common, but others are also possible. It is crucial to work in a sterile manner to prevent contamination on the agar plates.

[ 1 ] Plating is thus often done in a laminar flow cabinet or on the working bench next to a bunsen burner .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] In 1881, Fanny Hesse , who was working as a technician for her husband Walther Hesse in the laboratory of Robert Koch , suggested agar as an effective setting agent, since it had been commonplace in jam making for some time.

[ 3 ] Types [ edit ] An agar plate being viewed in an electronic colony counter Example of a workup algorithm of possible bacterial infection in cases with no specifically requested targets (non-bacteria, mycobacteria etc.), with most common situations and agents seen in a New England community hospital setting. Different agar plates are used for different specimen sources, as seen in the upper left quadrant.

Like other growth media , the formulations of agar used in plates may be classified as either "defined" or "undefined"; a defined medium is synthesized from individual chemicals required by the organism so the exact molecular composition is known, whereas an undefined medium is made from natural products such as yeast extract , where the precise composition is unknown.

[ 4 ] Agar plates may be formulated as either permissive, with the intent of allowing the growth of whatever organisms are present, or restrictive or selective, with the intent of only allowing the growth of a particular subset of those organisms.

[ 5 ] This may take the form of a nutritional requirement, for instance providing a particular compound such as lactose as the only source of carbon and thereby selecting only organisms which can metabolize that compound, or by including a particular antibiotic or other substance to select only organisms which are resistant to that substance. This correlates to some degree with defined and undefined media; undefined media, made from natural products and containing an unknown combination of very many organic molecules, is typically more permissive in terms of supplying the needs of a wider variety of organisms. In contrast, defined media can be precisely tailored to select organisms with specific properties.

Agar plates may also be indicator plates, in which the organisms are not selected based on growth, but are instead distinguished by a color change in some colonies, typically caused by the action of an enzyme on some compound added to the medium.

[ 6 ] The plates are incubated for 12 hours up to several days, depending on the test that is performed.

Commonly used types of agar plates include: Red blood cells on an agar plate are used to diagnose infection . On the left is a positive Staphylococcus infection, on the right a positive Streptococcus culture.

Blood agar [ edit ] Hemolyses of Streptococcus spp.

(left) α-hemolysis ( S. mitis ); (middle) β-hemolysis ( S. pyogenes ); (right) γ-hemolysis (= nonhemolytic, S. salivarius ) Blood agar plate [ edit ] Blood agar plates (BAPs) contain mammalian blood (usually sheep or horse), typically at a 5–10% concentration. BAPs are enriched, and differential media is used to isolate fastidious organisms and detect hemolytic activity. β-Hemolytic activity will show lysis and complete digestion of red blood cell contents surrounding a colony. Examples include Streptococcus haemolyticus . α-Hemolysis will only cause partial lysis of the red blood cells (the cell membrane is left intact) and appear green or brown due to the conversion of hemoglobin to methemoglobin. An example of this would be Streptococcus viridans . γ-Hemolysis (or nonhemolytic) is the term referring to a lack of hemolytic activity.

[ 7 ] BAPs also contain meat extract or yeast extract , tryptone , sodium chloride , and agar.

[ 8 ] Chocolate agar [ edit ] Chocolate agar is a type of blood agar plate in which the blood cells have been lysed by heating the cells to 80 °C. It is used for growing fastidious respiratory bacteria, such as Haemophilus influenzae . Chocolate agar is named for its color, and no chocolate is contained in the plate.

Thayer–Martin agar [ edit ] Thayer–Martin agar is a chocolate agar designed to isolate Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Neisseria meningitidis .

Thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose agar [ edit ] Thiosulfate–citrate–bile salts–sucrose agar enhances growth of Vibrio spp.

, including Vibrio cholerae .

[ 9 ] General bacterial media [ edit ] Four types of agar plate demonstrating differential growth depending on bacterial metabolism Bile esculin agar is used for the isolation of Enterococcus and group D Streptococcus species .

CLED agar – cysteine , lactose , electrolyte-deficient agar  is used to isolate and differentiate urinary tract bacteria, since it inhibits Proteus species swarming and can distinguish between lactose fermenters and nonfermenters.

Granada medium is used to isolate and differentiate group B Streptococcus , Streptococcus agalactiae from clinical samples. It grows in Granada medium as red colonies, and most of the accompanying bacteria are inhibited.

Hektoen enteric agar is designed to isolate and recover fecal bacteria of the family Enterobacteriaceae . It is particularly useful in isolating Salmonella and Shigella .

Lysogeny broth is used to culture Escherichia coli .

[ 10 ] MacConkey agar is a selective and differential medium used to differentiate between gram-negative bacteria while inhibiting the growth of gram-positive bacteria. Adding bile salts and crystal violet to the agar inhibits the growth of most gram-positive bacteria, making MacConkey agar selective. Lactose and neutral red are added to differentiate the lactose fermenters, which form pink colonies, from lactose nonfermenters that form clear colonies. An alternative medium, eosin methylene blue serves a similar purpose.

[ 11 ] Mannitol salt agar is also a selective and differential medium. The mannitol indicates organisms that ferment mannitol: mannitol fermentation produces lactic acid , lowering the pH and turning the plate yellow. The salt is to select for halophiles ; organisms that cannot withstand a high salt content are unable to grow well.

Mueller–Hinton agar contains beef infusion, peptone, and starch , and is used primarily for antibiotic susceptibility testing. It can be in a form of blood agar .

Nutrient agar is usually used for growth of nonfastidious organisms and observation of pigment production. It is safe to use in school science laboratories because it does not selectively grow pathogenic bacteria.

Önöz agar allows more rapid bacteriological diagnosis, as Salmonella and Shigella colonies can be clearly and reliably differentiated from other Enterobacteriaceae. The yields of Salmonella from stool samples obtained, when using this medium, are higher than those obtained with LEIFSON agar or Salmonella–Shigella agar.

Phenylethyl alcohol agar selects for Staphylococcus species while inhibiting Gram-negative bacilli (e.g., Escherichia coli , Shigella , Proteus , etc.).

R2A agar , a nonspecific medium,  imitates water, so is used for water analysis.

Tryptic (trypticase) soy agar (TSA) is a general-purpose medium produced by enzymatic digestion of soybean meal and casein . It is frequently the base medium of other agar types; for example, blood agar plates are made by enriching TSA plates with blood. TSA plates support growth of many semifastidious bacteria, including some species of Brucella , Corynebacterium , Listeria , Neisseria , and Vibrio .

Xylose - lysine - deoxycholate agar is used for the culture of stool samples and contains two indicators. It is formulated to inhibit Gram-positive bacteria, while the growth of Gram-negative bacilli is encouraged. The colonies of lactose fermenters appear yellow. It is also used to culture possible Salmonella that may be present in a food sample. Most Salmonella colonies produce a black centre on it.

Cetrimide agar is used for the selective isolation of the Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa .

Tinsdale agar contains potassium tellurite , which can isolate Corynebacterium diphteriae .

[ 9 ] Fungal media [ edit ] Sabouraud agar is used to culture fungi and has a low pH that inhibits the growth of most bacteria; it also contains the antibiotic gentamicin to specifically inhibit the growth of Gram-negative bacteria.

Hay infusion agar is specific for the culturing of slime moulds (which are not fungi).

Potato dextrose agar is used to culture certain types of fungi.

Malt extract agar has a high content of peptone and is acidic. It is essentially used in the isolation of fungal microorganisms.

MMN (Modified Melin-Norkrans) medium and BAF medium are used for ectomycorrhizal fungi.

Chromogenic agars can distinguish some major types of fungal infection.

Bottom view of a Sabouraud agar plate with a colony of Trichophyton rubrum var.

rodhaini CHROMAgar (a chromogenic agar ) with its distinctive presentation of some major fungal pathogens.

Fungi ( ascomycetes ) growing in axenic cultures , each of which is a culture of one selected organism and is free of all other organisms, enabling study of the cultured organism in isolation Aspergillus niger growing on potato dextrose agar Moss media [ edit ] Knop agar is used to axenically culture protonema and whole moss plants, such as those of Physcomitrella patens , a model organism .

[ 12 ] Yeast media [ edit ] the yeast Candida albicans growing both as yeast cells and filamentous cells on YPD agar YEPD media is often used as a general growth media for yeasts like Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans Sporulation medium is medium used when spores have to be formed. It can also be used when working with fungi or bacteria depending on whether or not the strain is capable of forming spores.

Mega Plate [ edit ] A 2' x 4' petri plate filled with 14L (liters) of seaweed derived agar medium created by Harvard scientists that was used to see how E. coli evolved to be resistant to antibiotics. The mega plate also helped study more unique concepts of microbiology such as parallel evolution, mutation selection, colonial interference etc.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Microbial art Viral plaque Different specific types of agar: Casein nutrient agar MRS agar New York City Agar References [ edit ] ^ a b Madigan M, Martinko J, eds. (2005).

Brock Biology of Microorganisms (11th ed.). Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-144329-1 .

^ Sanders, Erin R. (11 May 2012).

"Aseptic Laboratory Techniques: Plating Methods" .

Journal of Visualized Experiments (63): e3064.

doi : 10.3791/3064 .

PMC 4846335 .

PMID 22617405 .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2018 .

^ "History of the agar plate" .

Laboratory News . Archived from the original on 11 February 2010 . Retrieved 2010-02-22 .

^ Baron S; et al., eds. (1996).

Baron's Medical Microbiology (4th ed.).

University of Texas Medical Branch.

ISBN 0-9631172-1-1 .

(via NCBI Bookshelf) .

^ Ryan KJ; Ray CG, eds. (2004).

Sherris Medical Microbiology (4th ed.). McGraw Hill.

ISBN 0-8385-8529-9 .

^ "Indicator Plates" . Retrieved 12 July 2018 .

^ "Blood Agar Plates and Hemolysis Protocols" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-02 . Retrieved 2014-10-28 .

^ "Blood Agar- Composition, Preparation, Uses and Pictures" , Microbiology Info.com ^ a b Fisher, Bruce; Harvey, Richard P.; Champe, Pamela C. (2007).

Lippincott's Illustrated Reviews: Microbiology (Lippincott's Illustrated Reviews Series) . Hagerstwon, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.

ISBN 978-0-7817-8215-9 .

^ Miller, J. H. (1972). Experiments in molecular genetics. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, New York.

^ Jung, Benjamin; Hoilat, Gilles J. (2022), "MacConkey Medium" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 32491326 , retrieved 2022-12-12 ^ Reski, Ralf ; Abel, Wolfgang O. (1985).

"Induction of budding on chloronemata and caulonemata of the moss, Physcomitrella patens, using isopentenyladenine" .

Planta .

165 (3): 354– 358.

Bibcode : 1985Plant.165..354R .

doi : 10.1007/bf00392232 .

PMID 24241140 .

S2CID 11363119 .

^ "A cinematic approach to drug resistance" .

Harvard Gazette . 2016-09-08 . Retrieved 2021-04-08 .

External links [ edit ] The Wikibook School Science has a page on the topic of: Agar plate Wikimedia Commons has media related to Agar plates .

Video of sheep blood agar preparation Science Buddies – All About Agar Video on aseptic plating methods Video on how to use glass beads to plate out samples v t e Laboratory equipment General Heaters Dryers Alcohol burner Bunsen burner Desiccator Heating mantle Hot plate Lab oven Kiln Meker–Fisher burner Striker Teclu burner Water bath Vacuum dry box Mixers Shakers Chemostat Homogenizer Liquid whistle Magnetic stirrer Mortar and pestle Shaker Sonicator Static mixer Stirring rod Vortex mixer Wash bottle Stands Clamps Holders Beaker clamp Clamp holder Tripod Burette clamp Extension clamp Flask clamp Funnel support Iron ring Pinch clamp Retort stand Screw clamp Test tube holder Test tube rack Wire gauze Lab drying rack Containers Storage Agar plate Cryogenic storage dewar Incubator Laminar flow cabinet Microtiter plate Petri dish Picotiter plate Refrigerator Weighing boat Weighing dish Other items Aspirator Autoclave Balance brush Cork borer Crucible Filter paper File Forceps Centrifuge Microscope Pipeclay triangle Spectrophotometer Splint Stopper Scoopula Spatula Test tube brush Wire brush Inoculation needle Inoculation loop Glassware Apparatus Dean–Stark Soxhlet extractor Kipp's Bottles Boston round Condensers Cold finger Liebig Dishes Evaporating Petri Syracuse Watch glass Flasks Büchner Vacuum (Dewar) Erlenmeyer Fernbach Fleaker Florence Retort Round-bottom Schlenk Volumetric Funnels Büchner Hirsch Dropping Separatory Measuring devices Burette Conical measure Cuvette Eye dropper Eudiometer Graduated cylinder Ostwald viscometer Pipette Tubes Drying Cragie Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Test Thiele Thistle Other items Beaker Bell jar Gas syringe Vial Analytical chemistry Compositional AutoAnalyzer CHN analyzer Colorimeter Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) device Gas chromatograph (GC) Liquid chromatograph (LC) Mass spectrometer (MS) pH indicator pH meter Microscopy Scanning electron microscope (SEM) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) Thermochemistry Calorimeter differential scanning Melting-point apparatus Thermometer Thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) Other items Analytical balance Colony counter Spiral plater Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument Plate reader Electronics Control devices Bench power supply Current source Voltage source Function generator Galvanostat Pulse generator Potentiostat Measurement Ammeter Logic analyzer Multimeter Network analyzer Oscilloscope Spectrum analyzer Time-domain reflectometer Transistor tester Voltmeter Tools Heat gun Soldering iron Tweezers Wire stripper General Alligator clip Test probe Safety Personal protective equipment (PPE) Lab coat Face shield Respirator Rubber apron Safety shower Eye and hand Acid-resistant gloves Eyewash station Glove box Medical gloves Nitrile gloves Safety glasses Safety goggles Other items Biosafety cabinet Fire blanket Fire extinguisher Fume hood Safety cabinet Solvent cabinet Instruments used in medical laboratories v t e Growth media / agar plates Selective media Gram positive Actinomycetota Mycobacterium tuberculosis Löwenstein–Jensen medium Middlebrook 7H9 Broth Middlebrook 7H10 Agar Middlebrook 7H11 Agar Mycoplasma pneumoniae Eaton's agar Bacillota Corynebacterium diphtheriae Hoyle's agar Enterococcus Bile esculin agar Lactobacillus MRS agar Lactococcus M17 agar Staphylococcus Mannitol salt agar Baird-Parker agar Vogel–Johnson agar Gram negative Alphaproteobacteria Brucella Brucella agar Farrell's medium Betaproteobacteria Neisseria Thayer–Martin agar New York City agar Gammaproteobacteria Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans Tryptic soy-serum-bacitracin-vancomycin Bordetella Bordet–Gengou agar Enterobacteriaceae VRBD agar Haemophilus influenzae / Legionella pneumophila Buffered charcoal yeast extract agar Pseudomonas aeruginosa Cetrimide agar Salmonella XLT agar DCA agar Salmonella / Shigella XLD agar Differential media Lactose fermenting gram negative MacConkey agar / Sorbitol-MacConkey agar Eosin methylene blue Endo agar Bismuth sulfite agar Hektoen enteric agar Lysine iron agar Simmons' citrate agar TSI slant Fungal media BAF agar Czapek medium Dermatophyte test medium MMN medium Potato dextrose agar Sabouraud agar YEPD YM Nonselective media Blood agar Chocolate agar Lysogeny broth Nutrient agar Plate count agar Trypticase soy agar Tryptic soy broth Other/ungrouped media Brain heart infusion Cystine–lactose–electrolyte-deficient agar Cystine tryptic agar Glucose phosphate broth Lauryl tryptose broth Mannitol motility medium Mueller–Hinton agar / PNP agar R2A agar Schädler agar v t e Techniques in clinical microbiology Isolation and culture Isolation techniques Asepsis Streak plate Selective media Cultures by body site Blood culture Genital culture Sputum culture Throat culture Urine culture Wound culture Cultures by organism Bacterial culture Fungal culture Viral culture Identification and testing Manual testing: basic techniques Colonial morphology Hemolysis Staining Gram stain Acid-fast stain Giemsa stain India ink stain Ziehl–Neelsen stain Wet prep Rapid tests Oxidase Catalase Indole PYR Manual testing: biochemical and immunologic tests ALA test Amino acid decarboxylase test Bile solubility test CAMP test Citrate test Coagulase test DNAse test IMViC KOH test Methyl red test Nitrite test ONPG test Oxidative/fermentation glucose test Phenylalanine deaminase test Reverse CAMP test Salt tolerance test Sulfide indole motility test Triple sugar iron test Urease test rapid Voges–Proskauer test X and V factor test Bacitracin susceptibility test Optochin susceptibility test Novobiocin susceptibility test Lancefield grouping RPR test Automated and point-of-care testing Analytical profile index MALDI-TOF Polymerase chain reaction VITEK Rapid strep test Monospot test Antibiotic susceptibility testing Beta-lactamase test Disk diffusion test Etest McFarland standards Minimum inhibitory concentration Equipment Agar plate Growth medium Anaerobic jar Gas-pak Durham tube Biosafety cabinet Incubator Inoculation loop Inoculation needle Portal : Biology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n8rv6
Cached time: 20250817054152
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.427 seconds
Real time usage: 0.582 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2035/1000000
Revision size: 19177/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152041/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1703/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 79580/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.243/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6049384/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  440.328      1 -total
 37.83%  166.588      1 Template:Reflist
 24.89%  109.587      4 Template:Cite_book
 19.64%   86.477      1 Template:Laboratory_equipment
 19.27%   84.854      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.05%   61.879      1 Template:Short_description
 13.98%   61.566     13 Template:Navbox
  9.85%   43.388      2 Template:Sister_project
  9.53%   41.963      2 Template:Side_box
  7.64%   33.651      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:254713:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817054152 and revision id 1301000265. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agar_plate&oldid=1301000265 " Categories : Microbiological media Microbiology terms Microbiology equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 15:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agar plate 17 languages Add topic

