Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Format 2 Content 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 Ancient sources 6 Reconstructions and translations 7 Notes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Protrepticus (Aristotle) 10 languages Català Ελληνικά Español Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical work by Aristotle Protrepticus ( Ancient Greek : Προτρεπτικός ) or, "Exhortation to Philosophy" ( Ancient Greek : Φιλοσοφητέον ) is a lost philosophical work written by Aristotle in the mid-4th century BCE. The work was intended to encourage the reader to study philosophy .

[ 1 ] Although the Protrepticus was one of Aristotle's most famous works in antiquity, [ 2 ] it did not survive except in fragments and ancient reports from later authors, particularly from Iamblichus , who appears to quote large extracts from it, without attribution, alongside extracts from extant works of Plato, in the second book of his work on Pythagoreanism .

[ 3 ] Format [ edit ] Like many of Aristotle's lost works, Protrepticus was likely written as a Socratic dialogue , in a similar format to the works of Plato . There is good evidence that several of the nineteen works that stand at the head of Diogenes ' and Hesychius ' lists were dialogues; it may be inferred with high probability, though not with certainty, that the others were so too, but Stobaeus, pp. 59, 61 infra, and Athenaeus, p. 61 infra, confirm its genuineness. The Historia Augusta furthermore says that another lost work, Cicero 's Hortensius , was allegedly modeled after the Protrepticus [ 4 ] and as the Hortensius , like many of Cicero's extant philosophical works, was known to be written as a dialogue, the Protrepticus was probably one too.

Content [ edit ] The main aim of the work was to convince its readers that they should do philosophy. According to Alexander of Aphrodisias , the argument put forth was that if someone denied that one should do philosophy, then, because whether or not one should do philosophy is itself a philosophical concern, this proves that one should do philosophy in order to investigate the answer.

[ 4 ] Alexander states that the work further investigates the nature of philosophical contemplation and argues that this is also the proper exercise of human beings.

[ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] Aristotle's protrepticus is likely the origin of the English word Protreptics, which means,  “turning or converting someone to a specific end” used in a philosophical sense, [ 5 ] a word hardly ever used except in specialized philosophical treatises.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Clement of Alexandria Ancient sources [ edit ] Large fragments of the Protrepticus are quoted by Iamblichus in the second book of his work On Pythagoreanism.

A number of ancient reports on the Protrepticus survive in other works: [ 4 ] Alexander of Aphrodisias , Commentary on Aristotle's Topics page 149, lines 9-15 Historia Augusta , Volume II page 97 lines 20-22 Stobaeus , Florilegium §4.32.25 Olympiodorus the Younger , Commentary on Plato's Alcibiades page 144 Boethius , The Consolation of Philosophy §3.8 David (commentator) , Prolegomena to Philosophy page 9, lines 2-12 Elias (commentator) , Prolegomena to Philosophy page 3 lines 17-23 "Φιλοσοφειν" .

Suda Online . Retrieved 21 February 2023 .

Aristoteles (1978).

Anonymous Commentary on Aristotle's De Interpretatione: (Codex Parisinus Graecus 2064) (in German).

Reconstructions and translations [ edit ] Since the 19th century, when inquiry was initiated by Jakob Bernays (1863), several scholars have attempted to reconstruct the work.

[ 7 ] Attempted reconstructions include: A 1961 book by Ingemar Düring [ 8 ] A 1964 book by Anton-Hermann Chroust [ 9 ] 2015 Online edition by Hutchinson and Johnson [ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Rabinowitz, W. G., Aristotle's Protrepticus and the Sources of its Reconstruction . University of California Press, 1957. Print. pg. 1.

^ Johnson & Hutchinson 2005 , p. 196.

^ Johnson & Hutchinson 2005 , p. 198.

^ a b c d Johnson & Hutchinson 2005 , p. 197.

^ "Oxford Scholarship" .

Oxford Scholarship Online . 2022-06-23 . Retrieved 2022-06-26 .

^ Klein, Jacob; Bollingen Foundation Collection (1965).

A commentary on Plato's Meno . Chapel Hill. p. 9.

ISBN 0-226-43959-3 .

OCLC 2394325 .

The dialogues [of Plato] not only embody the famous "oracular" and "paradoxical" statements emanating from Socrates ("virtue is knowledge", "nobody does evil knowingly", "it is better to suffer than to commit injustice") and are, to a large extent, protreptic plays based on these, but they also discuss and state, more or less explicitly, the ultimate foundations on which those statements rest and the far-reaching consequences which flow from them. ) {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Anton-Hermann Chroust (1965). "A brief account of the reconstruction of Aristotle's Protrepticus".

Classical Philology .

60 (4). The University of Chicago Press: 229– 239.

doi : 10.1086/365046 .

ISSN 0009-837X .

JSTOR 269094 .

S2CID 161905149 .

^ Düring, Ingemar; Aristotle (1961).

Aristotle's Protrepticus: An attempt at reconstruction . Göteborg, Sweden: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.

ISBN 9780391004269 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Chroust, Anton-Hermann; Aristotle (1964).

Protrepticus: A reconstruction . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.

^ reconstruction of Protrepticus References [ edit ] Johnson, Monte Ransome; Hutchinson, D. S. (2005).

"Authenticating Aristotle's Protrepticus" .

Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy .

29 : 193– 294.

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Protrepticus_(Aristotle)&oldid=1254125736 " Category : Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 29 October 2024, at 14:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Protrepticus (Aristotle) 10 languages Add topic

