Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location and description 2 History 3 Flora and fauna 4 Threats and preservation 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Scotia Sea 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 57°30′S 40°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 57.500°S 40.000°W ﻿ / -57.500; -40.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sea in the Southern Ocean This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Scotia Sea" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Scotia Sea Tabular iceberg in the Scotia Sea, 1996 Scotia Sea Location of the Scotia Sea Bathymetric map of the Scotia Sea Coordinates 57°30′S 40°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 57.500°S 40.000°W ﻿ / -57.500; -40.000 Type Sea Ocean/sea sources Southern Ocean Surface area 900,000 km 2 (347,500 sq mi) Max. depth 6,022 m (19,757 ft) The Scotia Sea is a sea located at the northern edge of the Southern Ocean at its boundary with the South Atlantic Ocean . It is bounded on the west by the Drake Passage and on the north, east, and south by the Scotia Arc , an undersea ridge and island arc system supporting various islands. The sea sits atop the Scotia Plate . It is named after the expedition ship Scotia . Many icebergs melt there.

[ 1 ] Location and description [ edit ] Approximate area of the Scotia Sea in the Southern Hemisphere The Scotia Sea is the area of water between the Drake Passage, Tierra del Fuego , South Georgia , the South Sandwich Islands , the South Orkney Islands , and the Antarctic Peninsula . These island groups all sit atop the Scotia Arc, which frames the sea on the north, east, and south. The Scotia Sea covers an area around 900,000 km 2 (347,500 sq mi). About half of the sea stands above the continental shelf .

History [ edit ] The sea was named about 1932 after the Scotia , the expedition ship used in these waters by the Scottish National Antarctic Expedition (1902–04) under William S. Bruce . The most famous traverse of this frigid sea was made near the end of the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition in 1916 by Sir Ernest Shackleton and five others in the adapted lifeboat James Caird . They left Elephant Island , just off the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula, and reached South Georgia Island two weeks later. It was a distance of nearly 900 miles and the sun was only sighted for navigational fixes four times during the entire journey.

In Argentina , the Scotia Sea is considered part of an area known as the Mar Argentino , and several territories claimed but not occupied by Argentina, such as South Georgia and the Falkland Islands, lie within this region.

Flora and fauna [ edit ] The islands bordering the Scotia Sea are rocky and partly covered in ice and snow year round. Despite these harsh conditions, however, the islands do support vegetation. They have been described as the Scotia Sea Islands tundra ecoregion , which includes South Georgia, the volcanic South Sandwich Islands, and the South Orkneys in the Scotia Sea, as well as the remote South Shetland Islands near the Antarctic Peninsula and the small isolated volcano called Bouvet Island . All these islands lie in the cold seas below the Antarctic Convergence . These areas support tundra vegetation consisting of mosses , lichens , and algae , while seabirds, penguins, and seals feed in the surrounding waters.

Seabirds include four main species of albatross: black-browed albatross ( Thalassarche melanophris ) , grey-headed albatross ( Thalassarche chrysostoma ) , light-mantled albatross ( Phoebetria palpebrata ) , and snowy albatross ( Diomedea exulans ) . Only five species of land birds remain on the islands, and these include an endemic race of the yellow-billed pintail duck ( Anas georgica ) and the endemic South Georgia pipit ( Anthus antarcticus ) . Other birds include the southern giant petrel , with sizeable colonies on Bird Island .

Penguin species found here include large numbers of king penguins on South Georgia especially, as well as chinstrap penguin , macaroni penguin , gentoo penguin , Adelie penguin , and rockhopper penguin ( Eudyptes chrysocome ) .

Seals include the Antarctic fur seal ( Arctocephalus gazella ) and sub-Antarctic fur seal ( Arctocephalus tropicalis ) in large numbers, leopard seal (Hydrurga leptonyx) , Weddell seal (Leptonychotes weddellii) , the huge southern elephant seal (Mirounga leonina) , and crabeater seal (Lobodon carcinophagus) .

[ 2 ] Threats and preservation [ edit ] Map of the Scotia Sea. Toponyms: Undersea relief, maritime, nearby lands, countries and cities. Isobath interval: 2000 m Although the Scotia Arc islands have a harsh climate and have never been permanently occupied, they have long been used as a base for fishing and seal hunting. Wildlife on these remote islands is threatened by introduced species , especially on South Georgia, where even large animals, including (now removed) reindeer , have been brought to the islands. Further damage to ecosystems results from overfishing.  South Georgia, the South Sandwich Islands, and Bouvet Island are protected as nature reserves, with Bird Island, South Georgia , being a site of special scientific interest . The seals are further protected by international agreements, and fur seal populations are recovering.

See also [ edit ] East Scotia Basin West Scotia Basin References [ edit ] ^ "Antarctica's iceberg graveyard could reveal the ice sheet's future" .

Science News . 2019-04-09 . Retrieved 2020-02-28 .

^ "Marielandia Antarctic tundra" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund.

This article incorporates public domain material from "Scotia Sea" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey .

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Capital: King Edward Point General Coat of arms Commissioner Flag Foreign relations History Languages List of South Georgians Operation "Paraquet" Public holidays Toothfish Day South Georgia Museum .gs Sovereignty Invasion of South Georgia Settlements / Whaling stations Bird Island Grytviken Godthul Husvik King Edward Point Leith Harbour Ocean Harbour Prince Olav Harbour Stromness Corbeta Uruguay base South Georgia islands Annenkov Island Bird Island Black Rock Black Rocks Clerke Rocks Cooper Island Grass Island Grassholm Kupriyanov Islands Pickersgill Islands Prion Island Saddle Island Shag Rocks South Georgia Welcome Islands Willis Islands South Sandwich Islands Bristol Montagu Saunders Candlemas Islands Candlemas Vindication Traversay Islands Leskov Visokoi Zavodovski Southern Thule Bellingshausen Cook Thule Seamounts Protector Shoal Kemp Caldera Landmarks Admiralty Peak Allardyce Range Barff Peninsula Fortuna Glacier Gold Harbour Larsen Harbour Mount Baume Mount Belinda Mount Cunningham Mount Paget Mount Roots Orca Peak Peggotty Bluff Salisbury Plain Salvesen Range Southern Thule Thatcher Peninsula Bay of Isles Stromness Bay Cumberland Bay Possession Bay Busen Point Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scotia_Sea&oldid=1298277560 " Categories : Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Seas of the Southern Ocean Tundra Antarctic region 1930s neologisms Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2018 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without alt bathymetry Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the USGS Geographic Names Information System This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 14:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scotia Sea 72 languages Add topic

