Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Civil law 2 Common law 3 Religious law 4 Pluralistic systems Toggle Pluralistic systems subsection 4.1 Civil law and canon law 4.2 Civil law and common law 4.3 Civil law and sharia law 4.4 Common law and sharia law 5 By geography 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents List of national legal systems 14 languages العربية Bosanski 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia System for interpreting and enforcing the laws Legal systems of the world The contemporary national legal systems are generally based on one of four major legal traditions : civil law , common law , customary law , religious law or combinations of these. However, the legal system of each country is shaped by its unique history and so incorporates individual variations.

[ 1 ] The science that studies law at the level of legal systems is called comparative law .

Both civil (also known as Roman ) and common law systems can be considered the most widespread in the world: civil law because it is the most widespread by landmass and by population overall, and common law because it is employed by the greatest number of people compared to any single civil law system.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Civil law [ edit ] Main article: Civil law (legal system) Emperor Justinian I , author of what became the foundational texts of the civil law tradition.

The source of law that is recognized as authoritative is codifications in a constitution or statute passed by legislature , to amend a code.
While the concept of codification dates back to the Code of Hammurabi in Babylon ca. 1790 BC, civil law systems derive from the Roman Empire and, more particularly, the Corpus Juris Civilis issued by the Emperor Justinian ca. AD 529. This was an extensive reform of the law in the Byzantine Empire , bringing it together into codified documents. Civil law was also partly influenced by religious laws such as Canon law and Islamic law .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Civil law today, in theory, is interpreted rather than developed or made by judges. Only legislative enactments (rather than legal precedents , as in common law) are considered legally binding.

Scholars of comparative law and economists promoting the legal origins theory usually subdivide civil law into distinct groups: French civil law : in France, the Benelux countries, Italy, Romania, Spain and former colonies of those countries, mainly in Latin America, Africa and the Middle East; German civil law : in Germany, Austria, Russia, Switzerland, Estonia, Latvia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Kosovo*, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Slovenia, Serbia, Greece, Portugal and its former colonies , Turkey, and East Asian countries including Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan (Republic of China); Scandinavian civil law : in Northern Europe such as Denmark, Norway, Finland, Iceland and Sweden. As historically integrated into the Scandinavian cultural sphere, Finland and Iceland also inherited the system, although especially Iceland has its own legal roots. Scandinavian or Nordic civil law exhibit least similar traits with other civil law systems and is sometimes considered a legal system in its own right, despite reception from mainly German civil law.

However, some of these legal systems are often and more correctly said to be of hybrid nature: Napoleonic to Germanistic influence ( Italian civil law ) The Italian civil code of 1942 replaced the original one of 1865, introducing germanistic elements due to the geopolitical alliances of the time.

[ 7 ] The Italian approach has been imitated by other countries including Portugal (1966), the Netherlands (1992), Lithuania (2000), Brazil (2002) and Argentina (2014). Most of them have innovations introduced by the Italian legislation, including the unification of the civil and commercial codes .

[ 8 ] Germanistic to Napoleonic influence ( Swiss civil law ) The Swiss civil code is considered mainly influenced by the German civil code and partly influenced by the French civil code. The civil code of the Republic of Turkey is a slightly modified version of the Swiss code, adopted in 1926 during Mustafa Kemal Atatürk 's presidency as part of the government's progressive reforms and secularization.

A comprehensive list of countries that base their legal system on a codified civil law follows: Country Description Albania Based on Napoleonic civil law.

[ 9 ] Angola Based on Portuguese civil law .

Argentina The Spanish legal tradition had a great influence on the Civil Code of Argentina , basically a work of the Argentine jurist Dalmacio Vélez Sársfield , who dedicated five years of his life to this task. The Civil Code came into effect on 1 January 1871. Beyond the influence of the Spanish legal tradition, the Argentine Civil Code was also inspired by the Draft of the Brazilian Civil Code, the Draft of the Spanish Civil Code of 1851, the Napoleonic code and the Chilean Civil Code . The sources of this Civil Code also include various theoretical legal works, mainly of the great French jurists of the 19th century. It was the first Civil Law that consciously adopted as its cornerstone the distinction between i. rights from obligations and ii. real property rights, thus distancing itself from the French model.

The Argentine Civil Code was also in effect in Paraguay, as per a Paraguayan law of 1880, until the new Civil Code went into force in 1987.

In Argentina, this 1871 Civil Code remained in force until August 2015, when it was replaced by the new Código Civil y Comercial de la Nación .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] During the second half of the 20th century, the German legal theory became increasingly influential in Argentina.

Andorra Courts apply the customary laws of Andorra, supplemented with Roman law and customary Catalan law.

[ 12 ] Armenia Based on Napoleonic Civil law and traditional Armenian law.

Aruba Based on Dutch civil law Austria Based on Roman and Germanic Civil law. The Allgemeines bürgerliches Gesetzbuch (ABGB) of 1811. The ABGB is influenced both by Roman and Austrian law traditions. Comparable to the Napoleonic code, it is based on the ideals of freedom and equality before the law.

Azerbaijan Based on German, French, Russian, and traditional Azerbaijani Law Belarus Based on Germanic Civil law ( administrative , criminal codes) Belgium The Napoleonic Code is still in use, although it is heavily modified (especially concerning family law) Benin Based on Napoleonic Civil law.

Bolivia Influenced by the Napoleonic Code Bosnia and Herzegovina Influenced by Austrian law . The Swiss civil law ( Zivilgesetzbuch ) was a model for the Law on Obligations of 1978.

Brazil Based on German, Italian, French and Portuguese law. However, in 2004 the Federal Constitution was amended to grant the Supreme Federal Court authority to issue binding precedents ( súmulas vinculantes ) to settle controversies involving constitutional law – a mechanism that echoes the stare decisis principle typically found in common law systems.

Bulgaria Civil Law system influenced by Germanic and Roman law systems Burkina Faso Based on the French civil law Burundi Based on the French civil law Chad Based on the French civil law People's Republic of China Based on Germanic Civil law and France Civil law, also with influences from the Soviet Socialist law from Soviet Union Republic of the Congo Based on the Napoleonic Civil law.

Democratic Republic of the Congo Based on Belgian civil law Cambodia Cape Verde Based on Portuguese civil law Central African Republic Based on the French civil law system Chile The Chilean Civil Code, based on the Napoleonic Civil Law, was also heavily influenced by the Spanish legal tradition. On its turn, the Chilean civil code influenced to a large degree the drafting of the civil codes of other Latin-American states. For instance, the codes of Ecuador (1861) and Colombia (1873) constituted faithful reproductions of the Chilean code, but for very few exceptions. The compiler of the Civil Code of Chile , Venezuelan Andrés Bello , worked for its completion for almost 30 years, using elements, of the Spanish law on the one hand, and of other Western laws , especially of the French one, on the other. It is noted that he consulted and used all of the codes that had been issued till then, starting from the era of Justinian .

The Civil Code came into effect on 1 January 1857. The influence of the Napoleonic code and the Law of Castile of the Spanish colonial period (especially the Siete Partidas ), is great; it is observed however that e.g.

in many provisions of property or contract law , the solutions of the French code civil were put aside in favor of pure Roman law or Castilian law.

Colombia Based on the Chilean Civil Law. Civil code introduced in 1873. Nearly faithful reproduction of the Chilean civil code Costa Rica Based on the Napoleonic Civil Law. First Civil Code (a part of the General Code or Carrillo Code) came into effect in 1841; its text was inspired by the South Peruvian Civil Code of Marshal Andres de Santa Cruz . The present Civil Code went into effect 1 January 1888 and was influenced by the Napoleonic Code and the Spanish Civil Code of 1889 (from its 1851 draft version).

Croatia Based on the Germanic Civil Law. The Croatian Law system is largely influenced by German and Austrian law systems. It is significantly influenced by the Civil Code of the Austrian Empire from 1811, known in Croatia as "General Civil Law" ("Opći građanski zakon") . OGZ was in force from 1853 [ 13 ] to 1946. After the World War II , Croatia becomes a member of the Yugoslav Federation which enacted in 1946 the "Law on immediate voiding of regulations passed before April 6, 1941, and during the enemy occupation" ("Zakon o nevaženju pravnih proposal donesenih prije 6. travnja 1941. i za vrijeme neprijateljske okupacije") . By this law, OGZ was declared invalid as a whole, but the implementation of some of its legal rules was approved. During the post-War era, the Croatian legal system become influenced by elements of the socialist law . Croatian civil law was pushed aside, and it took norms of public law and legal regulation of the social ownership . After Croatia declared independence from Yugoslavia on 25 June 1991, the previous legal system was used as a base for writing new laws.

"The Law on Obligations" ("Zakon o obveznim odnosima") was enacted in 2005.

[ 14 ] Today, Croatia as a European Union member state implements elements of the EU acquis into its legal system.

Cuba Influenced by Spanish and American law with large elements of Communist legal theory .

Curaçao Based on Dutch Civil Law.

Czech Republic Based on Germanic civil law. Descended from the Civil Code of the Austrian Empire (1811), influenced by German (1939–45) and Soviet (1947/68–89) legal codes during occupation periods, substantially reformed to remove Soviet influence and elements of socialist law after the Velvet Revolution (1989). The new Civil Code of the Czech Republic was introduced in 2014, reestablishing the norms of the ABGB, an reintroducing terms and concepts from it.

Denmark Based on North Germanic law . Scandinavian-North Germanic civil law.

Dominican Republic Based on the Napoleonic Code Ecuador Based on the Chilean civil law. Civil code introduced in 1861.

El Salvador Based on law.

Estonia Based on German civil law.

Finland Based on Nordic law.

[ 15 ] France Based on Napoleonic code ( code civil of 1804) Egypt Based on Napoleonic civil law and Islamic law.

Equatorial Guinea Ethiopia Gabon Based on the French civil law system Guinea Based on French civil law system, customary law, and decree [ 15 ] Guinea-Bissau Based on Portuguese civil law Georgia Based on Napoleonic civil law Germany Based on Germanic civil law. The Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch of 1900 ("BGB"). The BGB is influenced both by Roman and German law traditions.

Greece Based on Germanic civil law. The Greek civil code of 1946, highly influenced by traditional Roman law and the German civil code of 1900 ( Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch ); the Greek civil code replaced the Byzantine–Roman civil law in effect in Greece since its independence (Νομική Διάταξη της Ανατολικής Χέρσου Ελλάδος, Legal Provision of Eastern Mainland Greece, November 1821: 'Οι Κοινωνικοί Νόμοι των Αειμνήστων Χριστιανών Αυτοκρατόρων της Ελλάδος μόνοι ισχύουσι κατά το παρόν εις την Ανατολικήν Χέρσον Ελλάδα', 'The Social [i.e. Civil] Laws of the Dear Departed Christian Emperors of Greece [referring to the Byzantine Emperors] alone are in effect at present in Eastern Mainland Greece') Guatemala Based on Napoleonic civil law. Guatemala has had three Civil Codes: the first one from 1877, a new one introduced in 1933, and the one currently in force, which was passed in 1963. This Civil Code has suffered some reforms throughout the years, as well as a few derogations relating to areas that have subsequently been regulated by newer laws, such as the Code of Commerce and the Law of the National Registry of Persons. In general, it follows the tradition of the Roman-French system of civil codification.

Regarding the theory of 'sources of law' in the Guatemalan legal system, the 'Ley del Organismo Judicial' recognizes 'the law' as the main legal source (in the sense of legislative texts), although it also establishes 'jurisprudence' as a complementary source. Although jurisprudence technically refers to judicial decisions in general, in practice it tends to be confused and identified with the concept of 'legal doctrine', which is a qualified series of identical resolutions in similar cases pronounced by higher courts (the Constitutional Court acting as a 'Tribunal de Amparo ', and the Supreme Court acting as a 'Tribunal de Casación') whose theses become binding for lower courts.

Haiti Based on Napoleonic civil law.

Honduras Hungary Based on Germanic, codified Roman law with elements from Napoleonic civil law.

Iceland Based on North Germanic law . Germanic traditional laws and influenced by Medieval Norwegian and Danish laws.

India (former French and Portuguese colonies) Based on Portuguese civil law ( Goa , and Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu ), and French civil law ( Puducherry ).

[ 16 ] Vedic Hindu legal traditions also influenced the legal system in India.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Italy Based on Napoleonic code and older ones with German law influence; civil code of 1942 replaced the original one of 1865.

Ivory Coast Based on French civil law system Japan Based on Germanic civil law. Japanese civil code of 1895.

Latvia Based on Napoleonic and German civil law, as it was historically before the Soviet occupation. While general principles of law are prerequisites in making and interpreting the law, case law is also regularly applied to present legal arguments in courts and explain the application of law in similar cases. Civil law largely modeled after the Napoleonic code mixed with strong elements of German civil law. Criminal law retains Russian and German legal traditions, while criminal procedure law has been fully modeled after practice accepted in Western Europe. The civil law of Latvia enacted in 1937.

Lebanon Based on Napoleonic civil law.

Lithuania Modeled after Dutch civil law Louisiana ( U.S.) Law in the state of Louisiana is based on French and Spanish civil law.

Federal courts and 49 states use the legal system based on English common law (see below), which has diverged somewhat since the mid-nineteenth century in that they look to each other's cases for guidance on issues of the first impression and rarely look at contemporary cases on the same issue in the UK or the Commonwealth.

Luxembourg Based on Napoleonic civil law.

Macau (P.R.China) Principally based on Portuguese civil law, also influenced by PRC law.

[ 19 ] Mexico Based on Napoleonic civil law."The origins of Mexico's legal system are both ancient and classical, based on the Roman and French legal systems, and the Mexican system shares more in common with other legal systems throughout the world (especially those in Latin America and most of continental Europe) ..." [ 20 ] Mongolia Based on Germanic civil law.

Montenegro Based on Napoleonic and German civil law. First: the General Property Code for the Principality of Montenegro of 1888, written by Valtazar Bogišić . Present: the Law on Obligations of 2008.

Mozambique Based on Portuguese civil law Netherlands Based on Napoleonic code with German law influence Nepal Based on Civil Code , however, the principle of stare decisis is widely practised. The legal system of Nepal has been influenced by British Legal System Norway Scandinavian-North Germanic civil law, based on North Germanic law . King Magnus VI the Lawmender unified the regional laws into a single code of law for the whole kingdom in 1274. This was replaced by Christian V 's Norwegian Code of 1687.

Panama Paraguay The Paraguayan Civil Code in force since 1987 is largely influenced by the Napoleonic Code and the Argentine Code Peru Based on civil law system. accepts compulsory International Court of Justice ICJ jurisdiction with despotic and corrupting reservations.

Poland The Polish Civil Code in force since 1965 Portugal Influenced by the Napoleonic Code and later by the German civil law Romania Civil Code came into force in 2011. Based on the Civil Code of Quebec, but also influenced by the Napoleonic Code and other French-inspired codes (such as those of Italy, Spain and Switzerland) [ 21 ] Russia Civil Law system descendant from Roman Law through Byzantine tradition. Heavily influenced by German and Dutch norms in the 1700s. Socialism-style modifications from 1920s on, and Continental European Civil Law influences since the 1990s.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Rwanda Mixture of Belgian civil law and English common law São Tomé e Príncipe Based on Portuguese civil law Serbia First: the Civil Code of Principality of Serbia of 1844, written by Jovan Hadžić, was influenced by the Austrian Civil Code ( Allgemeines bürgerliches Gesetzbuch ). Present: The Swiss civil law ( Zivilgesetzbuch ) was a model for the Law on Obligations of 1978.

Slovakia Descended from the Civil Code of the Austrian Empire (1811), influenced by German (1939–45) and Soviet (1947/68–89) legal codes during occupation periods, substantially reformed to remove Soviet influence and elements of socialist law after the Velvet Revolution (1989).

Slovenia A Civil Law system influenced mostly by Germanic and Austro-Hungarian law systems South Korea Based on the German civil law system. Also largely influenced by Japanese civil law which itself modeled after the German one.

Korean Civil Code was introduced 1958 and fully enacted by 1960.

Spain Influenced by the Napoleonic Code , it also has some elements of Spain's legal tradition, starting with the Siete Partidas , major legislative achievement from the Middle Ages. That body of law remained more or less unchanged until the 19th century when the first civil codes were drafted, merging both the Napoleonic style with the Castilian traditions.

Catalonia , Balearics , Aragon , Navarre , the Basque Country and Galicia still have its own civil law (the so-called foral law ) which predates and survived the Spanish process of uniformisation, in the Catalan case, its civil law is currently fully codificated in the form of the Civil Code of Catalonia .

Suriname Based on Dutch civil law Sweden Scandinavian-North Germanic civil law. Like all Scandinavian legal systems, it is distinguished by its traditional character and for the fact that it did not adopt elements of Roman law. It assimilated very few elements of foreign laws whatsoever. The Napoleonic Code had no influence in the codification of law in Scandinavia. The historical basis of the law of Sweden, just as for all Nordic countries, is North Germanic law . Codification of the law started in Sweden during the 18th century, preceding the codifications of most other European countries. However, neither Sweden nor any other Nordic state created a civil code of the kind of the Code Civil or the BGB.

Switzerland The Swiss Civil Code of 1908 and 1912 (obligations; fifth book) Syria Based on Napoleonic civil law.

Taiwan (Republic of China) Influenced by German Civil Code and Japanese Six Codes . Enacted in 1931.

Timor-Leste Based on Portuguese civil law Turkey Modeled after the Swiss civil law ( Zivilgesetzbuch ) of 1907.

Ukraine Based on German civil law and was accepted in 2004.

Uruguay The basis for its public law is the 1967 Constitution , amended in 1989, 1994, 1996 , and 2004. There is a clear separation of functions between the three administrative powers.

[ 24 ] Private relationships are governed by the Uruguayan Civil Code .

[ 25 ] Uzbekistan Represents an evolution of Soviet civil law. The overwhelmingly strong impact of the Communist legal theory is traceable.

Vietnam Based on Communist legal theory , influenced by French civil law .

Venezuela Based on Napoleonic civil law. Spanish legal traditions also influenced the civil law system in Venezuela.

[ 26 ] Common law [ edit ] Main article: Common law King John of England signs Magna Carta .

Common law and equity are systems of law whose sources are the decisions in cases by judges. In addition, every system will have a legislature that passes new laws and statutes. The relationships between statutes and judicial decisions can be complex. In some jurisdictions, such statutes may overrule judicial decisions or codify the topic covered by several contradictory or ambiguous decisions. In some jurisdictions, judicial decisions may decide whether the jurisdiction's constitution allowed a particular statute or statutory provision to be made or what meaning is contained within the statutory provisions. The common law developed in England, influenced by Anglo-Saxon law and to a much lesser extent by the Norman conquest of England , which introduced legal concepts from Norman law , which, in turn, had its origins in Salic law . Common law was later inherited by the Commonwealth of Nations , and almost every former colony of the British Empire has adopted it ( Malta being an exception). The doctrine of stare decisis , also known as case law or precedent by courts , is the major difference to codified civil law systems.

Common law is practiced in Canada (excluding Quebec ), Australia , New Zealand , most of the United Kingdom ( England, Wales , and Northern Ireland ), South Africa , Ireland , India (excluding Goa and Puducherry), [ 27 ] Pakistan , Hong Kong , the United States (on state and territorial levels excluding Louisiana and Puerto Rico ), Bangladesh , and many other places. Several others have adapted the common law system into a mixed system; For example, Nigeria operates largely on a common law system in the southern states and at the federal level, but also incorporates religious law in the northern states.

In the European Union , the Court of Justice takes an approach mixing civil law (based on the treaties) with an attachment to the importance of case law. One of the most fundamental documents to shape common law is the English Magna Carta , [ 28 ] which placed limits on the power of the English Kings. It served as a kind of medieval bill of rights for the aristocracy and the judiciary who developed the law.

Country Description American Samoa Based on law of the United States .

Antigua and Barbuda Based on English common law.

Australia Based on English common law.

Bahamas Based on English common law.

Bangladesh Based on English common law, with the Muslim family law heavily based on Islamic law (Sharia).

Barbados Based on English common law.

Belize Based on English common law.

Bhutan Based on English common law, with an Indian influence. Religious law influences personal law.

British Virgin Islands Based on English common law.

Canada Based on English common law, except in Quebec , where a civil law system based on French law prevails in most matters of a civil nature, such as obligations (contract and delict), property law, family law, and private matters. Federal statutes take into account the juridical nature of Canada and use both common law and civil law terms where appropriate.

Cayman Islands Based on English common law.

Cyprus Based on English common law, as inherited from British colonization, with civil law influences, particularly in administrational law.

Dominica Based on English common law.

England and Wales Primarily common law , with early Roman and some modern continental European influences.

Fiji Based on English common law.

Gibraltar Based on English common law.

Ghana Based on English common law.

Grenada Based on English common law.

Hong Kong (P.R.China) Principally based on English common law, also influenced by PRC law.

[ 19 ] India Based on English common law, except intermingled laws in Goa, [ 29 ] DNHDD and Puducherry.

[ 16 ] Vedic Hindu legal traditions also influenced the legal system in India.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Ireland Based on Irish law before 1922, which was itself based on English common law.

Israel Based on English common law, arising from the period of the British Mandate (which includes laws arising from previous Ottoman rule), [ 30 ] also incorporating civil law and fragments of Halakha and Sharia for family law cases Jamaica Based on English common law.

Kiribati Based on English common law.

Liberia Based on Anglo-American and customary law Marshall Islands Based on law of the United States .

Myanmar Based on English common law.

Nauru Based on English common law.

Nepal Based on English common law.

New Zealand Based on English common law with some aspects of tikanga Māori .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Northern Ireland Based on Irish law before 1921, in turn, based on English common law.

Palau Based on law of the United States .

Pakistan Based on English common law, with some provisions of Islamic law.

[ 33 ] Papua New Guinea Based on English common law and customary laws of its more than 750 different cultural and language groups.

Saint Kitts and Nevis Based on English common law.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Based on English common law.

Singapore Based on English common law, but Muslims are subject to the Administration of Muslim Law Act , which gives the Sharia Court jurisdiction over Muslim personal law, e.g.

, marriage, inheritance and divorce.

Tonga Based on English common law.

Trinidad and Tobago Based on English common law.

Tuvalu Based on English common law.

Uganda Based on English common law.

United States Federal courts and 49 states use the legal system based on English common law, which has diverged somewhat since the mid-nineteenth century in that they look to each other's cases for guidance on issues of the first impression and rarely, if ever, look at contemporary cases on the same issue in the UK or the Commonwealth.

Louisiana is based on French and Spanish civil law, and Puerto Rico is based on Spanish civil law.

Religious law [ edit ] Main article: Religious law Religious law refers to the notion of a religious system or document being used as a legal source, though the methodology used varies. For example, the use of Judaism and halakha for public law has a static and unalterable quality, precluding amendment through legislative acts of government or development through judicial precedent; Christian canon law is more similar to civil law in its use of codes ; and Islamic sharia law (and fiqh jurisprudence) is based on legal precedent and reasoning by analogy ( qiyas ), and is thus considered similar to common law .

[ 34 ] The main kinds of religious law are sharia in Islam, halakha in Judaism, and canon law in some Christian groups. In some cases these are intended purely as individual moral guidance, whereas in other cases they are intended and may be used as the basis for a country's legal system; the latter was particularly common during the Middle Ages .

Aleppo Codex: 10th century Hebrew Bible with Masoretic pointing Halakha is followed by Orthodox and Conservative Jews in both ecclesiastical and civil relations. No country is fully governed by halakha , but two Jewish people may decide, because of personal belief, to have a dispute heard by a Jewish court, and be bound by its rulings.

Canon law is the internal ecclesiastical law, or operational policy, governing the Catholic Church (both the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches ), the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox churches, and the individual national churches within the Anglican Communion .

[ 35 ] Canon law of the Catholic Church ( Latin : jus canonicum ) [ 36 ] is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the hierarchical authorities of the Catholic Church to regulate its external organisation and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the church.

[ 37 ] The canon law of the Catholic Church has all the ordinary elements of a mature legal system: laws, courts , lawyers , judges.

[ 38 ] The canon law of the Latin Church was the first modern Western legal system , [ 39 ] and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] while the distinctive traditions of Eastern Catholic canon law govern the 23 Eastern Catholic particular churches sui iuris .

The Islamic legal system, consisting of sharia (Islamic law) and fiqh (Islamic jurisprudence), is the most widely used religious law system, and one of the three most common legal systems in the world alongside common law and civil law.

[ 42 ] It is based on both divine law , derived from the hadith of the Quran and Sunnah , and the rulings of ulema (jurists), who use the methods of ijma (consensus), qiyas (analogical deduction), ijtihad (research), and urf (common practice) to derive fatwā (legal opinions). An ulema was required to qualify for an ijazah ( legal doctorate ) at a madrasa ( law school or college ) before they could issue fatwā .

[ 43 ] During the Islamic Golden Age , classical Islamic law may have had an influence on the development of common law [ 6 ] and several civil law institutions.

[ 44 ] Sharia law governs a number of Islamic countries, including Saudi Arabia and Iran, though most countries use Sharia law only as a supplement to national law. It can relate to all aspects of civil law, including property rights, contracts, and public law.

Country Description Afghanistan Islamic law, based on Sunni Hanafi jurisprudence.

[ 45 ] Iran Islamic law, based on Shia Jaʽfari jurisprudence.

[ 46 ] Nigeria Sharia in the northern states , common law in the south and at the federal level.

Saudi Arabia Islamic law, based on Sunni Hanbali jurisprudence.

Yemen Islamic law.

Pluralistic systems [ edit ] Civil law and canon law [ edit ] Main article: Canon law (Catholic Church) Canon law is not divine law, properly speaking, because it is not found in revelation. Instead, it is seen as human law inspired by the word of God and applying the demands of that revelation to the actual situation of the church.

Canon law regulates the internal ordering of the Catholic Church , the Eastern Orthodox Church and the Anglican Communion . Canon law is amended and adopted by the legislative authority of the church, such as councils of bishops , individual bishops for their respective sees, the Pope for the entire Catholic Church, and the British Parliament for the Church of England .

Country Description Vatican City Based on Roman & Italian civil law and Catholic canon law [ 47 ] Civil law and common law [ edit ] Country Description Botswana Based on South African law . An 1891 proclamation by the High Commissioner for Southern Africa applied the law of the Cape Colony (now part of South Africa) to the Bechuanaland Protectorate (now Botswana).

[ 48 ] Cameroon Mixture of French civil law system and English common law (After World War I , Cameroon was ruled by France and the United Kingdom as a League of Nations mandate then a United Nations trust territory from 1916 to 1961) Cyprus Based on English common law (Cyprus was a British colony 1878–1960), with admixtures of French and Greek civil and public law, Italian civil law, Indian contract law, Greek Orthodox canon law and Muslim religious law.

Eswatini Based on South African law . A 1907 proclamation by the High Commissioner for Southern Africa applied the Roman-Dutch common law of the Transvaal Colony (now part of South Africa) to the Swaziland Protectorate (now Eswatini).

[ 48 ] Guyana Guyana follows a mixed legal system, a combination of civil law & common law.

[ 49 ] India In post-independence India, the Uniform Penal Code throughout India and civil code to residents of Goa . The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita , the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita and the Bharatiya Sakshya Act, 2023 amendment bills with minor changes.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] While Hindu personal law based on customary laws of Indian religions and Muslim personal law based on hanafi school are currently used, [ 50 ] the Indian government is promoting a Uniform Civil Code that applies to all citizens.

[ 51 ] Kenya Based on English Common Law and Civil law as well as the country's customary law.

Lesotho Based on South African law . An 1884 proclamation by the High Commissioner for Southern Africa applied the law of the Cape Colony (now part of South Africa) to Basutoland (now Lesotho).

[ 48 ] Louisiana ( U.S.) Based on French and Spanish civil law, but federal laws (based on common law) are also in effect in Louisiana because of the federal constitution's Supremacy Clause . However, Louisiana's criminal law, procedural law and administrative law is predominantly based on the common law tradition.

Malta Initially based on Roman Law and eventually progressed to the Code de Rohan, the Napoleonic Code with influences from Italian Civil Law. English common law however is also a source of Maltese Law, most notably in public law.

Mauritius Laws governing the Mauritian penal system are derived partly from French civil law and British common law .

[ 52 ] Namibia Based on South African law . South Africa conquered South-West Africa (now Namibia) in 1915, and a 1919 proclamation by the Governor-General applied the law of the Cape Province of South Africa to the territory.

[ 53 ] Philippines Based on Spanish law; influenced by U.S. common law after 1898 Spanish– and Philippine–American Wars , personal law based on sharia law applies to Muslims.

Puerto Rico ( U.S.) Based on Spanish law; influenced by U.S. common law after 1898 (victory of the U.S. over Spain in the Spanish–American War of 1898 and cession of Puerto Rico to the U.S.); federal laws (based on common law) are in effect because of federal Supremacy Clause.

Quebec ( Canada ) After the 1763 Treaty of Paris awarded French Canada to Great Britain, the British initially attempted to impose English Common Law. In 1774, as a result of a ruling by the British courts in Campbell v Hall about the status of legal systems found in acquired territories, the British Parliament passed the Quebec Act , which preserved French civil law for private law while keeping and reserving English common law for public law including criminal prosecution. Codification occurred in 1866 with the enactment of the Civil Code of Lower Canada ( French : Code civil du Bas-Canada ), which continued in force when the modern Province of Quebec was created at Confederation in 1867. Subsequently, the Civil Code of Quebec ( French : Code civil du Québec ) came into effect on 1 January 1994, and is the civil code currently in force. Canadian (federal) criminal law in force in Quebec is based on common law, but federal statutes of or relating to private law take into account the bijuridical nature of Canada and use both common law and civil law terms where appropriate.

Saint Lucia Scotland Based on Roman and continental law, with common law elements dating back to the High Middle Ages .

[ 54 ] Seychelles The substantive civil law is based on the French Civil Code. Otherwise, the criminal law and court procedure are based on the English common law. See Seychelles Legal Environment .

South Africa An amalgam of Roman-Dutch civil law and English common law , as well as Customary Law .

Sri Lanka An amalgam of English common law, Roman-Dutch civil law and Customary Law Thailand The Thai legal system became an amalgam of German, Swiss, French, English, Japanese, Italian, Indian and American laws and practices. Even today, Islamic laws and practices exist in four southern provinces. Over the years, Thai law has naturally taken on its own Thai identity.

Vanuatu Consists of a mixed system combining the legacy of English common law, French civil law and indigenous customary law.

Zimbabwe Based on South African law . An 1891 proclamation by the High Commissioner for Southern Africa applied the law of the Cape Colony (now part of South Africa) to Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe).

Civil law and sharia law [ edit ] Country Description Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Family Law (personal Statute) for Muslims based on Islamic Jurisprudence, Separate Personal Statute for non-Muslims, and all other branches of Law are based on French civil law system Eritrea Only applies to Muslims for personal matters Indonesia Based on Napoleonic-Dutch civil law , mixed with Islamic sharia law (personal matters only), and Customary Law .

Jordan Mainly based on French Civil Code and Ottoman Majalla , Islamic law applicable to family law Mauritania Mix of Islamic law and French Civil Codes , Islamic law largely applicable to both criminal, family law, and other forms of personal laws such as disputes.

Mauritius Civil law and sharia personal law for Muslims.

Morocco Based on Islamic law and French and Spanish civil law system. Islamic law is mainly for personal matters and Jews use Halakha.

Oman Qatar Based on Islamic law and the Egyptian civil law system (after the French civil law system) Syria Mainly based on French Civil Code . Islamic law is applicable to family law. Non-Muslims follow their own family laws.

United Arab Emirates Mixed legal system, based on Islamic law and the Egyptian civil law system (after the French civil law system). The UAE adopts a dual legal system of civil and Sharia.

[ 55 ] Common law and sharia law [ edit ] Country Description Bangladesh Based on English common law, personal law based on sharia law applies to Muslims.

Brunei The Gambia Malaysia Based on English common law, personal law based on sharia law applies to Muslims (Not used on non-Muslims).

Nigeria Common law is used at the federal level and in most states, Sharia is applied in some northern states .

Pakistan Based on English common law, some Islamic law (sharia) applications in inheritance . Formerly Tribal Law in the FATA .

[ 33 ] By geography [ edit ] Despite the usefulness of different classifications, every legal system has its own individual identity. Below are groups of legal systems, categorised by their geographic location .

v t e Law of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Law of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Law of South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands v t e Law of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Law in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union v t e Law of Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna See also [ edit ] Anarchist law Comparative law English common law International customary law Sharia Qanun (law) Legal pluralism Journal of Legal Pluralism Rule of law Rule According to Higher Law Socialist law Soviet law Tribal sovereignty Western law Comparative law wiki Legal education References [ edit ] ^ "Legal Systems of the World" (PDF) . Saint: Security Sector Development. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2020 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Wood, Phillip (2007).

Principles of International Insolvency . Sweet & Maxwell.

ISBN 9781847032102 . Retrieved 30 August 2015 .

^ Wood, Phillip (2008).

Maps of World Financial Law:Law and practice of international finance series . Sweet & Maxwell.

ISBN 9781847033420 . Retrieved 30 August 2015 .

^ " English Common Law is the most widespread legal system in the world " (PDF) . Sweet & Maxwell. November 2008 . Retrieved 30 August 2015 .

^ Badr, Gamal Moursi (Spring 1978), "Islamic Law: Its Relation to Other Legal Systems", The American Journal of Comparative Law , 26 (2 [Proceedings of an International Conference on Comparative Law, Salt Lake City, Utah, February 24–25, 1977]): 187–198 [196–8], doi : 10.2307/839667 , JSTOR 839667 ^ a b Makdisi, John A. (June 1999), "The Islamic Origins of the Common Law", North Carolina Law Review , 77 (5): 1635– 1739 ^ Triggiano, Annalisa.

"Towards a Civil Code: The Italian Experience" .

Teoria e Storia del Diritto Privato .

^ Franklin, Mitchell (Spring 1951).

"On the Legal Method of the Uniform Commercial Code" .

Law and Contemporary Problems .

16 (2): 330– 343.

doi : 10.2307/1190098 .

JSTOR 1190098 .

^ The Civil Code of the Republic of Albania, 1991 Archived 22 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas Públicas – Argentina" . InfoLEG . Retrieved 19 January 2017 .

^ "Comienza a regir el nuevo Código Civil y Comercial" . Jornadaonline.com. Archived from the original on 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 19 January 2017 .

^ Andorra (11/07) ^ "Opći građanski zakonik | Hrvatska enciklopedija" . Enciklopedija.hr . Retrieved 19 January 2017 .

^ Croatian legal history in the European context, Dalibor Čepulo, p. 357 ^ a b The World Factbook ^ a b Jain, Subhash C. (1970).

"French Legal System in Pondicherry: An Introduction" .

Journal of the Indian Law Institute .

12 (4): 573– 608.

ISSN 0019-5731 .

JSTOR 43950094 .

^ a b c Ritisha, Sinha (13 December 2023).

"India government introduces revised criminal law amendment bills with minor changes" .

Jurist . Retrieved 31 March 2024 .

^ a b c Bhaumik, Aaratrika (18 December 2023).

"Revised criminal law bills: The key changes | Explained" .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 31 March 2024 .

^ a b Ignazio, Castellucci (2012).

"Legal Hybridity in Hong Kong and Macau" (PDF) .

McGill Law Journal .

57 (4): 665– 720.

doi : 10.7202/1013028ar .

^ "Jaime B. Berger Stender Attorney at Law author, Tijuana, B.C., Mexico" . Archived from the original on 4 April 2005 . Retrieved 23 February 2007 .

^ Valeriu Stoica (2009).

Drept civil. Drepturile reale Principale . Bucharest: C.H. Beck. pp. XIII.

^ Maggs, Peter B., Olga Schwartz, and William Burnham. Law and legal system of the Russian Federation. Juris Publishing, Inc., 2015.

https://books.google.com/books?id=J0jwCQAAQBAJ&dq=russian+legal+system&pg=PR21 ^ Butler, William E. "Russian law." Elgar Encyclopedia of Comparative Law, Second Edition. Edward Elgar Publishing, 2012. 777–788.

https://www.elgaronline.com/display/edcoll/9781849804158/9781849804158.00066.xml ^ Constitution of Uruguay (in Spanish) ^ Uruguayan Civil Code Archived 2013-12-13 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) ^ "Venezuela: Legal tradition" . International Commission of Jurists . Retrieved 19 November 2021 .

^ Manooja, D. C. (2000).

"Uniform Civil Code: A Suggestion" .

Journal of the Indian Law Institute .

42 (2/4): 448– 457.

ISSN 0019-5731 .

JSTOR 43953824 .

^ "Magna Carta" . Retrieved 10 November 2006 .

^ Nandini Chavan, Qutub Jehan Kidwai (2006). "Territorial Diversities and Personal Laws".

Personal Law Reforms and Gender Empowerment: A Debate on Uniform Civil Code . Hope India Publications. p. 245.

ISBN 978-81-7871-079-2 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2015 . Retrieved 30 January 2015 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Josephine Takamore v Denise Clarke ,  SC 131/2011 [2012] NZSC 116, paragraph 94 ( Supreme Court of New Zealand 18 December 2012).

^ Kramm, Matthias (2020).

"When a River Becomes a Person" .

Journal of Human Development and Capabilities .

21 (4): 307– 319.

doi : 10.1080/19452829.2020.1801610 .

^ a b Martin, Lau (1994).

"Introduction to the Pakistani Legal System, with Special Reference to the Law of Contract" .

Yearbook of Islamic and Middle Eastern Law .

1 : 3.

^ El-Gamal, Mahmoud A. (2006), Islamic Finance: Law, Economics, and Practice , Cambridge University Press , p. 16, ISBN 0-521-86414-3 ^ Boudinhon, Auguste.

"Canon Law." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 9. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 9 August 2013 ^ Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, pg. 771: "Jus canonicum" ^ Della Rocca, Manual of Canon Law , p. 3.

^ Edward N. Peters , "A Catechist's Introduction to Canon Law" , CanonLaw.info, accessed June-11-2013 ^ Berman, Harold J.

Law and Revolution , pp. 86, 115.

^ Edward N. Peters , CanonLaw.info Home Page , accessed 11 June 2013.

^ Raymond Wacks, Law: A Very Short Introduction, 2nd Ed.

(Oxford University Press, 2015) p. 13.

^ Badr, Gamal Moursi (Spring 1978), "Islamic Law: Its Relation to Other Legal Systems", The American Journal of Comparative Law , 26 (2 – Proceedings of an International Conference on Comparative Law, Salt Lake City, Utah, 24–25 February 1977): 187– 198, doi : 10.2307/839667 , JSTOR 839667 ^ Makdisi, George (April–June 1989), "Scholasticism and Humanism in Classical Islam and the Christian West", Journal of the American Oriental Society , 109 (2): 175–182 [175–77], doi : 10.2307/604423 , JSTOR 604423 ^ Badr, Gamal Moursi (Spring 1978), "Islamic Law: Its Relation to Other Legal Systems", The American Journal of Comparative Law , 26 (2 – Proceedings of an International Conference on Comparative Law, Salt Lake City, Utah, 24–25 February 1977): 187–198 [196–8], doi : 10.2307/839667 , JSTOR 839667 ^ Arwa, Ibrahim.

"Explainer: The Taliban and Islamic law in Afghanistan" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "An Intellectual History of the Ja'fari School" . Law and religion forum . Retrieved 25 August 2022 .

^ "Pope Francis reforms Vatican City courts with new law" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 16 February 2021 .

^ a b c Pain, JH (July 1978). "The reception of English and Roman-Dutch law in Africa with reference to Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland".

The Comparative and International Law Journal of Southern Africa .

11 (2): 137– 167.

^ Errol, A. Adams (2020).

"Guyana Law and Legal Research" . Hauser Global Law School Program, New York University School of Law.

^ "Religious conversion: HC query raises more question marks" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 1 December 2017 .

^ "Modi's party set to bring contentious common civil laws in India through states" . Reuters . Retrieved 31 January 2024 .

^ "Mauritius-Penal System" . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ Geraldo, Geraldine Mwanza; Nowases, Isabella (April 2010).

"Researching Namibian Law and the Namibian Legal System" . Retrieved 7 May 2013 .

^ This definition is partly disputed – Thomson, Stephen, Mixed Jurisdiction and the Scottish Legal Tradition: Reconsidering the Concept of Mixture (2014) 7(1) Journal of Civil Law Studies 51–91 ^ "The Federal Judiciary" . The UAE Government. 2022.

Sources [ edit ] Books Susan Farran, Esin Örücü, & Seán Patrick Donlan, eds.

A study of mixed legal systems: endangered, entrenched, or blended . Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate, 2014.

Elina N. Moustaira.

Comparative law: university courses (in Greek) . Athens: Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers, 2004, ISBN 960-15-1267-5 .

Elina N. Moustaira.

Milestones in the course of comparative law: thesis and antithesis (in Greek) . Athens: Ant. N. Sakkoulas Publishers, 2003, ISBN 960-15-1097-4 .

Esin Örücü, ed.

Mixed legal systems at new frontiers . London: Wildy, Simmonds & Hill, 2010.

Vernon Valentine Palmer, Mohamed Y. Mattar, & Anna Kopper, eds.

Mixed legal systems, east and west . Farnham–Burlington, VT: Ashgate, 2014.

External links [ edit ] World Legal Systems , Website of the Faculty of Law of the University of Ottawa Factbook list of legal systems v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Lists of countries by laws and law enforcement rankings Age of Candidacy for political office Consent Criminal responsibility Drinking Smoking Gambling Driving Majority Marriage in the US Retirement Mandatory retirement School-leaving in the US Voting Suffrage Youth suffrage Working Drugs and alcohol Drug and precursor laws by country or territory Alcohol Alcohol consumption Bath salts Legal status of Mephedrone Legal status of Methylone Legal status of MPDV Cocaine use Legality Methamphetamine Legality Opiate use Psychedelics Amanita mushroom Legality Ayahuasca Legality Cannabis Legality Annual use Lifetime use Ibogaine Legality LSD Legality Psilocybin mushroom Legality Salvia divinorum Legality Death Murder Intentional homicide By gender Legality of euthanasia Legality of suicide Legality of assisted suicide Weapons and explosives Air guns Guns Deaths Households Laws Ownership Knives Pepper spray Tasers Punishment Death penalty Incarceration Life imprisonment Policing Crime statistics Size of police forces Obscenity Incest Laws Pornography Child pornography Fictional pornography depicting minors Simulated child pornography Internet pornography Prostitution Sex trafficking Sexual assault Child sexual abuse Rape Sodomy law Reproduction Abortion law Minors and abortion Adoption law International adoption Human cloning Sterilization Surrogacy Marriage Marriage law Cousin marriage in the US ) Divorce Impotence Polygamy Same-sex marriage Human rights Children's rights Children in the military Intersex rights Human trafficking Women's rights Freedom of movement By country In the air Abode Property and environment Air Estate Land Minerals Mining Mortgage Water Riparian water Business Competition Mergers and acquisitions Monopoly Corporate Corporate liability Legality of cryptocurrency Violence Corporal punishment At home At school In court LGBT rights Police misconduct Police accountability Police brutality Annual rates by country Prisoner abuse Police body camera Alcohol law Slavery International ownership International waters Maritime law UN Convention on the Law of the Sea Antarctic Treaty System World Intellectual Property Organization World Intellectual Property Indicators Foreign ownership International copyright treaties Censorship Censorship by country Book censorship by country Cartographic censorship Film censorship by country Internet censorship by country Censorship of LGBT issues Political censorship Television censorship by country Video gaming censorship by country Other Animal rights Immigration law National legal systems Religious law Separation of church and state Sharia World Justice Project List of international rankings Lists by country v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cdqmm
Cached time: 20250818051222
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.074 seconds
Real time usage: 2.763 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 53768/1000000
Revision size: 68148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 399246/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 56207/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 236304/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.691/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15068037/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1923.108      1 -total
 34.66%  666.481    198 Template:Flagicon
 19.38%  372.610      1 Template:Reflist
 15.41%  296.266      7 Template:Navbox
 14.41%  277.158    104 Template:Iso2country
  9.78%  188.015      1 Template:Law_of_Europe
  9.73%  187.117     20 Template:Cite_web
  9.56%  183.758      1 Template:Europe_topic
  7.38%  141.962      1 Template:Asia_in_topic
  5.40%  103.832      1 Template:Langx Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:154708:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818051222 and revision id 1306519587. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_national_legal_systems&oldid=1306519587 " Categories : Comparative law Law by country Legal systems Customary legal systems Law-related lists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 05:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of national legal systems 14 languages Add topic

