Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career in psychotherapy 2 Influence of Leibnizian symbolic thought 3 Publications (selected) 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Harald Schultz-Hencke 5 languages Български Deutsch Español Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German psychiatrist and psychotherapist This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Harald Schultz-Hencke" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lehrbuch der Traumanalyse , 1949 Harald Julius Alfred Carl-Ludwig Schultz-Hencke (18 August 1892, Berlin – 23 May 1953, Berlin) was a German psychiatrist and psychotherapist . After an initial introduction to psychoanalysis, with Sandor Rado as psychoanalyst, he was excluded from the German Society of Psychoanalysis because of, among other things, his divergent views on sexuality.

Schultze-Hencke was the son of Dankmar Schultz-Henke , a chemist who was the founder of the photographic institute at the Lette-Verein , and Rosa Zingler, a graphologist who had written the libretto to the opera Die Sibylle von Tivoli by Alfred Sormann and who was rumoured to be an illegitimate daughter of King Edward VII .

[ 1 ] Career in psychotherapy [ edit ] In 1933, like several non-Jewish psychotherapists (Felix Julius Boehm, Carl Müller-Braunschweig and Werner Kemper) he helped set up the " Göring Institute " (named after Matthias Göring ), which was closely linked to the Nazi regime and promoted a “New German soul medicine," a psychotherapy for Germans. After the war, his participation in this institute created controversy in professional circles such as the International Psychoanalytical Association.

With other psychotherapists and analysts who had left or had been excluded from other psychoanalytic organizations, he started the DPV (Deutsche Psychoanalytische Vereinigung). After numerous debates regarding whether or not these analysts should join the International Psychoanalytical Association , Schultz-Hencke, who had long been in disagreement with the basic tenets of Freudian theory , created " Neopsychanalyse ." "Neopsychanalyse" or neopsychoanalysis is a psychotherapeutic technique thus named by Schultz-Hencke.

Influence of Leibnizian symbolic thought [ edit ] In one of his books, Schultz-Hencke had asserted that all psychotherapy should be submitted to the Leibnizian principle that "all science must be expressed in mathematical terms." This implies that even a young science must strive towards this goal. In this perspective, Schultz-Hencke analyzed all Freudian concepts and eliminated all those that do not respond to this precept, or that, according to him, could never respond to it, such as infantile sexuality , etc. So, in a way, the dualistic view of Freudian psychoanalysis is challenged in favor of a monistic view (and thus does not include notions of conflict between psychic entities, etc.).

Schultz-Hencke also wanted to subject the Oedipus complex to statistical studies. To some extent, this criticism joined that of Karl Popper and other more modern scientists who, before anything else, advocated quantitative analysis and, thus, statistics. The treatment technique advocated by Schultz-Hencke was subsequently developed by Helmut Bach, among others, who progressively demarcated the ideas of its founder to create a "psychoanalysis" within the limits of practices imposed by the IPA; psychotherapists such as Franz Alexander , Karen Horney , René Laforgue , and Erich Fromm have contributed significantly to this endeavor.

Publications (selected) [ edit ] 1917: Der Einfluß des militärischen Kriegsdienstes auf die progressive Paralyse . - Freiburg i. B. : Speyer & Kaerner 1920: Der Sinn unserer Zeit und die freien Volkshochschulen als Vorkämpfer neuen Bildungswesens : Grundsätzliches z. Revolutionierung von Schule u. Unterricht , Berlin-Wilmersdorf: Volkshaus-Verlag 1927: Einführung in die Psychoanalyse ; Jena: G. Fischer 1931: Schicksal und Neurose : Versuch e. Neurosenlehre vom Bewusstsein her , Jena: Fischer 1940: Der gehemmte Mensch : Entwurf eines Lehrbuches der Neo-Psychoanalyse , Stuttgart: Thieme, 6. unveränd. Auflage, Stuttgart 1989, ISBN 3-13-401806-3 1949: Lehrbuch der Traumanalyse.

Stuttgart: G. Thieme References [ edit ] ^ International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis: "Schultz-Hencke, Harald Julius Alfred Carl-Ludwig (1892–1953)", Thomson Gale, 2005 Sources [ edit ] Alain de Mijolla (ed.).

International Dictionary of Psychoanalysis , 3rd vol.: "Schultz-Hencke, Harald Julius Alfred Carl-Ludwig (1892–1953)", Macmillan Reference Books, ISBN 0-02-865924-4 Cocks, Geoffrey. (1985).

Psychotherapy in the Third Reich: The Göring Institute (2nd ed). New York: Oxford University Press Theilemann, Steffen, Harald Schultz-Hencke und die Freideutsche Jugend: biografie bis 1921 und die Geschichte einer Bewegung (Giessen: Psychosozial-Verlag, 2018) ISBN 978-3-8379-2802-0 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harald_Schultz-Hencke&oldid=1289946953 " Categories : 1892 births 1953 deaths German psychiatrists Analysands of Sándor Radó 20th-century German psychologists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 21:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harald Schultz-Hencke 5 languages Add topic

