Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Human osteology and forensic anthropology 3 Crossrail Project 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Osteology 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of bones A human skeleton ( endoskeleton ) Osteology (from Greek ὀστέον (ostéon) ' bones ' and λόγος (logos) ' study ' ) is the scientific study of bones , practiced by osteologists [ 1 ] .

A subdiscipline of anatomy , anthropology , archaeology and paleontology , osteology is the detailed study of the structure of bones, skeletal elements, teeth , microbone morphology , function, disease , pathology , the process of ossification from cartilaginous molds, and the resistance and hardness of bones ( biophysics ).

[ 2 ] Osteologists frequently work in the public and private sector as consultants for museums, scientists for research laboratories, scientists for medical investigations and/or for companies producing osteological reproductions in an academic context. The role of an osteologist entails understanding the macroscopic and microscopic anatomies of bones for both humans and non-humans (courses in non-human osteology is known as zooarchaeology ).

[ 1 ] Osteology and osteologists should not be confused with the pseudoscientific practice of osteopathy and its practitioners, osteopaths .

Methods [ edit ] A typical analysis will include: an inventory of the skeletal elements present a dental inventory aging data, based upon epiphyseal fusion and dental eruption (for subadults) and deterioration of the pubic symphysis or sternal end of ribs (for adults) stature and other metric data ancestry non-metric traits pathology and/or cultural modifications Applications [ edit ] Comparative Osteology Room in the La Plata Museum , Argentina.

Comparison of Great Dane and Chihuahua skeletons at the Museum of Osteology , Oklahoma City, Oklahoma .

Osteological approaches are frequently applied to investigations in disciplines such as vertebrate paleontology , zoology , forensic science, physical anthropology , and archaeology . It has been shown that osteological characters have greater  consistency with molecular phylogenies than non-osteological (soft tissue) characters, implying that they may be more reliable in reconstructing evolutionary history.

[ 3 ] Osteology has a place in research on topics including: Ancient warfare Activity patterns Criminal investigations Demography Developmental biology Diet Disease Genetics of early populations Fossil assemblages Health Human migration Identification of unknown remains Physique Social inequality War crimes Human osteology and forensic anthropology [ edit ] Examination of human osteology is often used in forensic anthropology , which is usually used to identify age , death , sex , growth , and development of human remains and can be used in a biocultural context.

There are four factors leading to variation in skeletal anatomy: ontogeny (or growth), sexual dimorphism , geographic variation and individual, or idiosyncratic, variation.

[ 4 ] Osteology can also determine an individual's ancestry , race or ethnicity . Historically, humans were typically grouped into three outdated race groups: caucasoids , mongoloids and negroids . However, this classification system is growing less reliable due to interancestrial marriages increases and markers become less defined.

[ 5 ] Determination of ancestry is controversial, but can give an understandable label to define the ancestry of an unidentified body or skeleton.

[ 6 ] Crossrail Project [ edit ] One example of osteology and its various applications is illustrated by the Crossrail Project. An endeavor by the city of London to expand their railway system inadvertently uncovered 25 human skeletons at Charterhouse Square in 2013. Although archaeological excavation of the skeletons temporarily halted further advances in the railway system, they have given way to new, possibly revolutionary, discoveries in the field of archaeology.

These 25 skeletal remains, along with many more that were found in further searches, are believed to be from the mass graves dug to bury the millions of victims of the Black Death in the 14th century. Archaeologists and forensic scientists have used osteology to examine the condition of the skeletal remains, to help piece together the reason why the Black Death had such a detrimental effect on the European population. It was discovered that most of the population was in generally poor health to begin with. Through extensive analysis of the bones, it was discovered that many of the inhabitants of Great Britain were plagued with rickets , anemia , and malnutrition .

[ 7 ] There has also been frequent evidence that much of the population had traces of broken bones from frequent fighting and hard labor.

This archaeological project has been named the Crossrail Project. Archaeologists will continue to excavate and search for remains to help uncover missing pieces of history. These advances in our understanding of the past will be improved by the study of other skeletons buried in the same area.

See also [ edit ] Osteometric points Museum of Osteology Vix Grave Bone Clones Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Langley, Natalie; Terisgni-Terrant, Maria-Teresa (May 22, 2017).

Forensic Anthropology: A Compresensive Introduction (2nd ed.). CRC Press. p. 82.

ISBN 9781315300030 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Blau, Soren (2014). "Osteology: Definition".

Encyclopedia of Global Archaeology . Springer. p. 5641.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-0465-2_127 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-0465-2 .

^ Leah M Callender-Crowe; Robert S Sansom (2022).

"Osteological characters of birds and reptiles are more congruent with molecular phylogenies than soft characters are" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

194 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1093/zoolinnean/zlaa136 .

^ White, Tim D.; Black, Michael T.; Folkens, Pieter A. (2011).

Human Osteology . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-092085-6 .

^ "Visible Proofs: Forensic Views of the Body: Education: Anthropological Views" .

www.nlm.nih.gov .

^ "Forensic Anthropology and Race | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

^ McCoy, Terrence.

"Everything you know about the Black Death is wrong" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 4 April 2014 .

References [ edit ] Bass, W. M. 2005.

Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual . 5th Edition. Columbia: Missouri Archaeological Society.

Buikstra, J. E.

and Ubelaker, D. H.

(eds.) 1994.

Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains . Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series No. 44.

Cox, M and Mays, S. (eds.) 2000.

Human Osteology in Archaeology and Forensic Science . London: Greenwich Medical Media.

F.F.A. Ijpma, H.J. ten Duis, T.M. van Guilik 2012." A cornerstone of orthopaedic education". Bones & Joint 360, Vol. 1, No. 6 Ekezie, Jervas, PHD, "Bone, the Frame of Human Classification: The Core of Anthropology". Department of Anatomy, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Federal University of Technology, PMB 1526, Owerri, Nigeria. Volume 2: Issue 1.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Osteology .

British Association for Biological Anthropology and Osteoarchaeology Museum of Osteology v t e Archaeology History Archaeological sites Antiquarianism Johann Joachim Winckelmann Richard Hoare Heinrich Schliemann Arthur Evans John Lloyd Stephens William Henry Holmes Augustus Pitt Rivers Flinders Petrie Mortimer Wheeler Dorothy Garrod Max Uhle Alfred V. Kidder George Bass Method and theory Archaeological theory Philosophy of archaeology Archaeological diving Archaeological ethics Conservation and restoration of archaeological sites Survey geophysical survey electrical resistance survey Sondage Burnt layer Excavation Lithic analysis Post-excavation Sub-disciplines Chronological Prehistoric Protohistoric Biblical Classical Medieval Post-Medieval Historical Contemporary Geographic African American Asian Australian Oceanian Egyptian Mesopotamian Near Eastern Nubian Methodological Aerial Bioarchaeology Archaeogenetics Medieval Near Eastern Osteology Paleopathology Calceology Digital Archaeogaming Computational Virtual Environmental Geoarchaeology Paleoethnobotany Zooarchaeology Experimental Underwater Thematic Archaeoastronomy Archaeometry Battlefield Conflict Feminist Funerary Gender Indigenous Industrial Landscape Maritime Mortuary Music Nazi Phenomenology Pseudoarchaeology Queer Transgender Lists Sites by country Periods Archaeologists Egyptologists Assyriologists Hittitologists Journals Category History portal v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Osteology&oldid=1301021981 " Categories : Osteology Biological anthropology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Osteology 48 languages Add topic

