Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Text 2 Interpretation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents The Sheep and the Goats 16 languages Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Polski Português தமிழ் 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Parable by Jesus in Matthew 25 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The Sheep and the Goats" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Replica of a 6th-century Byzantine mosaic, depicting Christ separating the sheep from the goats, in the church of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo , Ravenna, Italy. The blue angel in the original mosaic is possibly the earliest artistic depiction of Satan .

The Sheep and the Goats or " the Judgement of the Nations " is a pronouncement of Jesus recorded in chapter 25 of the Gospel of Matthew , through which Jesus strongly encourages his followers to take action to help those in need.

[ 1 ] With this speech, Jesus indicates that, in order to go to Heaven , one must actively help people in need. Through it, Jesus explains that helping a person, whoever the person may be, is just the same as helping Jesus himself.

[ 2 ] According to Anglican theologian Charles Ellicott , "we commonly speak of the concluding portion of this chapter as the parable of the Sheep and the Goats, but it is obvious from its very beginning that it passes beyond the region of parable into that of divine realities, and that the sheep and goats form only a subordinate and parenthetic illustration".

[ 3 ] This portion concludes the section of Matthew's Gospel known as the Olivet Discourse and immediately precedes Matthew's account of Jesus' passion and resurrection .

[ 4 ] This story and the parable of the ten virgins and the parable of the talents in the same chapter "have a common aim, as impressing on the disciples the necessity at once of watchfulness and of activity in good, but each has ... a very distinct scope of its own".

[ 3 ] Text [ edit ] Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The text of the passage appears in Matthew's Gospel and is the final portion of a section containing a series of parables.

But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory. Before him all the nations will be gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. He will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then the King will tell those on his right hand, 'Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world; for I was hungry, and you gave me food to eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. I was a stranger, and you took me in. I was naked, and you clothed me. I was sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came to me.' Then the righteous will answer him, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you; or thirsty, and give you a drink? When did we see you as a stranger, and take you in; or naked, and clothe you?  When did we see you sick, or in prison, and come to you?' The King will answer them, 'Most certainly I tell you, because you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.' Then he will say also to those on the left hand, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels; for I was hungry, and you didn’t give me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and you didn’t take me in; naked, and you didn’t clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you didn’t visit me.' Then they will also answer, saying, Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and didn’t help you?

Then he will answer them, saying, 'Most certainly I tell you, because you did not do it to one of the least of these, you didn’t do it to me.' These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.

— Matthew 25:31–46 Interpretation [ edit ] The connection between the images of king and shepherd recalls the figure of David .

[ 5 ] The two parables that precede this one ( Parable of the Ten Virgins and the Parable of the Talents ) stress waiting for and preparing for the return of Christ. "This parable is similar to the Rich man and Lazarus in that the time to repent and be converted, the time to care for the poor on one's doorstep, is past." [ 6 ] It also recalls the parable of the Good Samaritan . As associate professor of Biblical Languages at Union Presbyterian Seminary, E. Carson Brisson, says, "Let it be noted that this list of afflicted and needy individuals is, at first glance, a list of the very ones who appear to be bereft of God's favor. These are ‘the least.’ These are truly ‘other.’" [ 7 ] Also, see Ezekiel 34:4 for a similar list of afflicted and needy individuals whom God favors. This pericope is also similar to the Parable of the Wheat and Weeds which will be sorted out on Judgment Day. What distinguishes the sheep from the goats is the acceptance or rejection of Jesus' message.

There is some difference of opinion among scholars regarding the identity of "the least of these my brothers", with Reginald H. Fuller and others holding that it refers to the disciples Jesus sent out on mission. "The criterion of judgment for all the nations is their treatment of those who have borne to the world the message of Jesus, and this means ultimately their acceptance or rejection of Jesus himself; cf. Mt 10:40, “Whoever receives you, receives me.”" [ 5 ] [ 8 ] "For the Son of Man will come with his angels in his Father’s glory, and then he will repay everyone according to his conduct." ( Matthew 16 :27).

True compassion will result in action.

[ 6 ] Those who believe in justification by faith may still accept that good works may function as a test or measure of belief.

According to free grace theology , this passage implies that only faithful believers are able to survive the tribulation; it draws a distinction between inheriting versus entering the kingdom.

[ 9 ] Cornelius a Lapide in his Great Commentary writes, "He compares the elect to sheep, because of their innocence, modesty, humility, obedience, and patience; the reprobate to goats, because this creature has a fetid smell. It is fierce, immodest, lascivious. It walks in precipitous places. And it is quarrelsome. Such are the wicked. Wherefore under the Old Law goats were wont to be offered as sin-offerings." Lapide also notes that "there are six principal corporal works of mercy which Christ here speaks of, viz., to feed the hungry, to give drink to the thirsty, to take in strangers, to clothe the naked, to visit the sick, to comfort and redeem captives, to which may be added a seventh, to bury the dead, which is commanded in Tobit ".

[ 10 ] Pope Francis saw in these verses "[a] new principle in human history which emphasizes that individuals are even more 'worthy' of our respect and love when they are weak, scorned , or suffering".

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Jerusalem: The Emanation of the Giant Albion – Prophetic book by William Blake Second Coming – Christian and Islamic belief that Jesus will return to Earth Sheep–goat hybrid – Hybrid between a sheep and a goat References [ edit ] ^ https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgqjgdm/revision/5 BBC - The Sheep and the Goats ^ https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zgqjgdm/revision/5 BBC - The Sheep and the Goats ^ a b "Matthew 25" . Ellicott's Commentary for English Readers.

biblehub.com . Retrieved 15 April 2018 .

^ Jerusalem Bible sub-title for chapters 26–28 ^ a b "Fuller, Reginald H.

Preaching the Lectionary: The Word of God for the Church Today , The Liturgical Press. 1984 (Revised Edition)" . Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 11 July 2019 .

^ a b McKenzie, Alyce. "Judging Sheep and Goats: Reflections on Matthew 25:31–46", November 14, 2011 ^ Brisson, E Carson. "Matthew 25:14–30." Interpretation 56.3 (2002): 307–310.

ATLA Religion Database with ATLASerials . Web. 5 September 2013.

^ NAB, note Matt.25:31–46 ^ Claeys, John (1 September 2017).

"Matthew 25:31–46: Salvation by Works?" .

Grace Evangelical Society . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ Lapide, Cornelius (1889).

The great commentary of Cornelius à Lapide . Translated by Thomas Wimberly Mossman.

^ Pope Francis, Dilexit nos , paragraph 170, published on 24 October 2024, accessed on 10 March 2025 v t e Parables of Jesus Canonical Gospels Barren Fig Tree Budding Fig Tree Counting the cost Drawing in the Net Faithful Servant Friend at Night Good Samaritan Good Shepherd Grain of Wheat Great Banquet Growing Seed Hidden Treasure Lamp Leaven Lost Coin Lost Sheep Master and Servant Mote and the Beam Mustard Seed New Wine into Old Wineskins Pearl of Great Price Pharisee and the Publican Prodigal Son Rich Fool Rich man and Lazarus Scribe Sheep and Goats Sower Strong Man Talents or minas Tares Ten Virgins True Vine Tree and Its Fruits Two Debtors Two Sons Unjust Judge Unjust Steward Unforgiving Servant Wedding Feast Wicked Husbandmen Wise and Foolish Builders Workers in the Vineyard Non-canonical / disputed Assassin Empty Jar Related Jesus ministry Jesus preaches in a ship Parable v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Sheep_and_the_Goats&oldid=1287125279 " Categories : Animals in the Bible Biblical phrases Eschatology in the Bible Christian terminology Doctrines and teachings of Jesus Gospel of Matthew Metaphors referring to sheep or goats Sayings of Jesus Satan in Bible verses Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2011 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 04:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Sheep and the Goats 16 languages Add topic

