Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Challenges 2 Flora vs Fauna conservation methods 3 Threatened categories 4 Conservation attempts 5 Conservation-dependent animals Toggle Conservation-dependent animals subsection 5.1 Reptiles 5.2 Mollusks 5.3 Arthropods 6 EPBC Act 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Conservation-dependent species 25 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina தமிழ் తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkmençe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia IUCN conservation category This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Conservation-dependent species" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) ( list ) Extinct in the Wild (EW) ( list ) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) ( list ) Endangered (EN) ( list ) Vulnerable (VU) ( list ) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) ( list ) Conservation Dependent (CD) ( list ) Least Concern (LC) ( lists ) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) ( list ) Not Evaluated (NE) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red List classes above and NatureServe status below v t e A visualization of the categories in the no-longer used "IUCN 1994 Categories & Criteria (version 2.3)", with conservation dependent (LR/cd) highlighted. The category was folded into the "near threatened" category in the 2001 revision, but some species which have not been re-evaluated retain the assessment.

A conservation-dependent species is a species which has been categorized as " Conservation Dependent " (" LR/cd ") by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), as dependent on conservation efforts to prevent it from becoming endangered . A species that is reliant on the conservation attempts of humans is considered conservation dependent. Such species must be the focus of a continuing species-specific and/or habitat-specific conservation program, the cessation of which would result in the species qualifying for one of the threatened categories within a period of five years. The determination of status is constantly monitored and can change.

This category is part of the IUCN 1994 Categories & Criteria (version 2.3), which is no longer used in evaluation of taxa, but persists in the IUCN Red List for taxa evaluated prior to 2001, when version 3.1 was first used. Using the 2001 (version 3.1) system these taxa are classed as near threatened , but those that have not been re-evaluated remain with the "Conservation Dependent" category.

Conservation-dependent species require maintenance additional to the use of the United States Endangered Species Act of 1973. This act is said to protect species from extinction by concerns and acts of conservation.

[ 1 ] Challenges [ edit ] Conservation-dependent species rely on population connectivity between humans and animals to maintain their life. Connectivity is based in regard to the federal regulatory provisions that protect the species and its habitat. Habitats and species are difficult to conserve when they are not susceptible to the regulations put in place.

[ 2 ] It is also seen that laws and acts have flaws that cause gaps in their motive. The Endangered Species Act fails to account for biological ecosystem conservation and threats to a species presence.

[ 3 ] Conservation in these conditions causes data gaps and leads to the depletion of species.

Funding of the federal provisions show to be a major concern when efforts are being made to conserve species. Legal members who don't agree on where funding should go cause more harm to the conservation-dependent species by making no effort for restoration. Despite legal efforts for defining a restoration program and setting regulatory provisions, conservation-dependent species are still in danger.

[ 4 ] Flora vs Fauna conservation methods [ edit ] While conservation dependent plants and animals fall under the same risk status in the environment different methods are used to protect them. Conservation dependent animals are typically protected by recovery plans and agreements for conservation by the government.

[ 5 ] Plants that are conservation dependent have less protection behind them as the major method for conservation is keeping a habitat healthy. In order to do so, keeping areas uncivilized and minimizing pollution emissions are predictable solutions.

[ 6 ] Keeping the flora (plants) and fauna (animals) in their region out of the conservation dependent category is the main goal of these methods.

Threatened categories [ edit ] Species that are considered Conservation- Dependent are under the lower risk category of status in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . The category of species may change and vary depending on its status in its environment. The lower risk status section has three categories that species may fluctuate through.

Near Threatened (NT) Conservation Dependent (CD) Least Concern (LC) Conservation attempts [ edit ] In fisheries around the world, there is a list of rules that people must follow which are in place as a conservation effort. These rules protect the conservation dependent listing of Scalloped Hammerhead shark ( Sphyrna lewini ) under the EPBC Act is one major step for conservation of endangered species.

[ 7 ] Reporting catch by phone : fishers must report their catch of a shark to QDAF's automated interactive voice response.

Species specific catch and discard information in logbooks: all catches of sharks must be recorded in a log book.

Data validation : one hour after docking when there is a shark on board, fisheries officers are allowed to inspect boat and catches.

Conservation-dependent animals [ edit ] Black caiman from Puerto Maldonado Examples of conservation-dependent species include the black caiman ( Melanosuchus niger ), the sinarapan , and the California ground cricket .

As of December 2015, there remains 209 conservation-dependent plant species and 29 conservation-dependent animal species.

As of September 2022, the IUCN still lists 20 conservation-dependent animal species, and one conservation-dependent subpopulations or stocks.

Reptiles [ edit ] Black caiman Mollusks [ edit ] Bear paw clam China clam Maxima clam Fluted giant clam Arthropods [ edit ] Mono Lake brine shrimp Attheyella yemanjae Canthocamptus campaneri Metacyclops campestris Murunducaris juneae Muscocyclops bidentatus Muscocyclops therasiae California ground cricket Ponticyclops boscoi Spaniacris deserticola Stenopelmatus nigrocapitatus Thermocyclops parvus EPBC Act [ edit ] In Australia, the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 still uses a "Conservation Dependent" category for classifying fauna and flora species. Species recognized as "Conservation Dependent" do not receive special protection, as they are not considered "matters of national environmental significance under the EPBC Act". Any assemblage of species may be listed as a "threatened ecological community" under the EPBC Act. Fauna may be classified under this category if its flora is directly threatened.

The legislation uses categories similar to those of the IUCN 1994 Categories & Criteria . It does not, however, have a near threatened category or any other "lower risk" categories.

As of December 2018, eight species of fishes have received the status under the act: [ 8 ] Orange roughy ( Hoplostethus atlanticus ) Silver gemfish (Rexea solandri) School shark (Galeorhinus galeus) Southern bluefin tuna (Thunnus maccoyii) Southern dogfish (Centrophorus zeehaani) Dumb gulper shark (Centrophorus harrissoni) Blue warehou (Seriolella brama) Scalloped hammerhead (Sphyrna lewini) No flora has been given the category under the EPBC Act.

See also [ edit ] Conservation-reliant species IUCN Red List conservation dependent species , ordered by taxonomic rank .

Category:IUCN Red List conservation dependent species , ordered alphabetically.

References [ edit ] ^ US EPA, OP (2013-02-22).

"Summary of the Endangered Species Act" .

epa.gov . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

^ Carroll, Carlos; Rohlf, Daniel J.; Li, Ya-Wei; Hartl, Brett; Phillips, Michael K.; Noss, Reed F. (2014-04-21).

"Connectivity Conservation and Endangered Species Recovery: A Study in the Challenges of Defining Conservation-Reliant Species" .

Conservation Letters .

8 (2): 132– 138.

doi : 10.1111/conl.12102 .

ISSN 1755-263X .

^ Rohlf, Daniel J. (1991).

"Six Biological Reasons Why the Endangered Species Act Doesn't Work-And What to Do About It" .

Conservation Biology .

5 (3): 273– 282.

Bibcode : 1991ConBi...5..273R .

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-1739.1991.tb00139.x .

ISSN 0888-8892 .

JSTOR 2385897 .

^ Scott, J. Michael; Goble, Dale D.; Haines, Aaron M.; Wiens, John A.; Neel, Maile C. (13 January 2010).

"Conservation-reliant species and the future of conservation" .

Conservation Letters .

3 (2): 91– 97.

Bibcode : 2010ConL....3...91S .

doi : 10.1111/j.1755-263x.2010.00096.x .

ISSN 1755-263X .

^ Fisheries, NOAA (2021-01-27).

"Recovery of Endangered and Threatened Species | NOAA Fisheries" .

NOAA . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

^ "How Are Rare Plants Conserved?" .

fs.usda.gov . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

^ "Australian Marine Conservation Society - AMCS" .

Australian Marine Conservation Society . Retrieved 2023-03-26 .

^ "Dryococelus australis: ANZECC Endangered Fauna Network" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . 2002-01-01.

doi : 10.2305/iucn.uk.2002.rlts.t6852a12810627.en . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Threatened species by region By region Blue-listed Environmental Vulnerability Index Regional Red List Australasia Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 ROTAP Threatened Species Protection Act 1995 Threatened ecological community Trade in Endangered Species Act 1989 Canada Species at Risk Act Committee on the Status of Endangered Wildlife in Canada Europe EAZA Ex-situ Programme Funds for Endangered Parrots South Africa Endangered Wildlife Trust United States Distinct population segment Endangered Species Act of 1973 Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978 Endangered species recovery plan Endangered Wolf Center National Wildlife Refuge NatureServe conservation status The Nature Conservancy Lists Asia List of endangered and protected species of China Endangered mammals of India List of endangered animals in India List of endemic and threatened plants of India List of endangered species in Pakistan List of threatened species of the Philippines List of endangered species in Vietnam Europe Threatened mammals of Europe Endangered plants of Europe Bulgaria Italy Lithuania Russia Ukraine United Kingdom North America List of endangered plants of North America List of endangered animals of North America Endangered mammals and birds of the United States List of threatened mammals of the United States List of threatened birds of the United States List of threatened reptiles and amphibians of the United States Elsewhere Threatened fauna of Australia List of threatened flora of Australia List of endangered flora of Brazil List of threatened mammals of Brazil List of threatened birds of Brazil v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation-dependent_species&oldid=1304825285 " Categories : Conservation dependent species IUCN Red List conservation dependent species Conservation dependent plants IUCN Red List Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from April 2020 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation-dependent species 25 languages Add topic

