Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 European exploration 1.1.1 Name origin 1.1.2 The Dutch's first settlement 1.1.3 The French refugees in the Cape Colony 1.1.4 The European coalitions and Napoleonic wars effect on the Cape Colony 1.1.5 Routes explorations and commemorations 1.2 Contemporary 2 Geography 3 Fauna 4 Flora 5 Legends 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cape of Good Hope 99 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Sakizaya Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Taqbaylit ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°21′29″S 18°28′32″E ﻿ / ﻿ 34.35806°S 18.47556°E ﻿ / -34.35806; 18.47556 ﻿ ( Cape of Good Hope ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Headland of Cape Peninsula, South Africa For other uses, see Cape of Good Hope (disambiguation) .

The Cape of Good Hope looking westward, from the coastal cliffs above Cape Point, overlooking Dias beach The Cape of Good Hope ( Afrikaans : Kaap die Goeie Hoop [ˌkɑːp di ˌχujə ˈɦuəp] ) [ a ] is a rocky headland on the Atlantic coast of the Cape Peninsula in South Africa .

A common misconception is that the Cape of Good Hope is the southern tip of Africa , based on the misbelief that the Cape was the dividing point between the Atlantic and Indian oceans. In fact, the southernmost point of Africa is Cape Agulhas about 150 kilometres (90 mi) to the east-southeast .

[ 1 ] The currents of the two oceans meet at the point where the warm-water Agulhas current meets the cold-water Benguela current and turns back on itself. That oceanic meeting point fluctuates between Cape Agulhas and Cape Point (about 1.2 kilometres (0.75 mi) east of the Cape of Good Hope).

60km 37miles Cape Agulhas Cape of Good Hope The Cape of Good Hope at the southern tip of the Cape Peninsula , approximately 50 km (31 mi) south of Cape Town , South Africa .

Cape Agulhas is the southernmost part of South Africa.

When following the western side of the African coastline from the equator, however, the Cape of Good Hope marks the point where a ship begins to travel more eastward than southward. Thus, the first modern rounding of the cape in 1487 by Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias was a milestone in the attempts by the Portuguese to establish direct trade relations with the Far East (although Herodotus mentioned a claim that the Phoenicians had done so far earlier ).

[ 2 ] Dias called the cape Cabo das Tormentas ('Cape of Storms'; Dutch : Stormkaap ), which was the original name of the cape.

[ 3 ] As one of the great capes of the South Atlantic Ocean, it has long been of special significance to sailors, many of whom refer to it simply as " the Cape ".

[ 4 ] It is a waypoint on the Cape Route and the clipper route followed by clipper ships to the Far East and Australia , and still followed by several offshore yacht races .

The term Cape of Good Hope is also used in three other ways: It is a section of the Table Mountain National Park , within which the cape of the same name, as well as Cape Point, falls. Prior to its incorporation into the national park, this section constituted the Cape Point Nature Reserve.

[ 5 ] It was the name of the early Cape Colony established by the Dutch East Indies Company in 1652, on the Cape Peninsula.

Just before the Union of South Africa was formed, the term referred to the entire region that in 1910 was to become the Cape of Good Hope Province (usually shortened to the Cape Province ).       * it was also a British colony known as the Cape Colony which existed from 1795 to 1802, and again from 1806 to 1910 History [ edit ] Around 600 BC, Necho II reputedly commissioned an expedition of Phoenicians , [ 6 ] who it is said in three years sailed from the Red Sea around Africa back to the mouth of the Nile; and would thereby be the first completion of the Cape Route .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Herodotus' account was handed down to him by oral tradition , [ 9 ] but is seen as potentially credible because he stated with disbelief that the Phoenicians "as they sailed on a westerly course round the southern end of Libya (Africa), they had the sun on their right"—to northward of them ( The Histories 4.42).

[ 10 ] Pliny reported that Hanno had circumnavigated Africa, which may have been a conflation with Necho's voyage, while Strabo , Polybius , and Ptolemy doubted the description; [ 11 ] at the time it was not generally known that Africa was surrounded by an ocean (with the southern part of Africa being thought connected to Asia).

[ 12 ] Eudoxus of Cyzicus ( fl.

c.

130 BC ) was a Greek navigator for Ptolemy VIII , king of the Hellenistic Ptolemaic dynasty in Egypt . In or about 116 BCE, while returning from a voyage to India, Eudoxus found the wreck of a ship that appeared to have originated in Gades (later Cádiz), in what was then Roman Hispania Baetica . At the time, the only way such a vessel could have reached the Indian Ocean was by rounding the Cape.

When Eudoxus was returning from his second voyage to India, the wind forced him south of the Gulf of Aden and down the coast of Africa for some distance. Somewhere along the coast of East Africa, he found the remains of the ship. Due to its appearance and the story told by the natives, Eudoxus concluded that the ship was from Gades and had sailed anti-clockwise around Africa, passing the Cape and entering the Indian Ocean. This inspired him to repeat the voyage and attempt a circumnavigation of the continent. Organising the expedition on his own account he set sail from Gades and began to work down the African coast. The difficulties were too great, however, and he was obliged to return to Europe.

[ 13 ] After this failure he again set out to circumnavigate Africa. His eventual fate is unknown. Although some, such as Pliny , claimed that Eudoxus did achieve his goal, the most probable conclusion is that he died on the journey.

[ 14 ] In the 1450 Fra Mauro map , the Indian Ocean is depicted as connected to the Atlantic. Fra Mauro puts the following inscription by the southern tip of Africa, which he names the "Cape of Diab", describing the exploration by a ship from the East around 1420: [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Detail of the Fra Mauro Map describing the construction of the junks that navigate in the Indian Ocean.

Around 1420 a ship, or junk, from India crossed the Sea of India towards the Island of Men and the Island of Women, off Cape Diab, between the Green Islands and the shadows. It sailed for 40 days in a south-westerly direction without ever finding anything other than wind and water. According to these people themselves, the ship went some 2,000 miles ahead until—once favourable conditions came to an end—it turned round and sailed back to Cape Diab in 70 days.

The ships called junks (lit. " Zonchi ") that navigate these seas carry four masts or more, some of which can be raised or lowered, and have 40 to 60 cabins for the merchants and only one tiller. They can navigate without a compass , because they have an astrologer , who stands on the side and, with an astrolabe in hand, gives orders to the navigator.

—Text from the Fra Mauro map, 09-P25 Fra Mauro explained that he obtained the information from "a trustworthy source", who traveled with the expedition, possibly the Venetian explorer Niccolò da Conti who happened to be in Calicut , India at the time the expedition left: What is more, I have spoken with a person worthy of trust, who says that he sailed in an Indian ship caught in the fury of a tempest for 40 days out in the Sea of India, beyond the Cape of Soffala and the Green Islands towards west-southwest; and according to the astrologers who act as their guides, they had advanced almost 2,000 miles. Thus one can believe and confirm what is said by both these and those, and that they had therefore sailed 4,000 miles.

Fra Mauro also comments that the account of the expedition, together with the relation by Strabo of the travels of Eudoxus of Cyzicus from Arabia to Gibraltar through the southern Ocean in Antiquity , led him to believe that the Indian Ocean was not a closed sea and that Africa could be circumnavigated by her southern end (Text from Fra Mauro map, 11, G2). This knowledge, together with the map depiction of the African continent, probably encouraged the Portuguese to intensify their effort to round the tip of Africa.

In 1511, after Afonso de Albuquerque conquered Malacca , the Portuguese recovered a chart from a Javanese maritime pilot , which, according to Albuquerque, already included the Cape of Good Hope. Regarding the chart Albuquerque said: [ 17 ] [ 18 ] : 98–99 "... a large map of a Javanese pilot, containing the Cape of Good Hope, Portugal and the land of Brazil, the Red Sea and the Sea of Persia , the Clove Islands, the navigation of the Chinese and the Gores, with their rhumbs and direct routes followed by the ships, and the hinterland, and how the kingdoms border on each other. It seems to me, Sir, that this was the best thing I have ever seen, and Your Highness will be very pleased to see it; it had the names in Javanese writing, but I had with me a Javanese who could read and write. I send this piece to Your Highness, which Francisco Rodrigues traced from the other, in which Your Highness can truly see where the Chinese and Gores come from, and the course your ships must take to the Clove Islands, and where the gold mines lie, and the islands of Java and Banda, of nutmeg and mace, and the land of the King of Siam, and also the end of the land of the navigation of the Chinese, the direction it takes, and how they do not navigate farther." — Letter of Albuquerque to King Manuel I of Portugal, 1 April 1512.

European exploration [ edit ] See also: Dutch Cape Colony and Cape Colony Name origin [ edit ] Cross of Bartholomew Dias at Cape of Good Hope.

Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope dubbed Cafres by the Portuguese ( Códice Casanatense , c.

1540 ) In the Early Modern Era , the first European to reach the cape was the Portuguese explorer Bartolomeu Dias on 12 March 1488, who named it the "Cape of Storms" ( Cabo das Tormentas ).

[ 19 ] It was later renamed by John II of Portugal as "Cape of Good Hope" ( Cabo da Boa Esperança ) because of the great optimism engendered by the opening of a sea route to India and the East.

[ 19 ] The Dutch's first settlement [ edit ] The Khoikhoi people lived in the cape area when the Dutch first settled there in 1652. The Khoikhoi had arrived in this area about fifteen hundred years before.

[ 20 ] The Dutch called them Hottentots , a term that has now come to be regarded as pejorative.

[ 21 ] In 1652, the Dutch East India Company's administrator Jan van Riebeeck established a resupply camp for the Dutch East India Company some 50 km north of the cape in Table Bay on April 6, [ 22 ] and this eventually developed into Cape Town . Supplies of fresh food were vital on the long journey around Africa and Cape Town became known as "The Tavern of the Seas".

[ 23 ] The French refugees in the Cape Colony [ edit ] On 31 December 1687, a community of Huguenots (French Protestants) arrived at the Cape of Good Hope from the Netherlands. They had fled from France due to religious persecution and gone to the Netherlands, [ 24 ] before making the journey to the Cape Colony. Members of this group included Pierre Joubert , [ 25 ] [ 26 ] who came from La Motte-d'Aigues , as well as Jean Roy . The Dutch East India Company needed skilled farmers at the Cape of Good Hope and the Dutch government saw opportunities to settle Huguenots at the Cape. The colony gradually grew over the 150 years that followed until it extended hundreds of kilometers to the north and the north-east.

The European coalitions and Napoleonic wars effect on the Cape Colony [ edit ] During the French Revolutionary Wars , the Dutch Republic was occupied by the French in 1795. The Cape Colony then became a French vassal and enemy of the British, who were at war with France. British troops invaded and occupied the Cape Colony that same year. The British relinquished control of the territory in 1803, under the peace of Amiens , but reoccupied the Colony on 19 January 1806 following the Battle of Blaauwberg .

[ 27 ] The Dutch formally ceded the territory to the British in the Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 .

[ 28 ] It would remain a separate British colony until its incorporation into the Union of South Africa in 1910.

[ 29 ] Routes explorations and commemorations [ edit ] The Portuguese government erected two navigational beacons, Dias Cross and da Gama Cross , [ 30 ] [ 31 ] to commemorate Bartolomeu Dias and Vasco da Gama , who were the first modern European explorers to reach the cape. When lined up, these crosses point to Whittle Rock , a large, permanently submerged shipping hazard in False Bay .

[ 32 ] Two other beacons in Simon's Town provide the intersection.

[ 33 ] Contemporary [ edit ] Sign at the Cape of Good Hope, 2018 The Cape of Good Hope saw an increase of ship activity after the 2021 Suez canal obstruction , and the 2024 Red Sea Crisis with ships needing a different route from the Indian Ocean .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The Cape of Good Hope route took a toll on the sea freight industry—stretching the transit time, reducing carriers availability, and skyrocketing shipment cost and container hire.

[ 38 ] Carriers' attempts to resort to the Red Sea route came at the expense of vessels and seafarers' safety as the Red Sea witnessed multiple sunken carriers struck by Houthi rebels .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Many large shipping companies and industries were afflicted by the situation such as IKEA , Amazon , Automotive companies, and Maersk .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Geography [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cape of Good Hope" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Map showing the Cape Peninsula , illustrating the position of the Cape of Good Hope. The main mountains and their peaks, including Table Mountain , and its relation to the City of Cape Town are shown.

Map of the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Agulhas , the southernmost point of Africa.

The Cape of Good Hope is at the southern tip of the Cape Peninsula , about 2.3 kilometers (1.4 mi) west and a little south of Cape Point on the south-east corner.

Cape Town is about 50 kilometers to the north of the Cape, in Table Bay at the north end of the peninsula. The peninsula forms the western boundary of False Bay . Geologically, the rocks found at the two capes, and indeed over much of the peninsula, are part of the Cape Supergroup , and are formed of the same type of sandstones as Table Mountain itself. Both the Cape of Good Hope and Cape Point offer spectacular scenery; the whole of the southernmost portion of the Cape Peninsula is a wild, rugged, scenic and generally unspoiled national park.

The term "the Cape" has also been used in a wider sense, to indicate the area of the European colony centered on Cape Town, [ 44 ] and the later South African province . Since 1994, it has been broken up into three smaller provinces: the Western Cape , Eastern Cape , and Northern Cape ; parts of the province were also absorbed into the North West .

[ 45 ] Fauna [ edit ] Male ostrich at the Cape Dassie Cape chacma baboon Captive Cape lion at Jardin des plantes , Paris With its diverse habitat, ranging from rocky mountain tops to beaches and open sea, the Cape of Good Hope is home to at least 250 species of birds including one of the two mainland colonies of African penguins . "Bush birds" tend to be rather scarce because of the coarse, scrubby nature of fynbos vegetation. When flowering, however, proteas and ericas attract sunbirds , sugarbirds , and other species in search of nectar. For most of the year, there are more small birds in coastal thicket than in fynbos. The Cape of Good Hope section of Table Mountain National Park is home to several species of antelope. Bontebok and eland are easily seen, and red hartebeest can be seen in the grazing lawns in Smitswinkel Flats. Grey rhebok are less commonly seen and are scarce, but may be observed along the beach hills at Olifantsbos. Most visitors are unlikely to ever see either Cape grysbok or klipspringer. The Cape of Good Hope section is home to four Cape mountain zebra . They might be seen by the attentive or lucky visitor, usually in Smitswinkel Flats. There are a wealth of small animals such as lizards , snakes , tortoises and insects . Small mammals include rock hyrax , four-striped grass mouse , water mongoose , Cape clawless otter and fallow deer . The area offers excellent vantage points for whale watching. The southern right whale is the species most likely to be seen in False Bay between June and November. Other species are the humpback whale and Bryde's whale .

Seals , dusky dolphins and orcas have also been seen. The strategic position of the Cape of Good Hope between two major ocean currents, ensures a rich diversity of marine life. There is a difference between the sea life west of Cape Point and that to the east due to the markedly differing sea temperatures. The South African Marine Living Resources Act is strictly enforced throughout the Table Mountain National Park , and especially in marine protected areas . Disturbance or removal of any marine organisms is strictly prohibited between Schusters Bay and Hoek van Bobbejaan, but is allowed in other areas during season and with relevant permits.

[ citation needed ] Chacma baboons ( Papio ursinus ) are the mammals most intimately associated with the Cape of Good Hope. Baboons inside the Cape of Good Hope section of the park are a major tourist attraction. There are 11 troops consisting of about 375 individuals throughout the entire Cape Peninsula. Six of these 11 troops either live entirely within the Cape of Good Hope section of the park, or use the section as part of their range. The Cape Point, Kanonkop, Klein Olifantsbos, and Buffels Bay troops live entirely inside the Cape of Good Hope section of the Park. The Groot Olifantsbos and Plateau Road troops range into the park. Chacma baboons are widely distributed across southern Africa and are classified as "least concern" in the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . However, the South African Parks Department states in its publication Mountains in the Sea that the baboon population on the Cape is "critically endangered." This is due to habitat loss, genetic isolation, and conflicts with humans. Cape baboons have been eliminated from the majority of their range across the Cape Peninsula, and the Cape of Good Hope section of Table Mountain National Park provides a sanctuary for the troops that live within its boundaries. It provides relative safety from nearby towns, where people have killed many baboons after the baboons raid their houses looking for food. Baboons are also frequently injured or killed outside of the park by cars and by electrocution on power lines. Inside the park, some management policies such as allowing barbecues and picnics in the baboon home ranges cause detriment to the troops, as they become embroiled in conflicts with guests to the park.

[ citation needed ] At the Cape in particular, the baboon is known for eating shellfish and other marine invertebrates.

[ 46 ] In 1842, Charles Hamilton Smith had described a black-maned lion from the Cape under the scientific name Felis (Leo) melanochaita .

[ 47 ] No longer seen as a subspecies of its own, [ 48 ] the Cape lion as a population is now extinct in the wilderness , [ 49 ] though descendants could exist in captivity .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Flora [ edit ] Fynbos at Cape Peninsula The Cape of Good Hope is an integral part of the Cape Floristic Kingdom , the smallest but richest of the world's six floral kingdoms. This comprises a treasure trove of 1100 species of indigenous plants, of which a number are endemic (occur naturally nowhere else on earth). The main type of fynbos ("fine bush") vegetation at the Cape of Good Hope is Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos , an endangered vegetation type that is endemic to the Cape Peninsula. Coastal Hangklip Sand Fynbos grows on low-lying alkaline sands and, right by the sea, small patches of Cape Flats Dune Strandveld can be found.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Characteristic fynbos plants include proteas , ericas (heath), and restios (reeds). Some of the most striking and well-known members belong to the Proteaceae family, of which up to 24 species occur. These include king protea , sugarbush , tree pincushion and golden cone bush ( Leucadendron laureolum ).

Many popular horticultural plants like pelargoniums , freesias , daisies , lilies and irises also have their origins in fynbos.

Legends [ edit ] Cape of Good Hope panorama – the cape at centre, and the conical Vasco da Gama Peak (266 metres) at right The Cape of Good Hope is the legendary home of the Flying Dutchman . According to the legend, crewed by tormented and damned ghostly sailors, it is doomed forever to beat its way through the adjacent waters without ever succeeding in rounding the headland.

[ 55 ] Adamastor is a Greek-type mythological character invented by the Portuguese poet Luís de Camões in his epic poem Os Lusíadas (first printed in 1572), as a symbol of the forces of nature Portuguese navigators had to overcome during their discoveries and more specifically of the dangers they faced when trying to round the Cape of Storms.

See also [ edit ] Geography portal South Africa portal Africa portal Cape Horn – Headland of the Tierra del Fuego archipelago in Chile, its South American counterpart Western Cape – Province of South Africa History of Cape Colony – British colony from 1806 to 1910 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Simon's Town – Seaside town in South Africa Postage stamps and postal history of the Cape of Good Hope Notes [ edit ] ^ Dutch : Kaap de Goede Hoop [ˌkaːb də ˌɣudə ˈɦoːp] ⓘ ; Portuguese : Cabo da Boa Esperança [ˈkaβu ðɐ ˈβoɐ (ɨ)ʃpɨˈɾɐ̃sɐ] .

References [ edit ] ^ "Cape of Good Hope, South Africa – 360° Aerial Panoramas" .

Archived from the original on 2011-10-08 . Retrieved 2017-02-03 .

^ The first circumnavigation of Africa Archived 2015-10-16 at the Wayback Machine . livius.org ^ Sarah Mytton Maury (1848).

Englishwoman In America . p.

33 .

^ Along the Clipper Way , Francis Chichester; page 78. Hodder & Stoughton, 1966.

ISBN 978-0-340-00191-2 ^ "Map of the Park, showing the Cape of Good Hope section (retrieved 27 March 2010)" .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2022 . Retrieved 28 March 2010 .

^ Unlikely with the intent of circumnavigating Africa, but for finding an alternative route to Asia than through the area near the Levant . Also, such voyages were undertaken for trading with more southern African cities; thereafter being blown off-course, if not tasked to sail around the lands.

^ Israel, India, Persia, Phoenicia, Minor Nations of Western Asia . Edited by Henry Smith Williams .

p118 ^ Anthony Tony Browder, Nile valley contributions to civilization, Volume 1. 1992 ( cf . In the Twenty Fifth Dynasty, during the reign of Necho II, navigational technology had advanced to the point where sailors from Kemet successfully circumnavigated Africa and drew an extremely accurate map of the continent.) ^ M. J. Cary.

The Ancient Explorers . Penguin Books, 1963. Page 114 ^ As for Libya, we know it to be washed on all sides by the sea, except where it is attached to Asia. This discovery was first made by Necos, the Egyptian king, who on desisting from the canal which he had begun between the Nile and the Arabian gulf (referring to the Red Sea), sent to sea a number of ships manned by Phoenicians, with orders to make for the Pillars of Hercules, and return to Egypt through them, and by the Mediterranean. The Phoenicians took their departure from Egypt by way of the Erythraean sea, and so sailed into the southern ocean. When autumn came, they went ashore, wherever they might happen to be, and having sown a tract of land with corn, waited until the grain was fit to cut. Having reaped it, they again set sail; and thus it came to pass that two whole years went by, and it was not till the third year that they doubled the Pillars of Hercules, and made good their voyage home. On their return, they declared—I for my part do not believe them, but perhaps others may—that in sailing round Libya they had the sun upon their right hand. In this way was the extent of Libya first discovered.

"Book 4" .

History of Herodotus – via Wikisource .

^ The Geographical system of Herodotus by James Rennel.

p348 + ^ Die umsegelung Asiens und Europas auf der Vega . Volume 2. By Adolf Erik Nordenskiöld.

p148 ^ Tozer, Henry F. (1997).

History of Ancient Geography . Biblo & Tannen. pp.

189– 190.

ISBN 978-0-8196-0138-4 – via Google Books .

^ Tozer, Henry F. (1997).

History of Ancient Geography . Biblo & Tannen. pp. xxiii.

ISBN 978-0-8196-0138-4 – via Google Books .

^ Marco Polo , p. 409 ^ Needham 1971 , p. 501 ^ Carta IX, 1 April 1512. In Pato, Raymundo Antonio de Bulhão (1884).

Cartas de Affonso de Albuquerque, Seguidas de Documentos que as Elucidam tomo I (pp. 29–65). Lisboa: Typographia da Academia Real das Sciencas. p. 64.

^ Olshin, Benjamin B. (1996).

"A sixteenth century Portuguese report concerning an early Javanese world map" .

História, Ciências, Saúde-Manguinhos .

2 (3): 97– 104.

doi : 10.1590/s0104-59701996000400005 .

ISSN 0104-5970 . Archived from the original on 4 January 2022 . Retrieved 19 October 2023 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b "Bartolomeu Dias | Biography, Voyage, Significance, Accomplishments, Areas Explored, Death, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2024-05-25 . Retrieved 2024-06-01 .

^ Ehret, Christopher (2001).

An African Classical Age . Charlottesville, Virginia: University of Virginia Press. p. 219.

ISBN 978-0-8139-2057-3 .

^ "Hottentot" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ "Jan van Riebeeck: Dutch colonial administrator" .

Britannica . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ Ward, Kerry.

" "Tavern of the Seas"? The Cape of Good Hope as an oceanic crossroads during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries" .

American Historical Association .

^ "Huguenot History" .

The Huguenot Museum . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ "La Motte's French heritage firmly rooted" .

La Motte . 29 May 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ de Bruin, Karen de Bruin (2021).

"From Viticulture to Commemoration: French Huguenot Memory in the Cape Colony (1688–1824)" .

Michigan Publishing .

47 – via University of Rhode Island.

^ J. Bundy, Colin (28 June 2024).

"Growth of the colonial economy" .

Britannica .

^ "Convention Between Great Britain And The Netherlands" .

UK Parliament .

31 – via Hansard.

^ "Cape Colony: British colony, South Africa" .

Britannica .

^ "Cross erected by Bartholomew Dias" .

South African History Online (SAHO) .

^ "Bartolomeu Dias – Life, Legacy & Expeditions" .

History.com . 6 June 2023.

^ "Da Gama Cross" .

Artefacts .

^ "THE SEARCH FOR BRENTON'S BEACON" .

Simon's Town Historical Society . 15 June 2021.

^ Farrer, Martin; Safi, Michael (26 March 2021).

"Suez canal: Japanese owner of stricken ship talks of plan to refloat it" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ El Wardany, Salma; Magdy, Mirette (27 March 2001).

"Ships Divert From Canal; More Tugs Coming: Suez Update" .

MSN .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2021 .

^ "Container ships turn to Cape of Good Hope as Suez issues continue: cFlow" .

Bunker World .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-16 . Retrieved 2021-03-26 .

^ "Red Sea crisis spurs maritime traffic to Cape of Good Hope, boosting South Africa's ports" . 27 January 2024.

^ Simpson, Jack.

"As the Red Sea crisis continues, pressure on consumer prices follows in its wake" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ "The shipping industry is sounding the alarm as another vessel sinks in the Red Sea" .

CNN . Retrieved 28 June 2024 .

^ "Ship attacked by Yemen's Houthi rebels in fatal assault sinks in Red Sea in their second sinking" .

AP News . Retrieved 29 June 2024 .

^ "Maersk suspends shipping through key Red Sea maritime trade route 'until further notice' " .

CNN . Retrieved 29 June 2024 .

^ "Maersk Operations through Red Sea / Gulf of Aden" .

Maersk . Retrieved 29 June 2024 .

^ "Top 8 Industries Affected by The Red Sea Crisis in January 2024" .

Resilinic . 15 January 2024 . Retrieved 29 June 2024 .

^ "Cape Town the Segregated city" .

South African History Online (SAHO) .

^ "South African in Government and Society" .

Britannica .

^ Davidge, C. (1978). "Ecology of baboons (Papio ursinus) at Cape Point".

Zoologica Africana .

13 (2): 329– 350.

doi : 10.1080/00445096.1978.11447633 .

^ Smith, C.H. (1842).

"Black maned lion Leo melanochaita " . In Jardine, W. (ed.).

The Naturalist's Library. Vol. 15 Mammalia . London: Chatto and Windus. p. Plate X, 177.

^ Kitchener, A. C.; Breitenmoser-Würsten, C.; Eizirik, E.; Gentry, A.; Werdelin, L.; Wilting, A.; Yamaguchi, N.; Abramov, A. V.; Christiansen, P.; Driscoll, C.; Duckworth, J. W.; Johnson, W.; Luo, S.-J.; Meijaard, E.; O'Donoghue, P.; Sanderson, J.; Seymour, K.; Bruford, M.; Groves, C.; Hoffmann, M.; Nowell, K.; Timmons, Z.; Tobe, S. (2017).

"A revised taxonomy of the Felidae: The final report of the Cat Classification Task Force of the IUCN Cat Specialist Group" (PDF) .

Cat News (Special Issue 11).

ISSN 1027-2992 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-01-17 . Retrieved 2019-08-18 .

^ Yamaguchi, N. (2000).

"The Barbary lion and the Cape lion: their phylogenetic places and conservation" (PDF) .

African Lion Working Group News . Vol. 1. pp.

9– 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2019-08-18 .

^ " 'Extinct' lions (Cape lion) surface in Siberia" .

The BBC . 2000.

Archived from the original on 2017-08-24 . Retrieved 2012-12-31 .

^ "Лев" . Sibzoo.narod.ru. Archived from the original on March 29, 2009 . Retrieved January 28, 2010 .

^ "South Africa: Lion Cubs Thought to Be Cape Lions" . AP Archive, The Associated Press . 2000.

Archived from the original on 2019-08-18 . Retrieved 2019-08-18 .

(with 2-minute video of cubs at zoo with John Spence, 3 sound-bites, and 15 photos) ^ "Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos. Cape Town Biodiversity Factsheets" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-11-01.

^ "Cape Flats Dune Strandveld. Cape Town Biodiversity Factsheets" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-11-17.

^ "Flying Dutchman | Captain, Myth, and Origin" .

Britannica .

Bibliography [ edit ] Marco Polo (1875), Yule, Henry (ed.), The Book of Ser Marco Polo, the Venetian: Concerning the Kingdoms and Marvels of the East , John Murray Needham, Joseph (1971), Science and Civilisation in China External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cape of Good Hope .

List of birds of the Cape of Good Hope Nature Reserve, with paragraph describing each species Cape of Good Hope, Panoramic view Cape of Good Hope is a map by John Arrowsmith in 1842 34°21′29″S 18°28′32″E ﻿ / ﻿ 34.35806°S 18.47556°E ﻿ / -34.35806; 18.47556 ﻿ ( Cape of Good Hope ) v t e Cape Town City of Cape Town Natural environment Cape Flats Cape Peninsula Geology Helderberg Bays Bantry Bay Camps Bay False Bay Gordon's Bay Granger Bay Hout Bay Simon's Bay Smitswinkel Bay Table Bay Beaches Bloubergstrand Boulders Beach Camps Bay Clifton Glen Beach Melkbosstrand Muizenberg Sandy Bay Strand Hills Blaauwberg Skapenberg Signal Hill Tygerberg Mountains Chapman's Peak Constantiaberg Devil's Peak Helderberg Hottentots Holland Mountains Lion's Head Table Mountain Twelve Apostles Islands Duiker Island Robben Island Seal Island Headlands Cape of Good Hope Cape Point Miller's Point Rivers and wetlands Bokramspruit Buffels River Eerste River Kuils River Diep River Else River Hout Bay River Krom River Lourens River Modder River Salt River Black River Elsieskraal River Liesbeek River Sand River Schusters River Silvermine River Sir Lowry’s Pass River Sout River Steenbras River Zandvlei Zeekoevlei Climate and weather Cape Town water crisis Cape Doctor Berg wind World heritage sites Cape Floristic Region Table Mountain National Park Robben Island Biodiversity of Cape Town Nature reserves in Cape Town Helderberg Marine Protected Area Robben Island Marine Protected Area Table Mountain National Park Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Vegetation types Atlantis Sand Fynbos Boland Granite Fynbos Cape Flats Dune Strandveld Cape Flats Sand Fynbos Cape Lowland Freshwater Wetland Cape Winelands Shale Fynbos Hangklip Sand Fynbos Kogelberg Sandstone Fynbos Lourensford Alluvium Fynbos Peninsula Granite Fynbos Peninsula Sandstone Fynbos Southern Afrotemperate Forest Peninsula Shale Renosterveld Swartland Alluvium Fynbos Swartland Shale Renosterveld Parks and gardens Arderne Gardens Company's Garden Choo choo park De Waal Park Green Point Common Helderberg Nature Reserve Keurboom Park Kirstenbosch National Botanical Garden Rondebosch Common Rondebosch Park Tokai Arboretum Tokai Park Westridge Gardens Wynberg Park Nature reserves Blaauwberg Conservation Area Bracken Nature Reserve Cecilia De Hel Nature Area Dick Dent Bird Sanctuary Die Oog Conservation Area Diep River Fynbos Corridor Durbanville Nature Reserve Edith Stephens Wetland Park Glencairn Wetland Harmony Flats Nature Reserve Helderberg Nature Reserve Kenilworth Racecourse Conservation Area Koeberg Nature Reserve Kogelberg Nature Reserve Lourens River Protected Natural Environment Lower Silvermine River Wetlands Macassar Dunes Conservation Area Mamre Nature Garden Meadowridge Common Milnerton Racecourse Nature Reserve Raapenberg Bird Sanctuary Rietvlei Wetland Reserve Rondebosch Common Rondevlei Nature Reserve Silwerboomkloof Natural Heritage Site Tygerberg Nature Reserve Uitkamp Wetlands Witzands Aquifer Conservation Area Wolfgat Nature Reserve Zoarvlei Wetlands Zandvlei Estuary Nature Reserve Zeekoevlei Nature Reserve Communities Atlantic Seaboard Bakoven Bantry Bay Camps Bay Clifton Fresnaye Green Point Llandudno Mouille Point Sea Point Three Anchor Bay Blaauwberg Atlantis Bloubergstrand Brooklyn Century City Dunoon Duynefontein Joe Slovo Park Killarney Gardens Mamre Melkbosstrand Milnerton Montague Gardens Paarden Eiland Parklands Rugby Summer Greens Table View West Beach Ysterplaat Cape Flats (Klipfontein district) Athlone Belgravia Bishop Lavis Crawford Crossroads Gugulethu Hanover Park Heideveld Kalksteenfontein Kenwyn Lansdowne Lavender Hill Manenberg Nyanga Ottery Philippi Browns Farm Philippi Horticultural Philippi East Samora Machel Rondebosch East Rylands Strandfontein Valhalla Park Khayelitsha Bongweni Harare/Holimisa Ikwezi Park Mandela Park Griffiths Mxenge QQ Section Silver Town Victoria Merge Mitchells Plain Rocklands Westridge Portlands Tafelsig Eastridge Beacon Valley Lentegeur Woodlands Weltevreden Valley Colorado Mandalay Montclair Watergate Developments Heinz Park Morgans Village Rondevlei Westgate Montrose Park Lost City City Bowl Bo-Kaap De Waterkant Devil's Peak Estate District Six Foreshore Gardens Higgovale Lower Vrede Oranjezicht Robben Island Schotsche Kloof Tamboerskloof University Estate Vredehoek Walmer Estate Woodstock Zonnebloem Helderberg Eerste River Faure Firgrove Gordon's Bay Macassar Sir Lowry's Pass Village Somerset West Parel Vallei Strand Lwandle Nomzamo Northern Suburbs Acacia Park Belhar Bellville Boston Eversdal Kenridge Stellenberg Blue Downs Bonteheuwel Bothasig Brackenfell Delft Blikkiesdorp Durbanville Edgemead Elsie's River Epping Fisantekraal Goodwood Joostenbergvlakte Kensington Kraaifontein Kuils River Langa Joe Slovo Loevenstein Maitland Mfuleni Monte Vista Ndabeni Norwood Panorama Parow Philadelphia Plattekloof Pinelands Ravensmead Richwood Scottsdene Sonnestraal Thornton Tygerberg Tyger Valley Wallacedene Southern Suburbs Bergvliet Kreupelbosch Bishopscourt Claremont Harfield Village Constantia Diep River Grassy Park Pelican Park Heathfield Kenilworth Kirstenhof Lakeside Lotus River Marina da Gama Meadowridge Mowbray Muizenberg Newlands Observatory Plumstead Retreat Rondebosch Rosebank Salt River Southfield Steenberg Tokai Wetton Wynberg South Peninsula Capri Village Clovelly Da Gama Park Fish Hoek Glencairn Hangberg Hout Bay Imizamo Yethu Kalk Bay Kommetjie Masiphumelele Noordhoek Ocean View Scarborough Simon's Town St James Sunnydale Sun Valley Vrygrond Neighbourhoods Victoria & Alfred Waterfront Built environment Maclear's Beacon Foreshore Freeway Bridge Grand Parade Greenmarket Square Adderley Street Long Street Strand Street Chapman's Peak Drive Hospital Bend Kloof Nek Road Metropolitan Routes in Cape Town M3 M4 M5 M6 M7 M8 M9 M10 M11 M12 National roads N1 N2 N7 Regional roads R27 R44 R101 R102 R300 R302 R310 Sir Lowry's Pass Ou Kaapse Weg Peninsula Expressway (Cape Town) Skyscrapers List of tallest buildings in Cape Town 1 Thibault Square Atterbury House Cape Town Civic Centre Metlife Centre Mutual Building Naspers Centre Portside Tower Triangle House Government National government Parliament of South Africa Houses of Parliament Genadendal Residence Highstead Tuynhuys Defence Air Force Base Ysterplaat Naval Base Simon's Town SAS Wingfield South African Naval College Provincial government Leeuwenhof City of Cape Town Government of Cape Town Mayor Deputy Mayor Cape Town City Hall Cape Town Civic Centre Cape Town Partnership Coat of arms of Cape Town Flag of Cape Town Elections 2018 Cape Town mayoral election Erasmus Commission Wards Law and enforcement Western Cape Division of the High Court of South Africa Municipal Police Pollsmoor Prison History Invasion of the Cape Colony Battle of Blaauwberg Anglo-Dutch Treaty of 1814 Noon Gun Convict crisis Timeline of Cape Town Fortifications Amsterdam Battery Castle of Good Hope Chavonnes Battery Fort de Goede Hoop Redoubt Duijnhoop Monuments and memorials Artillery Memorial, Cape Town Japanese Lantern Monument Rhodes Memorial The Cenotaph Treaty Tree Van Riebeeck's Hedge Lists of heritage sites Near Cape Town Bo-Kaap CBD and the Waterfront Simon's Town Helderberg Bellville Table Mountain Wynberg district Historical buildings African Theatre Alhambra Theatre Breakwater Lodge Church Square Coornhoop Graaff Electric Lighting Works Culture Demographics Languages Afrikaans South African English Xhosa Cuisine Cape Town wine Constantia (wine) Gatsby (sandwich) Performance art Cape Town City Ballet Musical ensembles Cape Town Opera Cape Town Philharmonia Choir Cape Town Philharmonic Orchestra Theatres Artscape Theatre Centre Baxter Theatre Centre Labia Theatre Little Theatre Magnet Theatre Maynardville Open-Air Theatre Space Theatre The Independent Armchair Theatre Theatre on the Bay Events and festivals Cape Town Book Fair Cape Town International Jazz Festival Kaapse Klopse Museums and art galleries Air Force Museum Bertram House Chavonnes Battery Cape Town Science Centre District Six Museum Gallery Mau Mau Groote Schuur Heart of Cape Town Museum Hout Bay Museum Holocaust Centre Koopmans-de Wet House Maximum Security Prison, Robben Island Medical Museum Mostert's Mill Simon's Town Museum Naval Museum South African Sendinggestig Museum Waterworks Museum Zeitz Museum of Contemporary Art Africa Iziko Museums Bertram House Bo-Kaap Museum Groot Constantia Koopmans-de Wet House Michaelis Collection at the Old Town House Rust en Vreugd Slave Lodge Social History Centre SAS Somerset South African Museum National Gallery William Fehr Collection at the Castle of Good Hope Public art Statues Nelson Mandela Cecil Rhodes Nobel Square George Grey Jan Hendrik Hofmeyer Jan van Riebeeck Maria van Riebeeck Bartolomeu Dias Religion Anglican Diocese of Cape Town Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cape Town Religious buildings Auwal Mosque Gardens Shul Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St George Groote Kerk Lutheran Church in Strand Street Nurul Islam Mosque Palm Tree Mosque Queen Victoria Mosque St. George's Cathedral St. James Church St. Mary's Cathedral Secular architecture Cape Dutch architecture Tallest buildings in Cape Town Athlone Power Station Atterbury House Bertram House Boshofpoort Cape Town City Hall Cape Town Civic Centre Castle of Good Hope Centre for the Book Coornhoop Disa Park Egyptian Building Genadendal Residence Hawthorndon House Houses of Parliament Huguenot Memorial Building Leeuwenhof Mandela Rhodes Building Metlife Centre Mutual Building Naspers Centre Portside Tower Rhodes Memorial Royal Observatory Triangle House Media Newspapers Cape Times The Cape Messenger Radio and television Bush Radio CapeTalk Cape Town TV Fine Music Radio Good Hope FM Kfm 94.5 UCT Radio Voice of the Cape Economy Entrepreneurship and innovation Silicon Cape Initiative Companies based in Cape Town Naspers Travelstart MWEB Sanlam Woolworths Holdings Limited Of historical interest: Garlicks Hotels and resorts Belmond Mount Nelson Hotel Protea Hotels by Marriott The Vineyard Hotel Shopping areas, malls and markets Canal Walk Cavendish Square Golden Acre Greenmarket Square N1 City Tygerberg Mall Somerset Mall Victoria & Alfred Waterfront Exhibition centres Cape Town International Convention Centre Good Hope Centre Restaurants and cafés Café Caprice Perseverance Tavern Tourism Beaches of Cape Town Cape of Good Hope Table Mountain Aerial Cableway Groot Constantia Mariner's Wharf Nature reserves in Cape Town Ratanga Junction Two Oceans Aquarium Victoria & Alfred Waterfront World of Birds Wildlife Sanctuary and Monkey Park Transport Air transport Airports in Cape Town Air Force Base Ysterplaat Cape Town International Airport Cape Winelands Airfield Wingfield Aerodrome Maritime transport Port of Cape Town Safmarine Road transport Buses in Cape Town Golden Arrow Bus Services MyCiTi MyCiTi bus stations Roads in Cape Town Trolleybuses in Cape Town Rail transport Blue Train Commuter rail lines Metrorail Western Cape Cape Flats Line Central Line Northern Line Southern Line Railway stations Bellville Cape Town Claremont Crawford Mowbray Mutual Newlands Observatory Pinelands Retreat Rondebosch Rosebank Salt River Simon's Town Steenberg Woodstock Trams in Cape Town Sports Soccer Cape Town Spurs F.C.

Cape Town City F.C.

Rugby Western Province Ikey Tigers Cricket Cape Cobras Other Cape Town Tigers (basketball) Sports events 2010 FIFA World Cup Cape Town Cycle Tour Cape Town Open Cape Town Ladies Open Cape Town Marathon South Africa Sevens Two Oceans Marathon Sports venues Athlone Stadium Bellville Stadium Bellville Velodrome Cape Town Stadium Erica Park Good Hope Centre Green Point Stadium Hartleyvale Stadium Kenilworth Racecourse Killarney Motor Racing Complex Milnerton Racecourse Newlands Cricket Ground Newlands Stadium NNK Rugby Stadium Parow Park Philippi Stadium Royal Cape Golf Club University of the Western Cape Stadium Wynberg Military Base Stadium Education Libraries Biblionef Central Library Cape Town Centre for the Book Fish Hoek Library Jacob Gitlin Library Meadowridge Library National Library of South Africa Rondebosch Library SAAO Library Strandfontein Library University of Cape Town Libraries Universities Cape Peninsula University of Technology University of Cape Town University of the Western Cape Colleges Qualitas Career Academy South African College Yeshiva of Cape Town Private schools American International School of Cape Town Cannons Creek Independent School Cape Town French School Christel House South Africa Darul Islam Islamic High School Diocesan College German International School Cape Town Herschel Girls' School Herzlia Schools Mountain View Academy Parklands College St. Cyprian's School St. George's Grammar School Michael Oak Waldorf School Oakhurst Primary School Public schools Alexander Sinton Secondary School Belgravia High School Belhar Secondary School Bellville High School Bergvliet Primary School Bergvliet High School Bosmansdam High School Brackenfell High School Cape Academy of Mathematics, Science and Technology Cape Town High School Chris Hani Secondary School Claremont High School COSAT D.F. Malan High School Durbanville High School Eben Dönges High School Eersterivier Secondary School Fairbairn College Fairmont High School Gardens Commercial High School Grove Primary School Groote Schuur High School Harold Cressy High School Hottentots Holland High School Jan van Riebeeck High School Lavender Hill High School Livingstone High School Masiphumelele High School Milnerton High School Mondale High School Parel Vallei High School Pinelands High School Rondebosch Boys' High School Rustenburg School for Girls Sea Point High School Sinenjongo High School Spine Road High School South African College Schools Stellenberg High School Strand High School Table View High School The Settlers High School Trafalgar High School Tygerberg High School Westerford High School Windsor High School Wynberg Boys' High School Wynberg Girls' High School Alternative schools GlenBridge Special School Tafelberg School Former schools Ellerslie Girls' High School Tot Nut van het Algemeen Art & music schools Hugo Lambrechts Music Centre South African College of Music Peter Clarke Art Centre Not yet allocated College of Magic Montebello Design Centre Services Hospitals Alexandra Hospital Groote Schuur Hospital Karl Bremer Hospital Red Cross War Memorial Children's Hospital Somerset Hospital Tygerberg Hospital Valkenberg Hospital Lighthouses Cape Point Lighthouse Green Point Lighthouse Milnerton Lighthouse Roman Rock Lighthouse Slangkop Lighthouse Western Cape Water Supply System Dams and resrvoirs Alexandra Dam Berg River Dam De Villiers Dam Hely-Hutchinson Dam Kleinplaats Dam Land-en-Zeezicht Reservoir Lewis Gay Dam Molteno Dam Silvermine Dam Steenbras Dam Theewaterskloof Dam Victoria Dam Voëlvlei Dam Wemmershoek Dam Woodhead Dam Electrical power generation Athlone Power Station Graaff Electric Lighting Works Koeberg Nuclear Power Station Palmiet Pumped Storage Scheme Emergency services Cape Town Fire Department Metro Emergency Medical Services Mountain Club of South Africa National Sea Rescue Institute Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel People Trove Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐b9wk6
Cached time: 20250818104000
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.061 seconds
Real time usage: 1.335 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6337/1000000
Revision size: 42291/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 374952/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7538/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 191231/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.635/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26552772/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1034.091      1 -total
 34.36%  355.349      2 Template:Reflist
 14.71%  152.137     24 Template:Cite_web
 10.28%  106.321      1 Template:Cape_Town
  9.98%  103.235      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.81%   91.073      4 Template:Langx
  6.48%   67.060      1 Template:Short_description
  5.44%   56.248      1 Template:Commons_category
  5.23%   54.054      1 Template:Sister_project
  5.09%   52.656      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44252:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818104000 and revision id 1305316234. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cape_of_Good_Hope&oldid=1305316234 " Categories : Headlands of the Western Cape Geography of Cape Town Maritime history of South Africa Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Dutch-language text Pages with Dutch IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Portuguese-language text Pages with European Portuguese IPA Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use South African English from February 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in South African English Articles containing Afrikaans-language text Pages with Afrikaans IPA Articles containing OSM location maps Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is defined as the pagename Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 10:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cape of Good Hope 99 languages Add topic

