Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Incident 3 Investigation 4 Breaches of protocol and violations of standards 5 Public reaction 6 Human factors analysis 7 Civil case 8 Criminal case 9 Legacy 10 Notes 11 References Toggle the table of contents Death of Linnea Mills Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Death of a recreational scuba diver during training On 1 November 2020, PADI Open Water Diver Linnea Rose Mills [ 1 ] drowned during a training dive in Lake McDonald in Glacier National Park , Montana, while using an unfamiliar and defective equipment configuration , with excessive weights , no functional dry suit inflation mechanism , and a buoyancy compensator too small to support the weights, which were not configured to be ditched in an emergency .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] She had not been trained or given a basic orientation in the use of a dry suit. This defective equipment configuration was supplied by the dive school, and the instructor, who was registered but had not been assessed as competent to train dry suit diving, did not take appropriate action compliant with PADI training standards or general recreational diving best practice, at several stages of the dive.

[ 3 ] Several levels of safety checks which should have detected the problems failed to do so.

[ 4 ] During the dive, her dry suit was compressed by the ambient pressure, and as she was unable to add gas to restore buoyancy, she became negatively buoyant and was unable to swim upwards, further hindered by suit squeeze . She fell off an underwater ledge while trying to attract the attention of the instructor, and though a fellow diver attempted to stop her descent, he was unable to ditch any of her weights and had to surface to save himself.

The incident was poorly investigated and as of November 2024, no criminal charges have been made, but a civil case for $12 million was eventually settled out of court, and counsel for the plaintiffs has urged the state to prosecute. The Professional Association of Diving Instructors was alleged to have failed in their duty of care by not providing sufficient quality assurance oversight on the dive school and instructor, and by setting standards for training that were ambiguous and in places contradictory, relying on interpretation by the service provider, which allowed plausible deniability of responsibility by PADI if an accident occurred.

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] The Missoula dive shop Gull Dive, owned by David and Jeannine Olson, was advertised as a PADI dive school. It rented equipment to Mills, and employed the dive instructor responsible for the training.

[ 3 ] Variation in atmospheric pressure with altitude, computed for 15 °C and 0% relative humidity.

The dive site, Lake McDonald is a cold freshwater environment , [ 5 ] and a dry suit would be standard equipment for the expected conditions. Lake McDonald is the largest  lake in Glacier National Park . It is located at 48°35′N 113°55′W ﻿ / ﻿ 48.583°N 113.917°W ﻿ / 48.583; -113.917 in Flathead County in the U.S. state of Montana . Lake McDonald is approximately 10 miles (16 km) long, over a mile (1.6 km) wide, and 472 feet (144 m) deep, filling a valley formed by a combination of erosion and glacial activity, with steep sides and a relatively flat bottom, requiring good buoyancy control to avoid sinking to excessive depths if overweighted.

[ 6 ] The surface area of the lake is 6,823 acres (27.61 km 2 ). Lake McDonald lies at an elevation of 3,153 feet (961 m) [ 7 ] and is on the west side of the Continental Divide .

[ 8 ] Atmospheric pressure at this altitude is approximately 89% of sea level, and this causes gas volume reduction at depth due to hydrostatic pressure to be greater than at sea level, which exacerbates the effects of suit squeeze.

Altitude decompression is also affected by the lower surface pressure, and decompression schedules and algorithms must be adjusted to control the risk of decompression sickness . These problems are generally not familiar to divers who have not been trained in altitude diving .

The diver certification agency , PADI , is the largest recreational diver training agency in the world, and has considerable influence over international minimum training standards by virtue of their overwhelming worldwide market share. PADI training is focused on short, convenient courses, marketed by an emphasis on "fun" and claiming high standards of safety. As of 2020, PADI claims to have issued 28 million scuba certifications of all levels, many of which may be minor specializations. Some of the certifications align with WRSTC and ISO  minimum standards, and these are recognized worldwide. Many of the others are not relevant for recognition, as they are unique to PADI and have no equivalence anywhere, or may be part of other agencies' standards for certification for more general diving skill levels, or are not universally accepted as necessary for diver competence or safety.  PADI advertises itself as having a strong quality assurance system for members, which include  PADI Instructors, PADI Divemasters, and PADI Dive schools, which are contractually obliged to adhere to PADI's standards and pay a significant annual membership fee for the privilege of using the highly recognized PADI name and logo, and for selling PADI training materials and certification. As the training agency, PADI is responsible for ensuring that all certification issued under terms of recognition by international standards agencies, complies with the relevant international standards. PADI is owned by Canadian investment firm Altas Partners and French private equity firm Florac .

[ 9 ] The instructor, Debbie Snow, a  newly certified [ a ] PADI Open Water Scuba Instructor , [ b ] was initially trained as an instructor in Florida in warm sea water but did not pass the evaluation on her first attempt. Two months later she was reevaluated and registered as an instructor with PADI. At this time she was also registered as an instructor for five specialty courses, including Dry Suit Diver by Rainbow Reef, the school she was trained at as an Open Water Instructor, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Dry suit diving and altitude diving expose the diver to a set of hazards not generally encountered in entry-level diving as covered by the Open Water Diver course.

[ 12 ] Such levels of training are generally considered to require specialization training for recreational divers to allow the diver to dive safely and make an informed acceptance of risk. Snow's familiarity with the dive site is unknown.

Snow was assisted by another employee at Gull Dive, Seth Linton (22), whose only diving certification was Junior Open Water Diver , [ 3 ] a certification issued to entry level divers between 10 and 14 years old, otherwise equivalent to PADI Open Water Diver. His further experience was not specified, but stated to be hardly greater than that of Mills.

[ 13 ] [ c ] The decedent, Linnea Mills (18), was certified as a PADI Open Water Diver , had a total experience of five dives in warm water and one dive in Lake Seeley, in cold water, in a wetsuit , and had never dived in a dry suit before the incident.

[ 10 ] She was enrolled on a PADI Advanced Open Water Diver course through Gull Dive, of Missoula.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Mills was wearing a second hand dry suit purchased from a private seller, facilitated by the dive school, because they could not rent a dry suit to a diver who had not been trained in the use of a dry suit. Mills had not used a dry suit before, but she was not given a theory class, a briefing or confined water orientation in dry suit diving before the dive, which would have allowed the selection of appropriate weights and identified any obvious defects or other problems. The dry suit had a relatively uncommon CEJN connector inflation fitting and the scuba diving regulator set rented from the school did not have a compatible dry suit inflation hose connected, so it was not possible to add gas to relieve suit squeeze , or compensate for buoyancy reduction due to suit gas compression at depth. Mills was wearing a small, jacket style buoyancy compensation device (BCD) with a nominal lift capacity of 29.2 pounds (13.2 kg), rented from the school, and diving weights totaling 44 pounds (20 kg) distributed as 20 pounds (9.1 kg) in the zippered pockets of the dry suit and 24 pounds (11 kg) in the zippered pockets of the BCD, which could therefore not be easily jettisoned in an emergency, also supplied by the school. The watertight zipper of the suit was reported to not close completely and would therefore allow air to escape and water to leak in, and the suit was a poor fit with over-large boots and over-long trouser legs.

[ 6 ] At the start of the dive, Mills had positive buoyancy with her head out of the water at the surface with an inflated BCD and an unflooded dry suit with unknown buoyancy.

[ d ] [ 2 ] Mills had not filled in a medical statement on enrolling for the course, nor any waiver, liability release, or assumption of risk. The dive school had rented equipment four months earlier to an uncertified diver who subsequently drowned while using it.

[ 10 ] Incident [ edit ] The group of divers from Gull Dive arrived at Lake MacDonald at about 4 p.m. as daylight was fading. Two additional students who had completed dry suit training were already waiting there. While preparing for the dive, the instructor's assistant discovered that the regulator's low pressure hose fitting was incompatible with Mills' dry suit, and notified the instructor, who told Mills to use the BCD for buoyancy control during the dive.

[ 15 ] [ 3 ] Use of the BCD is standard practice for general buoyancy control, but the absence of an inflator hose makes it impossible to relieve suit squeeze and retain basic suit buoyancy.

[ 16 ] [ 6 ] Mills was given 44 pounds (20 kg) of loose dive weights instead of the standard quick-release weight belt or integrated weight pockets for the BCD, which were loaded into the dry suit (20 lb) [ e ] and BCD zipper pockets (24 lb). None of the weights were visible or easily jettisoned in an emergency by Mills or by another  diver.

[ 15 ] It is not known who put the weights in the suit's pockets.

[ 6 ] No on-site dive briefing was given, and Mills was not assigned a dive buddy , which would normally imply that the instructor would personally monitor the student throughout the dive, and the group entered the water at about 5 p.m., a short time before sunset. They descended to about 15 feet (4.6 m) and after about 5 minutes, one diver was cold and needed to surface. The instructor escorted the cold diver out of the water, [ clarification needed ] [ 15 ] leaving Mills without professional supervision or a properly allocated buddy.

[ f ] After returning to the group, the instructor and assistant took Mills and Bob Gentry to 60 feet (18 m). Gentry was carrying an action camera on a frame with two video lights, which recorded much of the activity of the dive.

[ 15 ] [ 11 ] At 60 feet (18 m), the dry suit was significantly compressed by the ambient pressure of 1.8 atm above surface atmospheric pressure of about 0.89 atm. The air in the suit was compressed to less than 1/3 of the volume at the surface, and suit buoyancy had decreased in proportion. Mills was standing on a ledge, unable to swim upward due to insufficient buoyancy, and was unable to attract Snow's attention when she swam past with her attention apparently fixed on the compass in her hand. Mills then signaled to Gentry, the diver with the GoPro, who approached her to assist, but she fell backwards off the ledge and began sinking. Gentry eventually caught up with her at a depth of 85 feet (26 m), where suit squeeze would be making it relatively difficult for her to move.

[ 3 ] Gentry attempted to find and release Mills' weights but could not find them, and tried to provide her with air from his secondary demand valve when she dropped her demand valve.

[ g ] An effort by Gentry to lift Mills and swim her up by finning hard failed and Gentry left her as his own air was running low. He made a rapid ascent to the surface from 105 feet (32 m) in less than a minute, putting himself at a raised risk of decompression illness . When he reached the surface, he was alone, but Snow surfaced after an undisclosed period. Gentry informed Snow of the emergency and she dived to look for Mills, but failed to find her.

[ h ] On a second search dive, by Snow and Liston, Mills was found at 127 feet (39 m), a depth significantly greater than the 60 feet (18 m) limit set by PADI for Open Water Diver certification. Liston then made a rapid ascent to the surface and Mills was recovered to the surface by Snow, after ditching the scuba set with the weights in the BCD pockets.

[ 15 ] [ 3 ] Snow and Liston were airlifted to Seattle, Washington, "for treatment for potential injuries", since Liston had been complaining of effects of his rapid ascent and had used up the available emergency oxygen.

[ 15 ] [ 3 ] [ i ] Consequently, they were not on site when the initial investigators and coroner arrived.

[ 11 ] Several other irregularities and alleged breaches of PADI procedure and general recreational diving safety procedure were cited in the complaint lodged for civil action, some of which may have had a material influence on the outcome of the dive. Others were more relevant to non-compliance with PADI standards by Gull Dive and Snow.

[ 3 ] Investigation [ edit ] See also: Investigation of diving accidents The initial investigation was conducted by local park agents who consulted a range of diving specialists, but it was soon taken over by National Park Service Investigative Services Branch (ISB), who stopped consulting with diving accident experts, and did not even call in their own diving safety officer , dive team or diving control board , who would normally be involved in a diving fatality investigation.

[ 17 ] There were a number of irregularities in the investigation that the investigators may not have noticed, possibly due to a lack of training and expert advice.

[ 17 ] This is not an isolated incident, as many diving accident investigations in the US have been poorly managed by investigators without the necessary competence.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Allegedly the ISB did not consider the dive profiles of Snow and Mills as recorded by their dive computers , which showed that Snow was at the surface while Mills was drowning. According to counsel ( David G. Concannon ), [ j ] Snow had failed to hand over Mills’ dive computer and personal effects, including partially completed PADI forms, to investigators, [ 17 ] and the investigators did not pursue this. According to Concannon, Mills' dive computer was on her wrist when her body was taken ashore but was removed before the medics arrived, "found its way" into Debbie Snow's truck, and was taken home with her. The initial investigator from Glacier Park tried to find the computer which he thought had been taken to the morgue. The second group of investigators went to Snow's home to interview her, and were shown the dive computer, told it was not downloadable, shown the display of the dive profile and got a photo of it, which they were unable to interpret. They left the computer with Snow, and it was then passed on to a lawyer who worked with PADI, who took it to California along with Snow's computer and Liston's computer. It stayed there for one and a half years. The head of scientific diving at Scripps university downloaded them as a consultant to the lawyer, but the data was never produced as evidence until the civil litigants got a court order. A commentator raised the question of why PADI, which claimed to consider diver safety a high priority, would not actively work towards making the data public, as it would be in the interests of diver safety to do so.

[ 11 ] In US Federal Law the owner of equipment that logs data during an incident that may be the subject of litigation is obliged to preserve that data and make it available as evidence if the case comes to court at a later date. Litigants are required to find out what they have and disclose everything relevant to the opposition.

[ 21 ] The video of the incident was not taken into account by the federal investigators; non-divers reviewed PADI's training standards and only after the instructor had been interviewed.

[ 17 ] Jeannine Olson, who had no first-hand knowledge of the events of the dive, allegedly told the Flathead County Deputy Coroner that Mills was "witnessed by a dive buddy to panic , then fall passively to the bottom of a lake after swimming without difficulty at a depth of approximately 40 feet", which is contradicted by the evidence of the video recordings serendipitously made during the dive, which cover the events extensively.

[ 11 ] As a result, the medical examiner did not document the bruising on Linnea's body caused by the dry suit squeeze or other complications arising from high pressure. Olson also allegedly contacted Gentry afterward, claiming he was responsible for Linnea's death.

[ 15 ] This section needs expansion with: allegations of incompetence of the investigators.

[ 11 ] Failure of investigators to recover Mills' dive computer.

[ 11 ] Failure of PADI to release Mills' dive computer to the investigators [ 11 ] Allegations of threats by/at DEMA [ 11 ] c minute 38, Lee Ann and Lamar Hires invited Lisa Mills to DEMA to hand out buddy tags and got harassed by DEMA authorities Allegations of attempted cover-up by PADI [ 11 ] Coroner's report did not mention some important evidence [ 11 ] . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2024 ) Breaches of protocol and violations of standards [ edit ] Further information: Diver training standard , Diving safety , and Civil liability in recreational diving The plaintiffs in the civil suit have alleged several breaches of general recreational diving safety protocols and violations of PADI and general recreational diving and training standards.

[ 3 ] Some of the standards are not easily accessible for the general public, making it difficult for a diver with only an entry level certification to find out whether standards are being followed for a course they have not done. Consequently, students have little choice but to assume that the instructor is actually following the standards if they want to get the training.

[ 10 ] Because the recreational diver training industry in the US is officially self-regulating, violations of training standards are not inherently illegal, and members of the public are obliged to fall back on assumptions of duty of care, contractual obligations, and expectation of a service provider to conduct appropriate safety measures, as generally accepted within the industry and as specifically required by the terms of training standards and membership agreements, for protection against negligence. The diving public also has an expectation that a training  and certification agency will ensure that their members comply with their standards and terms of membership by way of an effective quality assurance system.

[ 3 ] This situation is aggravated by the service provider requiring the client to sign waivers granting the service provider and certification agency indemnity for negligence to the greatest extent legally possible.

[ 20 ] In the Complaint and Demand for Jury Trial to the Montana Fourth Judicial District Court Missoula County, Concannon alleged several violations of PADI training and dive leadership standards: [ 3 ] Advising a client to purchase equipment that they knew the client was not competent to use. (dry suit) Failing to check whether equipment supplied was safe and compatible with the client's equipment, while in a teaching relationship with the client relating to that equipment. (regulator set with incompatible low pressure hose connection) Providing a client with unsafe equipment, in that it lacked necessary components to allow it to be used safely.(regulator set with low pressure hose connection incompatible with client's dry suit, and dive weights in excess of the BCD's capacity to support, with no facility to ditch the weights quickly in an emergency) Failing to inform a client that the equipment as supplied was unsafe. (regulator set and excessive dive weights with no ditchable component) Failing to verify whether a student understood how to use a combination of equipment as supplied. (regulator, BCD  and weighting system supplied, to be used with client's dry suit) Failing to provide a student diver with instruction on how to safely operate the combination of equipment provided by the school with the client's dry suit.

Providing and fitting the client with an inherently hazardous configuration of equipment. (overweighting with non-ditchable weights) Diving, and permitting a training dive to be made under their responsibility when the equipment was known to be unsafe. (gross overweighting, no suit inflation, inadequate buoyancy compensation) Failing to provide an adequate pre-dive briefing on a training dive.

Failing to ensure that a competent person was available to oversee the rest of the group when dealing with a problem with one diver. The decedent was left without an instructor or a formally allocated buddy in a hazardous environment.

Diving, and permitting a training dive to occur when there was no emergency plan, no emergency facilities in the vicinity, and no communications with emergency services.

Leaving a person under instruction and personal supervision unattended while dealing with a third party problem.

Failing to notice distress signals from a student without a buddy.

Using an assistant with inadequate qualifications and experience. (Open Water Diver doing the job of a divemaster/rescue diver) Taking an unqualified person on a search and body recovery mission to depths far in excess of their training and certification. (Open Water Diver to 127ft) While none of the above-mentioned breaches of standards are illegal, they are all violations of the terms of PADI RRA and instructor membership and any one would constitute negligence. Together they indicate gross negligence by industry standards.

Violations of Federal Law: Failing to hand over the dive computer of the decedent to the investigating officers (DS).

Knowingly providing false and misleading information to investigating officers (JO).

Attempts to intimidate and threaten a witness (JO).

After Mills' death PADI continued to issue certification in Snow's name, including to divers who were present on the fatal dive, and had not completed the course requirements for the dive due to the incident.

[ 10 ] Public reaction [ edit ] The incident and subsequent civil lawsuit were reported with varying accuracy, detail, and neutrality or lack thereof, by a local television station, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] other local news sites.

[ 12 ] [ 15 ] internet diving magazines and blogs.

[ 17 ] [ 24 ] [ 5 ] [ 2 ] [ 10 ] [ 13 ] There has been strong criticism of PADI's reactions and lack of reaction to this incident, including suggestions that PADI is more concerned with profit than diver safety.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 6 ] The quality of the investigation by the federal investigators of National Park Service Investigative Services Branch  has been severely criticized for being incomplete and poorly conducted, with findings that are based on misinformation from some of the witnesses and disregarding video footage that is impartial, unambiguous and fairly comprehensive, and leading to the state attorney not having sufficient evidence to prosecute a convincing criminal case. There is no statute of limitations on homicide, and when additional evidence and leads were provided to the investigators by counsel for the plaintiffs, it appears to have been disregarded, so that four years after the incident no apparent progress has been made.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] [ 3 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2024 ) Human factors analysis [ edit ] See also: Diver training § Safety during training Several stages of safety precautions are expected to be in place to prevent such an incident from occurring. These are based on industry standards for recreational diver training, and were the combined responsibility of the recreational diver training industry body for the US, RSTC , the training agency PADI , the proprietors of the dive shop/school, Gull Dive, and the instructor, Debbie Snow. Several organisational cultural factors have been identified which contributed to the situation in which the incident occurred.

[ 4 ] This section needs expansion with: analysis from [ 4 ] What are the expected safety measures, and why did they fail.. You can help by adding to it .

( April 2025 ) Civil case [ edit ] A wrongful death lawsuit was filed in Missoula County District Court by Mill’s parents and other dive trainees in May 2021 alleging that Gull Dive instructors were not sufficiently qualified and failed to follow several safety requirements stipulated by PADI training standards , and were negligent and failed to exercise reasonable care before, during and after the dive.

[ 3 ] It was alleged that Snow failed to check the equipment Mills was to train in, or her competence to use it, and allowed Mills to use an inappropriate and dangerous combination of gear. It was further alleged that during the dive, Snow failed to sufficiently monitor Mills’ situation or to take corrective actions as the incident developed.

[ 12 ] The suit was for $12 million for compensatory and punitive damages, [ 14 ] against Gull Dive, owners David and Jeannine Olson, diving instructor Debbie Snow, and shop employee and volunteer dive assistant Seth Liston. The Professional Association of Diving Instructors Worldwide Corporation, (PADI) and its wholly owned subsidiary PADI Americas Inc. was accused of negligence in its oversight of member businesses, but denied vicarious responsibility on grounds that member shops and instructors are not agents of PADI, which is no more than a professional organization and certifying agency, with members who operate independently, so PADI is therefore not responsible for their actions or omissions.

[ 12 ] PADI's argument that Gull Dive and their staff were neither its agents nor employees, and that it could not be held responsible for the death of a client of Gull Dive was overruled by a judge, who stated that PADI exerted control over Gull Dive and its instructors by way of its membership agreement, which obliged members to follow its standards and instructions.

[ 17 ] A settlement for an undisclosed amount was reached in February 2023.

[ 14 ] Snow's membership of PADI was subsequently terminated on 19 January 2023, [ 25 ] about the time of the settlement. Gull Dive was dissolved by the owners in 2022. The volunteer safety diver was originally cited but later dropped from the suit.

[ 17 ] Criminal case [ edit ] None of the defendants in the civil case were criminally charged after an initial investigation. The U.S. Attorney for the State of Montana declined to press criminal charges against Snow, claiming the state could not prove criminal culpability beyond reasonable doubt.

[ 12 ] Counsel for the plaintiffs in the civil case, David G. Concannon, suggested that if the federal investigators took the trouble to follow the chain of custody for the dive computer worn by Mills, which was taken out of state for two years, instead of being handed over to the investigators, they could charge those responsible for suppressing the evidence.

[ 24 ] This section needs expansion with: [ 11 ] . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2024 ) Legacy [ edit ] This section is empty.

You can help by adding to it .

( November 2024 ) Notes [ edit ] ^ January 2020 ^ Asserted by PADI to be compliant with EN 14413-2 / ISO 24802-2 - Part 2: Level 2 Instructor ^ As a recreational diver with no leadership or instructor certification, Linton could not accept or be given responsibility for dive leadership or instructional activities in a training scenario for a PADI dive school or instructor.

^ The buoyancy of a dry suit is variable and depends on the undergarments, diver attitude in the water, the setting of the auto-dump valve , the amount of air injected into the suit through the inflator valve, and ambient pressure, which varies with depth.

^ other sources state 22 lb in the suit and 22lb in the BCD.

[ 6 ] ^ A properly allocated buddy is one who has completed a pre-dive buddy check with their buddy, and is familiar with their buddy's equipment, particularly the details of weighting and buoyancy control equipment, and would have known where the weights were, that there was no inflator connection, and that the zipper was not properly closed, so should have refused to dive.

^ It is standard procedure for recreational divers to carry a secondary demand valve on the regulator to supply another diver in an emergency.

^ A breathing diver releases bubbles which are a reliable way to find them underwater if conditions are suitable ^ "Treatment for potential injuries" suggests that their dive profiles may have violated the dive computer decompression algorithms in use and they may have been at increased risk of developing symptomatic decompression sickness. As a general rule, flying after diving is avoided, or conducted at the lowest practicable altitude, as exposure to increased altitude is a significant risk factor soon after diving.

^ David Concannon, J.D., is a trial attorney with considerable experience in the diving industry in personal injury, product liability and wrongful death litigation, and in the investigation of scuba fatalities.

[ 20 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Linnea Rose Mills" .

www.umt.edu .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2023 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ a b c "#89 - The Linnea Mills Tragedy: A Review of the Equipment Involved in this Incident" .

YouTube . Pearland, TX: Dive Zone Scuba. October 2022 . Retrieved November 5, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Perry, Terance P.; Concannon, David G. (May 4, 2021).

"Montana Fourth Judicial District Court Missoula County: Case No. DV 32-2021-0000544-NE: Complaint and Demand for Jury Trial" (PDF) – via www.undercurrent.org.

^ a b c Lock, Gareth (March 2025).

"HF and System Safety view of the Linnea Mills Drysuit Diving Fatality" . The Human Diver – via YouTube.

^ a b Bantin, John (July 2021).

"The Tragic, Unnecessary Death of an AOW Trainee" .

www.undercurrent.org . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g Woody; Gus (November 8, 2024).

"Exclusive: Never-Told First-Hand witnesses on Linnea Mills' Drysuit Death (Part 1)" . Dive Talk . Retrieved November 13, 2024 – via YouTube.

^ "Elevation of Lake with altitude and height" .

elevationmap.net .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2020 . Retrieved October 12, 2017 .

^ "Lake McDonald Valley" .

NPS.gov . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2023 . Retrieved June 6, 2015 .

^ "Padi Americas, Private Equity Backed Company, (2017-06-28)" .

mergr.com .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved September 11, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g "PADI Faces Liability for Linnea Mills Death: My Hopes For The Legacy Of The Lady In The Lake" .

YouTube . Divers Ready. July 25, 2022 . Retrieved November 5, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Woody; Gus (November 15, 2024).

"Exclusive: Never-Told First-Hand witnesses on Linnea Mills' Drysuit Death (Part 2)" . Dive Talk . Retrieved November 15, 2024 – via YouTube.

^ a b c d e Lundquist, Laura (April 8, 2022).

"Diving association denies responsibility in Glacier drowning death of Missoula woman" .

missoulacurrent.com . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ a b "$12m lawsuit follows suit-squeeze death" .

divernet.com . May 9, 2021 . Retrieved November 7, 2024 .

^ a b c Murphy, Thomas J. (March 15, 2023).

"Settlement Reached in Glacier National Park Diving Death" .

www.enjuris.com .

Archived from the original on May 18, 2024 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Lundquist, Laura (May 7, 2021).

"Lawsuit details alleged negligence that drowned Missoula diver in Lake McDonald" .

missoulacurrent.com .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2024 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ Barsky, Steven M.; Long, Dick; Stinton, Bob (2006).

Dry Suit Diving: A Guide to Diving Dry . Ventura, Calif.: Hammerhead Press. p. 152.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-6-0 . Retrieved March 8, 2009 .

^ a b c d e f g Weinman, Steve (February 17, 2023).

"Mills death lawsuit settled – but will criminal case follow?" .

divernet.com . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ Caruso, James Louis; Bell, Michael D., eds. (February 18, 2019).

The Medicolegal Investigation of Recreational Diving Fatalities (PDF) . AAFS 71st Annual Scientific Meeting, Workshop #4. Baltimore, MD: American Academy of Forensic Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 30, 2019 . Retrieved November 7, 2024 .

^ Barsky, Steven; Neuman, Tom (2003).

Investigating Recreational and Commercial Diving Accidents . Santa Barbara, California: Hammerhead Press.

ISBN 0-9674305-3-4 .

^ a b Robbs, Maureen (November 1, 2013).

"Legal Liability in Diving" . Divers Alert Network . Retrieved November 11, 2024 .

^ Concannon, David. (2007).

"Dive Litigation in the Electronic Age: The Importance of Preserving Dive Computer Data in the Event of an Accident" .

Dive Center Business .

10 (6).

Archived from the original on March 23, 2018 . Retrieved January 14, 2011 .

^ "Glacier National Park diving death lawsuit settled" .

YouTube . KPAX-TV. February 10, 2023 . Retrieved November 5, 2024 .

^ "Lawsuit filed in Glacier NP scuba diving death" .

www.kpax.com . May 11, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ a b Liang, John (February 22, 2023).

"Lawyer Calling For Renewed Criminal Investigation Of Dead Teenage Diver" .

www.deeperblue.com .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2024 . Retrieved November 7, 2024 .

^ "Expelled PADI Professionals" .

PADI . October 24, 2013 . Retrieved November 13, 2024 .

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐z2q98
Cached time: 20250812024505
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.787 seconds
Real time usage: 0.947 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4980/1000000
Revision size: 41542/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 559029/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9393/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 131478/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.348/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9232705/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  576.891      1 -total
 34.88%  201.193      2 Template:Reflist
 25.75%  148.577      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 25.17%  145.210      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 24.68%  142.388     21 Template:Cite_web
 13.83%   79.783     35 Template:Navbox
  9.08%   52.356      1 Template:Short_description
  5.70%   32.878      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.36%   30.945      4 Template:Expand_section
  5.12%   29.558      5 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:78296743:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024505 and revision id 1303366355. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Death_of_Linnea_Mills&oldid=1303366355 " Categories : Deaths by person in Montana November 2020 in the United States Sports deaths in Montana Underwater diving deaths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2025 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2024 Articles to be expanded from November 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles to be expanded from April 2025 Articles with empty sections from November 2024 All articles with empty sections This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 15:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Death of Linnea Mills Add languages Add topic

