Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 See also 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Papers 3.2 General references Toggle the table of contents Certainty effect 4 languages Deutsch Nederlands Pälzisch 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological effect This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Certainty effect" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2010 ) Main article: Prospect theory The certainty effect is the psychological effect resulting from the reduction of probability from certain to probable ( Tversky & Kahneman 1986 ). It is an idea introduced in prospect theory .

Normally a reduction in the probability of winning a reward (e.g., a reduction from 80% to 20% in the chance of winning a reward) creates a psychological effect such as displeasure to individuals, which leads to the perception of loss from the original probability thus favoring a risk-averse decision. However, the same reduction results in a larger psychological effect when it is done from certainty than from uncertainty.

Example [ edit ] Tversky & Kahneman (1986) illustrated the certainty effect by the following examples.

First, consider this example: Which of the following options do you prefer?

A. a sure gain of $30 B. 80% chance to win $45 and 20% chance to win nothing In this case, 78% of participants chose option A while only 22% chose option B. This demonstrates the typical risk-aversion phenomenon in prospect theory and framing effect because the expected value of option B ($45x0.8=$36) exceeds that of A by 20%.

Now, consider this problem: Which of the following options do you prefer?

C. 25% chance to win $30 and 75% chance to win nothing D. 20% chance to win $45 and 80% chance to win nothing In this case, 42% of participants chose option C while 58% chose option D.

As before, the expected value of the first option ($30x0.25=$7.50) was 20% lower than that of option D ($45x0.2=9) however, when neither option was certain, risk-taking increased.

See also [ edit ] Pseudocertainty effect Framing effect Prospect theory Allais paradox Bibliography [ edit ] Papers [ edit ] Tversky, Amos ; Kahneman, Daniel (1981).

"The Framing of decisions and the psychology of choice" (PDF) .

Science .

211 (4481): 453– 458.

Bibcode : 1981Sci...211..453T .

doi : 10.1126/science.7455683 .

PMID 7455683 .

S2CID 5643902 .

Tversky, Amos; Kahneman, Daniel (1986).

"Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions" (PDF) .

The Journal of Business .

59 (S4): S251.

doi : 10.1086/296365 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-11-26 . Retrieved 2010-11-20 .

General references [ edit ] Baron, Jonathan (2006).

"Chapter 11: Prospect theory" .

Thinking and Deciding (4th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 262.

ISBN 978-0-521-68043-1 .

v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Certainty_effect&oldid=1294183289 " Categories : Risk Cognitive biases Prospect theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2010 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 04:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Certainty effect 4 languages Add topic

