Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hospitals and research institutions 2 Schools and colleges 3 Transportation 4 Energy 5 Lodging 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Longwood Medical and Academic Area 4 languages العربية Deutsch Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′18″N 71°06′22″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3382°N 71.1060°W ﻿ / 42.3382; -71.1060 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical campus in Boston, Massachusetts View over Longwood Medical and Academic Area facing Huntington Avenue The quadrangle of Harvard Medical School and adjacent Longwood Medical and Academic Area buildings The Longwood Medical and Academic Area , also known as Longwood Medical Area , LMA , or simply Longwood , is a medical campus in Boston , Massachusetts . Flanking Longwood Avenue, LMA is adjacent to the Fenway–Kenmore , Audubon Circle, and Mission Hill neighborhoods, as well as the town of Brookline .

[ 1 ] The campus houses several schools associated with Harvard University , including Harvard Medical School , Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health , Harvard School of Dental Medicine , Harvard's teaching hospitals, and several institutions not formally affiliated with Harvard. Long known as a global center of research, institutions in the Longwood Medical Area secured over $1.2 billion in NIH funds in 2018, which exceeds NIH funding received by 44 states.

Hospitals and research institutions [ edit ] Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Joslin Diabetes Center Massachusetts Mental Health Center New England Baptist Hospital Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering Schools and colleges [ edit ] Boston Latin School Boston University Wheelock College of Education & Human Development Emmanuel College Harvard Medical School Harvard School of Dental Medicine Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Simmons University Wentworth Institute of Technology Winsor School Transportation [ edit ] LMA is served by two subway stations at opposite ends of Longwood Avenue: Longwood station on the MBTA Green Line's "D" branch; and Longwood Medical Area on the Green Line E branch Several public bus routes serve the area and commuter rail service is available at nearby Ruggles Station . The Longwood Collective, formerly known as MASCO (Medical Area and Scientific Community Organization) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] ), offers shuttle buses for affiliated personnel around the Longwood Medical Area and between Harvard University 's main campus in Cambridge and its medical campus in Boston . The medical campus shuttle, known as M2, is free for passengers holding a Harvard ID. Shuttles are also offered to JFK/UMass , Ruggles , and Lansdowne Stations, in addition to satellite Fenway parking lots, the Landmark Center at Fenway, The Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health , and to the Renaissance & Columbus Parking Garages. A number of additional stops are listed on the Longwood Collective Website .

[ 4 ] Energy [ edit ] LMA receives electrical power, cooling, and heating from a trigeneration (CCHP) facility, the Medical Area Total Energy Plant (MATEP).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Lodging [ edit ] Inn at Longwood Medical [ 7 ] Longwood Inn [ 8 ] The Baldwin at Longwood Medical Centre [ 9 ] Yawkey Family Inn [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Channing Home References [ edit ] ^ "Longwood Medical and Academic Area (LMA) Fact Sheet" (PDF) . MASCO Area Planning and Development. December 2012 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 .

^ The Longwood Collective home page ^ MASCO is now the Longwood Collective, Boston Globe, July 21, 2022 ^ "Shuttle Routes | Longwood Collective" .

www.longwoodcollective.org . Retrieved August 12, 2024 .

^ Veolia (November 18, 2014).

"Medical Area Total Energy Plant (MATEP)" .

Veolia North America . Retrieved April 19, 2018 .

^ "Harvard's Unknown Medical Power Plant - News - The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved April 19, 2018 .

^ Inn at Longwood Medical ^ Longwood Inn ^ The Baldwin at Longwood Medical Centre ^ Yawkey Family Inn External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Longwood Medical Area .

Medical Academic and Scientific Community Organization The Diaries of John Hull, Mint-master and Treasurer of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay v t e Boston Topics Accent Annual events Architecture Arts Bibliography Culture Demographics Diplomatic missions Economy Education Colleges and universities Geography Historic places Northern Southern History Timeline Media Nicknames People Politics Port Public library Public schools Sister cities Skyscrapers Songs Transportation Attractions Boston Common Boston Convention and Exhibition Center Irish Famine Memorial Boston Tea Party Ships and Museum Bunker Hill Monument Dorchester Heights Monument Faneuil Hall Fenway Park Franklin Park Zoo Freedom Trail Hynes Convention Center Institute of Contemporary Art Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Massachusetts State House Museum of Fine Arts Appeal to the Great Spirit Museum of Science New England Aquarium Old North Church Paul Revere House Boston Symphony Hall TD Garden USS Constitution Museum Business districts Back Bay Downtown Fenway–Kenmore Financial District Government Center Innovation district North End Route 128 corridor South End List of companies in Boston Government City charter City council City Hall Elections Emergency Medical Services (EMS) FinComm Fire Housing (BHA) Mayor Planning & Development Agency (BPDA) Police Neighborhoods Allston–Brighton Allston Brighton Back Bay Bay Village Beacon Hill Downtown Boston Financial District Government Center Charlestown Chestnut Hill Chinatown Dorchester Columbia Point Upham's Corner East Boston Fenway–Kenmore Harbor Islands Hyde Park Readville Jamaica Plain Forest Hills Leather District Mattapan Mission Hill Longwood North End Roslindale Roxbury Fort Hill South Boston Fort Point Seaport South End West End West Roxbury Sports Boston Bruins Boston Celtics Boston Marathon Boston Red Sox New England Free Jacks New England Patriots New England Revolution Suffolk County Greater Boston Massachusetts 42°20′18″N 71°06′22″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3382°N 71.1060°W ﻿ / 42.3382; -71.1060 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Longwood_Medical_and_Academic_Area&oldid=1277106978 " Categories : Academic enclaves Biomedical districts Harvard Medical School Laboratories in the United States Medical districts Neighborhoods in Boston Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 February 2025, at 18:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Longwood Medical and Academic Area 4 languages Add topic

