Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 19th century 2.2.1 War of 1812 2.2.2 Seminole Wars 2.2.3 Mexican-American War 2.2.4 American Civil War 2.2.5 Later 19th century 2.3 20th century 2.3.1 World Wars 2.3.2 Cold War 2.3.2.1 1945–1960 2.3.2.2 1960–1970 2.3.2.3 1970–1990 2.3.3 1990s 2.4 21st century 3 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 3.1 Planning 3.2 Army Components 3.3 Army commands and army service component commands 3.4 Structure 3.5 Combat maneuver organizations 4 Special operations forces 5 Medical Department 6 Personnel Toggle Personnel subsection 6.1 Officers 6.2 Warrant officers 6.3 Enlisted personnel 6.4 Training 6.4.1 Future Soldier Prep Course 7 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 7.1 Weapons 7.1.1 Individual weapons 7.1.2 Crew-served weapons 7.2 Vehicles 7.3 Aviation 7.4 Uniforms 7.4.1 Berets 7.5 Tents 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Army 75 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land service branch of the U.S. military Not to be confused with Army of the United States , Department of the Army , Army National Guard , or Army Corps of Engineers .

United States Army Service Mark of the United States Army [ 1 ] Wordmark [ 2 ] Founded 3 June 1784 (241 years, 2 months) (in current form) 14 June 1775 (250 years, 2 months) (as the Continental Army ) [ 3 ] Country United States Type Army Role Land warfare Size 452,689 active duty personnel [ 4 ] 325,218 Army National Guard personnel 176,968 Army Reserve personnel [ 5 ] 954,875 total uniformed personnel (official data as of 31 July 2023) 265,000 civilian personnel [ 6 ] 4,406 crewed aircraft [ 7 ] Part of United States Armed Forces [ 8 ] Department of the Army Headquarters The Pentagon Arlington County, Virginia , U.S.

Motto(s) "This We'll Defend" [ 9 ] Colors Black, gold and white [ 10 ] [ 11 ] March " The Army Goes Rolling Along " Play ⓘ Mascot(s) Army Mules Anniversaries Army Birthday : 14 June [ 12 ] Equipment List of U.S. Army equipment Engagements See list Revolutionary War War of 1812 Mexican–American War Civil War Indian Wars Spanish–American War China Relief Expedition Philippine–American War Mexican Expedition World War I Russian Civil War Bonus Army suppression World War II Korean War 1958 Lebanon crisis Vietnam War Dominican Civil War Korean DMZ Conflict Invasion of Grenada Invasion of Panama Somali Civil War Persian Gulf War Kosovo War Global War on Terrorism War in Afghanistan Iraq War Operation Inherent Resolve [ 13 ] Battle of Khasham Website army.mil goarmy.com Commanders Commander-in-Chief President Donald Trump Secretary of Defense Pete Hegseth Secretary of the Army Daniel P. Driscoll Chief of Staff GEN Randy George Vice Chief of Staff GEN James J. Mingus Chief Warrant Officer of the Army CW5 Aaron H. Anderson Sergeant Major of the Army SMA Michael Weimer [ 14 ] Insignia Flag Field flag [ a ] Logo Military unit The United States Army ( USA ) is the primary land service branch of the United States Department of Defense . It is designated as the Army of the United States in the United States Constitution .

[ 15 ] It operates under the authority, direction, and control of the United States secretary of defense .

[ 16 ] It is one of the six armed forces and one of the eight uniformed services of the United States . The Army is the most senior branch in order of precedence amongst the armed services.

[ 17 ] It has its roots in the Continental Army , formed on 14 June 1775 to fight against the British for independence during the American Revolutionary War (1775–1783).

[ 12 ] After the Revolutionary War, the Congress of the Confederation created the United States Army on 3 June 1784 to replace the disbanded Continental Army.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The U.S. Army is part of the Department of the Army , which is one of the three military departments of the Department of Defense . The U.S. Army is headed by a civilian senior appointed civil servant, the secretary of the Army (SECARMY), and by a chief military officer , the chief of staff of the Army (CSA) who is also a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . It is the largest military branch, and in the fiscal year 2022, the projected end strength for the Regular Army (USA) was 480,893 soldiers; the Army National Guard (ARNG) had 336,129 soldiers and the U.S. Army Reserve (USAR) had 188,703 soldiers; the combined-component strength of the U.S. Army was 1,005,725 soldiers.

[ 20 ] The Army's mission is "to fight and win our Nation's wars, by providing prompt, sustained land dominance, across the full range of military operations and the spectrum of conflict, in support of combatant commanders ".

[ 21 ] The branch participates in conflicts worldwide and is the major ground-based offensive and defensive force of the United States of America.‌ Mission [ edit ] The United States Army serves as the primary land-based branch of the United States Department of Defense .

Section 7062 of Title 10, U.S. Code defines the purpose of the army as: [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Preserving the peace and security and providing for the defense of the United States, the Commonwealths and possessions, and any areas occupied by the United States Supporting the national policies Implementing the national objectives Overcoming any nations responsible for aggressive acts that imperil the peace and security of the United States In 2018, the Army Strategy 2018 articulated an eight-point addendum to the Army Vision for 2028.

[ 24 ] While the Army Mission remains constant, the Army Strategy builds upon the Army's Brigade Modernization by adding focus to corps and division -level echelons.

[ 24 ] The Army Futures Command oversees reforms geared toward conventional warfare . The Army's current reorganization plan is due to be completed by 2028.

[ 24 ] The Army's five core competencies are prompt and sustained land combat, combined arms operations (to include combined arms maneuver and wide–area security, armored and mechanized operations and airborne and air assault operations ), special operations forces , to set and sustain the theater for the joint force and to integrate national, multinational, and joint power on land.

[ 25 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of the United States Army Origins [ edit ] The Continental Army was created on 14 June 1775 by the Second Continental Congress [ 26 ] as a unified army for the colonies to fight Great Britain , with George Washington appointed as its commander.

[ 12 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] The army was initially led by men who had served in the British Army or colonial militias and who brought much of British military heritage with them. As the Revolutionary War progressed, French aid, resources, and military thinking helped shape the new army. A number of European soldiers came on their own to help, such as Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben , who taught Prussian Army tactics and organizational skills.

The storming of Redoubt No. 10 in the Siege of Yorktown during the American Revolutionary War , as depicted in a watercolor painting by H. Charles McBarron Jr.

(1902–1992) prompted Great Britain's government to begin negotiations, resulting in the Treaty of Paris and Great Britain's recognition of the United States as an independent state.

The Army fought numerous pitched battles, and sometimes used Fabian strategy and hit-and-run tactics in the South in 1780 and 1781; under Major General Nathanael Greene , it hit where the British were weakest to wear down their forces. Washington led victories against the British at Trenton and Princeton , but lost a series of battles in the New York and New Jersey campaign in 1776 and the Philadelphia campaign in 1777. With a decisive victory at Yorktown and the help of the French, the Continental Army prevailed against the British.

After the war, the Continental Army was quickly given land certificates and disbanded in a reflection of the republican distrust of standing armies.

State militias became the new nation's sole ground army, except a regiment to guard the Western Frontier and one battery of artillery guarding West Point 's arsenal. However, because of continuing conflict with Native Americans , it was soon considered necessary to field a trained standing army. The Regular Army was at first very small and after General St. Clair's defeat at the Battle of the Wabash, [ 30 ] where more than 800 soldiers were killed, the Regular Army was reorganized as the Legion of the United States , established in 1791 and renamed the United States Army in 1796.

In 1798, during the Quasi-War with France, the U.S. Congress established a three-year " Provisional Army " of 10,000 men, consisting of twelve regiments of infantry and six troops of light dragoons . In March 1799, Congress created an "Eventual Army" of 30,000 men, including three regiments of cavalry . Both "armies" existed only on paper, but equipment for 3,000 men and horses was procured and stored.

[ 31 ] 19th century [ edit ] Further information: War of 1812 and Army on the Frontier General Andrew Jackson standing on the parapet of his makeshift defenses as his troops repulse attacking Highlanders during the defense of New Orleans , the final major and most one-sided battle of the War of 1812 , mainly fought by militia and volunteers.

War of 1812 [ edit ] Main article: War of 1812 The War of 1812 was the second and last war between the United States and Great Britain. The war was split between a Northern, Southern, and naval campaign.

[ 32 ] While a large part of the war was fought between the United States and Great Britain, there were a variety of native tribes that fought on both sides of the conflict. The result of the war is the Treaty of Ghent and is generally considered to be inconclusive, and brought upon a period of peace between the United States and Great Britain that has lasted for over two centuries.

[ 33 ] Seminole Wars [ edit ] Main article: Seminole Wars There was a long period of war between the United States and the Seminoles that lasted over 50 years. The usual strategies utilized against Native American tribes were to seize winter food supplies and to form alliances with enemies of a tribe. These were not viable options against the Seminoles, largely due to the fact of lack of climate variability in Florida and because of the long history of warring between the Seminole tribe and other tribes in the Florida region.

[ 34 ] Mexican-American War [ edit ] Main article: Mexican-American War The U.S. Army fought and won the Mexican–American War, which was a defining event for both countries. The U.S. victory resulted in Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo , conceded a large portion of land to the United States which included the modern-day states of California , Nevada , New Mexico , Arizona , Texas , and parts of Colorado and Wyoming .

[ 35 ] American Civil War [ edit ] Further information: Union Army The Battle of Gettysburg , the turning point of the American Civil War The American Civil War was the costliest war for the U.S. in terms of casualties. After most slave states , located in the southern U.S., formed the Confederate States , the Confederate States Army , led by former U.S. Army officers, mobilized a large fraction of Southern white manpower. Forces of the United States (the "Union" or "the North") formed the Union Army , consisting of a small body of regular army units and a large body of volunteer units raised from every state, north and south, except South Carolina .

[ 36 ] For the first two years, Confederate forces did well in set battles but lost control of the border states.

[ 37 ] The Confederates had the advantage of defending a large territory in an area where disease caused twice as many deaths as combat. The Union pursued a strategy of seizing the coastline, blockading the ports, and taking control of the river systems. By 1863, the Confederacy was being strangled. Its eastern armies fought well, but the western armies were defeated one after another until the Union forces captured New Orleans in 1862 along with the Tennessee River.  In the Vicksburg Campaign of 1862–1863, General Ulysses Grant seized the Mississippi River and cut off the Southwest.  Grant took command of Union forces in 1864 and after a series of battles with very heavy casualties, he had General Robert E. Lee under siege in Richmond as General William T. Sherman captured Atlanta and marched through Georgia and the Carolinas .  The Confederate capital was abandoned in April 1865 and Lee subsequently surrendered his army at Appomattox Court House. All other Confederate armies surrendered within a few months.

The war remains the deadliest conflict in U.S. history, resulting in the deaths of 620,000 men on both sides. Based on 1860 census figures, 8% of all white males aged 13 to 43 died in the war, including 6.4% in the North and 18% in the South .

[ 38 ] Later 19th century [ edit ] Army soldiers in 1890 Following the Civil War, the U.S. Army had the mission of containing western tribes of Native Americans on the Indian reservations . They set up many forts, and engaged in the last of the American Indian Wars . U.S. Army troops also occupied several Southern states during the Reconstruction Era to protect freedmen .

The key battles of the Spanish–American War of 1898 were fought by the Navy. Using mostly new volunteers , the U.S. forces defeated Spain in land campaigns in Cuba and played the central role in the Philippine–American War .

20th century [ edit ] Starting in 1910, the army began acquiring fixed-wing aircraft .

[ 39 ] In 1910, during the Mexican Revolution , the army was deployed to U.S. towns near the border to ensure the safety of lives and property. In 1916, Pancho Villa , a major rebel leader, attacked Columbus, New Mexico , prompting a U.S. intervention in Mexico until 7 February 1917. They fought the rebels and the Mexican federal troops until 1918.

World Wars [ edit ] Main article: United States Army during World War II For a list of campaigns see List of United States Army campaigns during World War II U.S. Army troops assaulting a German bunker in France , c.

1918 U.S. Army unit before heading to France during World War I The United States joined World War I as an "Associated Power" in 1917 on the side of Britain , France , Russia , Italy and the other Allies . U.S. troops were sent to the Western Front and were involved in the last offensives that ended the war. With the armistice in November 1918, the army once again decreased its forces.

In 1939, estimates of the Army's strength ranged between 174,000 and 200,000 soldiers, smaller than that of Portugal 's, which ranked it 17th or 19th in the world in size. General George C. Marshall became Army chief of staff in September 1939 and set about expanding and modernizing the Army in preparation for war.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] U.S. soldiers hunting for Japanese infiltrators during the Bougainville Campaign The United States joined World War II in December 1941 after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . Some 11 million Americans were to serve in various Army operations.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] On the European front , U.S. Army troops formed a significant portion of the forces that landed in French North Africa and took Tunisia and then moved on to Sicily and later fought in Italy . In the June 1944 landings in northern France and in the subsequent liberation of Europe and defeat of Nazi Germany , millions of U.S. Army troops played a central role. In 1947, the number of soldiers in the US Army had decreased from eight million in 1945 to 684,000 soldiers and the total number of active divisions had dropped from 89 to 12. The leaders of the Army saw this demobilization as a success.

[ 44 ] In the Pacific War , U.S. Army soldiers participated alongside the United States Marine Corps in capturing the Pacific Islands from Japanese control. Following the Axis surrenders in May (Germany) and August (Japan) of 1945, army troops were deployed to Japan and Germany to occupy the two defeated nations. Two years after World War II, the Army Air Forces separated from the army to become the United States Air Force in September 1947. In 1948, the army was desegregated by order 9981 of President Harry S. Truman .

Cold War [ edit ] 1945–1960 [ edit ] U.S. Army soldiers observing an atomic bomb test of Operation Buster-Jangle at the Nevada Test Site during the Korean War The end of World War II set the stage for the East–West confrontation known as the Cold War . With the outbreak of the Korean War , concerns over the defense of Western Europe rose. Two corps, V and VII , were reactivated under Seventh United States Army in 1950 and U.S. strength in Europe rose from one division to four. Hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops remained stationed in West Germany, with others in Belgium , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom , until the 1990s in anticipation of a possible Soviet attack.

[ 45 ] : minute 9:00–10:00 US tanks and Soviet tanks at Checkpoint Charlie , 1961 During the Cold War, U.S. troops and their allies fought communist forces in Korea and Vietnam . The Korean War began in June 1950, when the Soviets walked out of a UN Security Council meeting, removing their possible veto. Under a United Nations umbrella, hundreds of thousands of U.S. troops fought to prevent the takeover of South Korea by North Korea and later to invade the northern nation. After repeated advances and retreats by both sides and the Chinese People's Volunteer Army 's entry into the war, the Korean Armistice Agreement returned the peninsula to the status quo in July 1953.

1960–1970 [ edit ] Main article: United States Army during Vietnam War The Vietnam War is often regarded as a low point for the U.S. Army due to the use of drafted personnel , the unpopularity of the war with the U.S. public and frustrating restrictions placed on the military by U.S. political leaders. While U.S. forces had been stationed in South Vietnam since 1959, in intelligence and advising/training roles, they were not deployed in large numbers until 1965, after the Gulf of Tonkin Incident . U.S. forces effectively established and maintained control of the "traditional" battlefield, but they struggled to counter the guerrilla hit and run tactics of the communist Viet Cong and the People's Army of Vietnam (NVA) .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] A U.S. Army infantry patrol moving up to assault the last North Vietnamese Army position at Dak To, South Vietnam during Operation Hawthorne During the 1960s, the Department of Defense continued to scrutinize the reserve forces and to question the number of divisions and brigades as well as the redundancy of maintaining two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve .

[ 48 ] In 1967, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara decided that 15 combat divisions in the Army National Guard were unnecessary and cut the number to eight divisions (one mechanized infantry, two armored, and five infantry), but increased the number of brigades from seven to 18 (one airborne, one armored, two mechanized infantry and 14 infantry). The loss of the divisions did not sit well with the states. Their objections included the inadequate maneuver element mix for those that remained and the end to the practice of rotating divisional commands among the states that supported them. Under the proposal, the remaining division commanders were to reside in the state of the division base. However, no reduction in total Army National Guard strength was to take place, which convinced the governors to accept the plan. The states reorganized their forces accordingly between 1 December 1967 and 1 May 1968.

1970–1990 [ edit ] U.S. Army soldiers preparing to take La Comandancia in the El Chorrillo neighborhood of Panama City during Operation Just Cause The Total Force Policy was adopted by Chief of Staff of the Army General Creighton Abrams in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and involved treating the three components of the army – the Regular Army , the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve as a single force.

[ 49 ] General Abrams' intertwining of the three components of the army effectively made extended operations impossible without the involvement of both the Army National Guard and Army Reserve in a predominantly combat support role.

[ 50 ] The army converted to an all-volunteer force with greater emphasis on training to specific performance standards driven by the reforms of General William E. DePuy , the first commander of United States Army Training and Doctrine Command . Following the Camp David Accords that was signed by Egypt, Israel that was brokered by president Jimmy Carter in 1978, as part of the agreement, both the United States and Egypt agreed that there would be a joint military training led by both countries that would usually take place every 2 years, that exercise is known as Exercise Bright Star .

The 1980s was mostly a decade of reorganization. The Goldwater-Nichols Act of 1986 created unified combatant commands bringing the army together with the other four military services under unified, geographically organized command structures. The army also played a role in the invasions of Grenada in 1983 ( Operation Urgent Fury ) and Panama in 1989 ( Operation Just Cause ).

By 1989 Germany was nearing reunification and the Cold War was coming to a close. Army leadership reacted by starting to plan for a reduction in strength. By November 1989 Pentagon briefers were laying out plans to reduce army end strength by 23%, from 750,000 to 580,000.

[ 51 ] A number of incentives such as early retirement were used.

1990s [ edit ] M1 Abrams tanks moving out before the Battle of Al Busayyah during the Gulf War In 1990, Iraq invaded its smaller neighbor, Kuwait , and U.S. land forces quickly deployed to assure the protection of Saudi Arabia . In January 1991 Operation Desert Storm commenced, a U.S.-led coalition which deployed over 500,000 troops, the bulk of them from U.S. Army formations, to drive out Iraqi forces . The campaign ended in total victory, as Western coalition forces routed the Iraqi Army . Some of the largest tank battles in history were fought during the Gulf war. The Battle of Medina Ridge , Battle of Norfolk and the Battle of 73 Easting were tank battles of historical significance.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Iraqi tanks destroyed by Task Force 1-41 Infantry during the Gulf War, February 1991 After Operation Desert Storm, the army did not see major combat operations for the remainder of the 1990s but did participate in a number of peacekeeping activities. In 1990 the Department of Defense issued guidance for "rebalancing" after a review of the Total Force Policy, [ 55 ] but in 2004, USAF Air War College scholars concluded the guidance would reverse the Total Force Policy which is an "essential ingredient to the successful application of military force".

[ 56 ] 21st century [ edit ] U.S. Army Rangers taking part in a raid during an operation in Nahr-e Saraj , Afghanistan On 11 September 2001, 53 Army civilians (47 employees and six contractors) and 22 soldiers were among the 125 victims killed in the Pentagon in a terrorist attack when American Airlines Flight 77 commandeered by five Al-Qaeda hijackers slammed into the western side of the building, as part of the September 11 attacks .

[ 57 ] In response to the 11 September attacks and as part of the Global War on Terror , U.S. and NATO forces invaded Afghanistan in October 2001, displacing the Taliban government. The U.S. Army also led the combined U.S. and allied invasion of Iraq in 2003; it served as the primary source for ground forces with its ability to sustain short and long-term deployment operations. In the following years, the mission changed from conflict between regular militaries to counterinsurgency , resulting in the deaths of more than 4,000 U.S. service members (as of March 2008) and injuries to thousands more.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] 23,813 insurgents were killed in Iraq between 2003 and 2011.

[ 60 ] U.S. Army soldiers with the 2nd Battalion, 327th Infantry Regiment , 101st Airborne Division returning fire during a firefight with Taliban forces in Barawala Kalay Valley in Kunar province , Afghanistan, March 2011 Until 2009, the army's chief modernization plan, its most ambitious since World War II, [ 61 ] was the Future Combat Systems program. In 2009, many systems were canceled, and the remaining were swept into the BCT modernization program .

[ 62 ] By 2017, the Brigade Modernization project was completed and its headquarters, the Brigade Modernization Command, was renamed the Joint Modernization Command, or JMC.

[ 63 ] In response to Budget sequestration in 2013 , Army plans were to shrink to 1940 levels, [ 64 ] although actual Active-Army end-strengths were projected to fall to some 450,000 troops by the end of FY2017.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] From 2016 to 2017, the Army retired hundreds of OH-58 Kiowa Warrior observation helicopters, [ 67 ] while retaining its Apache gunships.

[ 68 ] The 2015 expenditure for Army research, development and acquisition changed from $32 billion projected in 2012 for FY15 to $21 billion for FY15 expected in 2014.

[ 69 ] Organization [ edit ] Organization of the United States Army within the Department of Defense Planning [ edit ] By 2017, a task force was formed to address Army modernization, [ 70 ] which triggered shifts of units: CCDC , and ARCIC , from within Army Materiel Command (AMC), and Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC), respectively, to a new Army Command (ACOM) in 2018.

[ 71 ] AFC's mission is modernization reform: to design hardware, as well as to work within the acquisition process which defines materiel for AMC. TRADOC's mission is to define the architecture and organization of the Army, and to train and supply soldiers to FORSCOM.

[ 72 ] : minutes 2:30–15:00 [ 45 ] AFC's cross-functional teams (CFTs) are Futures Command's vehicle for sustainable reform of the acquisition process for the future.

[ 73 ] In order to support the Army's modernization priorities, its FY2020 budget allocated $30 billion for the top six modernization priorities over the next five years.

[ 74 ] The $30 billion came from $8 billion in cost avoidance and $22 billion in terminations.

[ 74 ] Army Components [ edit ] See also: Structure of the United States Army U.S. Army organization chart [ 75 ] The task of organizing the U.S. Army commenced in 1775.

[ 76 ] In the first one hundred years of its existence, the United States Army was maintained as a small peacetime force to man permanent forts and perform other non-wartime duties such as engineering and construction works. During times of war, the U.S. Army was augmented by the much larger United States Volunteers which were raised independently by various state governments. States also maintained full-time militias which could also be called into the service of the army.

Senior American commanders of the European theatre of World War II .

*Seated are (from left to right) Generals William H. Simpson , George S. Patton , Carl A. Spaatz , Dwight D. Eisenhower , Omar Bradley , Courtney H. Hodges , and Leonard T. Gerow *standing are (from left to right) Generals Ralph F. Stearley , Hoyt Vandenberg , Walter Bedell Smith , Otto P. Weyland , and Richard E. Nugent By the twentieth century, the U.S. Army had mobilized the U.S. Volunteers on four occasions during each of the major wars of the nineteenth century. During World War I, the " National Army " was organized to fight the conflict, replacing the concept of U.S. Volunteers.

[ 77 ] It was demobilized at the end of World War I and was replaced by the Regular Army, the Organized Reserve Corps, and the state militias. In the 1920s and 1930s, the "career" soldiers were known as the " Regular Army " with the "Enlisted Reserve Corps" and "Officer Reserve Corps" augmented to fill vacancies when needed.

[ 78 ] In 1941, the " Army of the United States " was founded to fight World War II.

[ 79 ] The Regular Army, Army of the United States, the National Guard, and Officer/Enlisted Reserve Corps (ORC and ERC) existed simultaneously. After World War II, the ORC and ERC were combined into the United States Army Reserve . The Army of the United States was re-established for the Korean War and Vietnam War and was demobilized upon the suspension of the draft .

[ 78 ] Currently, the Army is divided into the Regular Army , the Army Reserve, and the Army National Guard .

[ 77 ] Some states further maintain state defense forces , as a type of reserve to the National Guard, while all states maintain regulations for state militias .

[ 80 ] The U.S. Army is also divided into several branches and functional areas .  Branches include officers, warrant officers, and enlisted Soldiers while functional areas consist of officers who are reclassified from their former branch into a functional area. However, officers continue to wear the branch insignia of their former branch in most cases, as functional areas do not generally have discrete insignia. Some branches, such as Special Forces , operate similarly to functional areas in that individuals may not join their ranks until having served in another Army branch. Careers in the Army can extend into cross-functional areas for officers, [ 81 ] warrant officers, enlisted, and civilian personnel.

U.S. Army branches and functional areas Branch Insignia and colors Branch Insignia and colors Functional Area (FA) Acquisition Corps (AC) Air Defense Artillery (AD) Information Network Engineering (FA 26) Adjutant General's Corps (AG) Includes Army Bands (AB) Armor (AR) Includes Cavalry (CV) Information Operations (FA 30) Aviation (AV) Civil Affairs Corps (CA) Strategic Intelligence (FA 34) Chaplain Corps (CH) Chemical Corps (CM) Space Operations (FA 40) Cyber Corps (CY) Dental Corps (DC) Public Affairs Officer (FA 46) Corps of Engineers (EN) Field Artillery (FA) Academy Professor (FA 47) Finance Corps (FI) Infantry (IN) Foreign Area Officer (FA 48) Inspector General (IG) Logistics (LG) Operations Research/Systems Analysis (FA 49) Judge Advocate General's Corps (JA) Military Intelligence Corps (MI) Force Management (FA 50) Medical Corps (MC) Medical Service Corps (MS) Acquisition ( FA 51 ) [ 81 ] Military Police Corps (MP) Army Nurse Corps (AN) Nuclear and Counter WMD Officer (FA 52B) Psychological Operations (PO) Medical Specialist Corps (SP) Simulation Operations (FA 57) Quartermaster Corps (QM) Staff Specialist Corps (SS) (USAR and ARNG only) Army Marketing (FA 58) [ 82 ] Special Forces (SF) Ordnance Corps (OD) Health Services (FA 70) Veterinary Corps (VC) Public Affairs (PA) Laboratory Sciences (FA 71) Transportation Corps (TC) Signal Corps (SC) Preventive Medicine Sciences (FA 72) Behavioral Sciences (FA 73) Special branch insignias (for some unique duty assignments) National Guard Bureau (NGB) General Staff U.S. Military Academy Staff Chaplain Candidate Officer Candidate Warrant Officer Candidate Aide-de-camp Senior Enlisted Advisor (SEA) Before 1933, the Army National Guard members were considered state militia until they were mobilized into the U.S. Army, typically at the onset of war. Since the 1933 amendment to the National Defense Act of 1916 , all Army National Guard soldiers have held dual status. They serve as National Guardsmen under the authority of the governor of their state or territory and as reserve members of the U.S. Army under the authority of the president, in the Army National Guard of the United States.

[ 83 ] Since the adoption of the total force policy, in the aftermath of the Vietnam War, reserve component soldiers have taken a more active role in U.S. military operations. For example, Reserve and Guard units took part in the Gulf War , peacekeeping in Kosovo , Afghanistan, and the 2003 invasion of Iraq .

Army commands and army service component commands [ edit ] Headquarters, United States Department of the Army (HQDA): Army Commands Current commander Location of headquarters [ b ] United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM) [ 84 ] GEN Andrew P. Poppas Fort Bragg , North Carolina United States Army Futures Command (AFC) [ 85 ] GEN James E. Rainey Austin, Texas United States Army Materiel Command (AMC) [ 86 ] LTG Christopher O. Mohan (acting) Redstone Arsenal , Alabama United States Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) [ 87 ] GEN Gary M. Brito Fort Eustis , Virginia Army Service Component Commands Current commander Location of headquarters United States Army Central (ARCENT)/ Third Army [ 88 ] LTG Patrick D. Frank Shaw Air Force Base , South Carolina United States Army Europe and Africa / Seventh Army GEN Christopher T. Donahue [ 89 ] Clay Kaserne , Wiesbaden , Germany United States Army North (ARNORTH)/ Fifth Army [ 90 ] LTG Allan M. Pepin Joint Base San Antonio , Texas United States Army Pacific (USARPAC) [ 91 ] GEN Ronald P. Clark Fort Shafter , Hawaii United States Army South (ARSOUTH)/ Sixth Army [ 92 ] MG Phillip J. Ryan Joint Base San Antonio, Texas Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC) [ 93 ] MG Lance G. Curtis Scott AFB , Illinois United States Army Cyber Command (ARCYBER) [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] LTG Maria B. Barrett Fort Gordon , Georgia United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command /United States Army Forces Strategic Command (USASMDC/ARSTRAT) [ 97 ] LTG Sean Gainey Redstone Arsenal, Alabama United States Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) [ 98 ] LTG Jonathan P. Braga Fort Bragg, North Carolina Operational Force Headquarters Current commander Location of headquarters Eighth Army (EUSA) [ 99 ] BG D. Sean Crockett (acting) Camp Humphreys , South Korea Direct reporting units Current commander Location of headquarters Arlington National Cemetery and Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery [ 100 ] Katharine Kelley [ 101 ] (civilian) Arlington County, Virginia Civilian Protection Center of Excellence [ 102 ] Michael McNerney Arlington County, Virginia United States Army Joint Counter-Small Unmanned Aircraft Systems Office [ 103 ] Arlington County, Virginia Military Postal Service Agency [ 104 ] Arlington County, Virginia United States Army Acquisition Support Center (USAASC) [ 105 ] Craig A. Spisak [ 106 ] (civilian) Fort Belvoir, Virginia United States Army Civilian Human Resources Agency (CHRA) [ 107 ] Carol Burton [ 108 ] (civilian) Aberdeen Proving Ground , Maryland United States Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) [ 109 ] LTG William H. Graham Jr.

Washington, D.C.

United States Army Corrections Command (ACC) [ 110 ] BG Sarah K. Albrycht Arlington County, Virginia United States Army Criminal Investigation Division (USACID) [ 111 ] Gregory D. Ford Quantico, Virginia United States Army Human Resources Command (HRC) [ 112 ] MG Hope C. Rampy Fort Knox, Kentucky United States Army Intelligence and Security Command (INSCOM) [ 113 ] MG Timothy D. Brown Fort Belvoir, Virginia United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM) [ 114 ] LTG Mary K. Izaguirre Joint Base San Antonio, Texas United States Army Recruiting Command (USAREC) LTG Johnny K. Davis Fort Knox, Kentucky United States Army Military District of Washington (MDW) [ 115 ] BG Antoinette R. Gant Fort Lesley J. McNair , Washington, D.C.

United States Army War College (AWC) [ 116 ] MG David C. Hill Carlisle, Pennsylvania United States Military Academy (USMA) [ 117 ] LTG Steven W. Gilland West Point, New York Source: U.S. Army organization [ 21 ] Structure [ edit ] Main article: Structure of the United States Army See also: Transformation of the United States Army and Reorganization plan of the United States Army U.S. Army soldiers of the 1st Battalion, 175th Infantry Regiment , Maryland Army National Guard conducting an urban cordon and search exercise as part of the army readiness and training evaluation program in the mock city of Balad at Fort Dix , New Jersey U.S. soldiers from the 6th Infantry Regiment taking up positions on a street corner during a foot patrol in Ramadi , Iraq The 1st Cavalry Division's combat aviation brigade performing a mock charge with the horse detachment U.S. Army Special Forces soldiers from the 3rd Special Forces Group patrolling a field in the Gulistan district of Farah , Afghanistan See Structure of the United States Army for a detailed treatment of the history , components , administrative and operational structure and the branches and functional areas of the Army.

The U.S. Army is made up of three components: the active component, the Regular Army; and two reserve components, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve. Both reserve components are primarily composed of part-time soldiers who train once a month – known as battle assemblies or unit training assemblies (UTAs) – and conduct two to three weeks of annual training each year. Both the Regular Army and the Army Reserve are organized under Title 10 of the United States Code , while the National Guard is organized under Title 32 . While the Army National Guard is organized, trained, and equipped as a component of the U.S. Army, when it is not in federal service it is under the command of individual state and territorial governors. However, the District of Columbia National Guard reports to the U.S. president, not the district's mayor , even when not federalized. Any or all of the National Guard can be federalized by presidential order and against the governor's wishes.

[ 118 ] The U.S. Army is led by a civilian secretary of the Army , who has the statutory authority to conduct all the affairs of the army under the authority, direction, and control of the secretary of defense .

[ 119 ] The chief of staff of the Army , who is the highest-ranked military officer in the army, serves as the principal military adviser and executive agent for the secretary of the Army, i.e., its service chief; and as a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , a body composed of the service chiefs from each of the four military services belonging to the Department of Defense who advise the president of the United States , the secretary of defense and the National Security Council on operational military matters, under the guidance of the chairman and vice chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] In 1986, the Goldwater–Nichols Act mandated that operational control of the services follows a chain of command from the president to the secretary of defense directly to the unified combatant commanders , who have control of all units in their geographic or functional area of responsibility, thus the secretaries of the military departments (and their respective service chiefs underneath them) only have the responsibility to organize, train and equip their service components. The army provides trained forces to the combatant commanders for use as directed by the secretary of defense.

[ 122 ] In 2013, the army shifted to six geographical commands that align with the six geographical unified combatant commands (CCMD): United States Army Central headquartered at Shaw Air Force Base , South Carolina [ 88 ] United States Army North headquartered at Fort Sam Houston , Texas [ 90 ] United States Army South headquartered at Fort Sam Houston, Texas [ 92 ] United States Army Europe and Africa headquartered at Clay Kaserne , Wiesbaden, Germany [ 123 ] United States Army Pacific headquartered at Fort Shafter , Hawaii [ 91 ] The army also transformed its base unit from divisions to brigades . Division lineage will be retained, but the divisional headquarters will be able to command any brigade, not just brigades that carry their divisional lineage. The central part of this plan is that each brigade will be modular, i.e., all brigades of the same type will be exactly the same and thus any brigade can be commanded by any division. As specified before the 2013 end-strength re-definitions, the three major types of brigade combat teams are: Armored brigades, with a strength of 4,743 troops as of 2014.

Stryker brigades, with a strength of 4,500 troops as of 2014.

Infantry brigades, with a strength of 4,413 troops as of 2014.

In addition, there are combat support and service support modular brigades. Combat support brigades include aviation (CAB) brigades, which will come in heavy and light varieties, fires (artillery) brigades (now transforms to division artillery) and expeditionary military intelligence brigades .

Combat service support brigades include sustainment brigades and come in several varieties and serve the standard support role in an army.

Combat maneuver organizations [ edit ] To track the effects of the 2018 budget cuts, see Transformation of the United States Army#Divisions and brigades The U.S. Army's conventional combat capability currently consists of 11 active divisions and 1 non-deployable division headquarters (7th Infantry Division) as well as several independent maneuver units.

From 2013 through 2017, the Army sustained organizational and end-strength reductions after several years of growth . In June 2013, the Army announced plans to downsize to 32 active brigade combat teams by 2015 to match a reduction in active-duty strength to 490,000 soldiers. Army Chief of Staff Raymond Odierno projected that the Army was to shrink to "450,000 in the active component, 335,000 in the National Guard, and 195,000 in U.S. Army Reserve" by 2018.

[ 124 ] However, this plan was scrapped by the incoming Trump administration, with subsequent plans to expand the Army by 16,000 soldiers to a total of 476,000 by October 2017. The National Guard and the Army Reserve will see a smaller expansion.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The Army's maneuver organization was most recently altered by the reorganization of United States Army Alaska into the 11th Airborne Division , transferring the 1st and 4th Brigade Combat Teams of the 25th Infantry Division under a separate operational headquarters to reflect the brigades' distinct, Arctic-oriented mission. As part of the reorganization, the 1–11 (formerly 1–25) Stryker Brigade Combat Team will reorganize as an Infantry Brigade Combat Team.

[ 127 ] Following this transition, the active component BCTs will number 11 Armored brigades, 6 Stryker brigades, and 14 Infantry brigades.

Within the Army National Guard and United States Army Reserve, there are a further eight divisions, 27 brigade combat teams, additional combat support and combat service support brigades, and independent cavalry, infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer, and support battalions. The Army Reserve in particular provides virtually all psychological operations and civil affairs units.

United States Army Forces Command (FORSCOM) Direct reporting units Current commander Location of headquarters [ b ] I Corps [ 129 ] LTG Xavier Brunson Joint Base Lewis-McChord , Washington III Armored Corps [ 130 ] LTG Kevin Admiral Fort Cavazos , Texas V Corps [ 131 ] LTG Charles Costanza Fort Knox , Kentucky XVIII Airborne Corps [ 132 ] LTG Christopher T. Donahue Fort Bragg , North Carolina First Army [ 133 ] LTG Mark H. Landes Rock Island Arsenal , Illinois U.S. Army Reserve Command [ 134 ] LTG Robert Harter Fort Bragg, North Carolina Security Force Assistance Command BG Kevin J. Lambert Fort Bragg, North Carolina 20th CBRNE Command [ 135 ] BG W M Bochat Aberdeen Proving Ground , Maryland 32nd Army Air and Missile Defense Command MG Richard A. Harrison Fort Bliss , Texas U.S. Army Air Traffic Services Command COL Bryan C. Jones Fort Novosel , Alabama Active combat maneuver units Name Headquarters Subunits Subordinate to 1st Armored Division Fort Bliss , Texas 3 armored brigade combat teams, [ 136 ] 1st Armored Division Artillery (United States) , 1 Combat Aviation Brigade , and 1 sustainment brigade III Corps 1st Cavalry Division Fort Cavazos , Texas 3 armored BCTs, 1st Cavalry Division Artillery (United States) , 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade III Corps 1st Infantry Division Fort Riley , Kansas 2 armored BCTs, 1 1st Infantry Division Artillery (United States) , 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade III Corps 2nd Infantry Division Camp Humphreys , South Korea Joint Base Lewis–McChord , Washington 2 Stryker BCTs, 1 mechanized brigade from the ROK Army , [ 137 ] 1 2nd Infantry Division Artillery (United States) (under administrative control of 7th ID), 1 sustainment brigade, and a stateside Stryker BCT from another active division that is rotated in on a regular basis.

I Corps (CONUS) Eighth Army (OCONUS) 3rd Infantry Division Fort Stewart , Georgia 2 armored BCT, Divisional Artillery, Aviation Brigade, and 1 sustainment brigade XVIII Airborne Corps 4th Infantry Division Fort Carson , Colorado 2 Stryker BCT, 1 armored BCT, Divisional Artillery , 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade III Corps 2nd Cavalry Regiment Rose Barracks , Vilseck, Germany 4 Stryker squadrons, 1 engineer squadron, 1 fires squadron, and 1 support squadron U.S. Army Europe and Africa 3rd Cavalry Regiment Fort Cavazos, Texas 4 Stryker squadrons, 1 fires squadron, 1 engineer squadron, and 1 support squadron (overseen by the 1st Cavalry Division) [ 138 ] III Corps 7th Infantry Division Joint Base Lewis–McChord , Washington 1 CAB and 2 Stryker BCTs I Corps 10th Mountain Division Fort Drum , New York 3 infantry BCTs, 1 10th Mountain Division Artillery (United States) , 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade XVIII Airborne Corps 11th Airborne Division Joint Base Elmendorf–Richardson , Alaska 1 airborne infantry BCT, 1 infantry BCT, 1 aviation command, and 1 sustainment battalion I Corps 25th Infantry Division Schofield Barracks , Hawaii 2 infantry BCTs, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade I Corps 82nd Airborne Division Fort Bragg , North Carolina 3 airborne infantry BCTs, 1 airborne DIVARTY , 1 airborne CAB, and 1 airborne sustainment brigade XVIII Airborne Corps 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) Fort Campbell , Kentucky 3 infantry BCTs, 1 DIVARTY, 1 CAB, and 1 sustainment brigade XVIII Airborne Corps 173rd Airborne Brigade Camp Ederle , Vicenza , Italy 2 airborne infantry battalions, 1 airborne field artillery battalion, 1 airborne cavalry squadron, 1 airborne engineer battalion, [ 139 ] and 1 airborne support battalion Southern European Task Force, Africa Combat maneuver units under the Army National Guard until federalized Name Locations Subunits 28th Infantry Division Pennsylvania , Ohio and Maryland 2nd Infantry BCT , 56th Stryker BCT , 28th CAB , 55th Maneuver Enhancement Brigade (MEB), [ 140 ] and the 28th Infantry Division Sustainment Brigade (SB) 29th Infantry Division Virginia , Maryland, North Carolina and Florida 30th Armored BCT , 53rd Infantry BCT , 116th Infantry BCT , 29th CAB, 142nd Field Artillery Regiment , 29th Infantry Division SB , and the 226th MEB [ 141 ] 34th Infantry Division Minnesota , Wisconsin , Iowa and Idaho 1st Armored BCT , 2nd Infantry BCT , 32nd Infantry BCT , 116th Cavalry BCT , 115th Field Artillery Brigade , 34th CAB , 34th Infantry Division SB , and the 157th MEB 35th Infantry Division Kansas , Missouri , Illinois , Oklahoma , Georgia , Arkansas , and Nebraska 33rd Infantry BCT , 39th Infantry BCT , 45th Infantry BCT , 130th Field Artillery Brigade , 35th CAB , and the 67th MEB 36th Infantry Division Texas , Louisiana and Mississippi 56th Infantry BCT , 72nd Infantry BCT , 256th Infantry BCT , 155th Armored BCT , 278th Armored Cavalry Regiment , 36th CAB , 36th Infantry Division SB, and the 136th MEB 38th Infantry Division Indiana , Michigan , Ohio and Tennessee 37th Infantry BCT , 76th Infantry BCT , 138th Field Artillery Brigade , 38th CAB, 38th Infantry Division SB , and the 149th MEB 40th Infantry Division Arizona , California , Hawaii , Oregon , and Washington 29th Infantry BCT , 41st Infantry BCT , 79th Infantry BCT , 81st Stryker BCT , 40th CAB, and the 40th Infantry Division SB 42nd Infantry Division Connecticut , Maine , Maryland , Massachusetts , New Hampshire , New Jersey , New York , Rhode Island , and Vermont 27th Infantry BCT , 44th Infantry BCT , 86th Infantry BCT (Mountain) , 197th Field Artillery Brigade , 42nd CAB , 42nd Infantry Division SB , and the 26th MEB For a description of U.S. Army tactical organizational structure, see: a U.S. context [ broken anchor ] and also a global context .

Special operations forces [ edit ] Main article: Army Special Operations Command United States Army Special Operations Command (Airborne) (USASOC): [ 142 ] Name Headquarters [ b ] Structure and purpose 1st Special Forces Command Fort Bragg , North Carolina Manages seven special forces groups designed to deploy and execute nine doctrinal missions: unconventional warfare , foreign internal defense , direct action , counter-insurgency , special reconnaissance , counter-terrorism , information operations , counterproliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and security force assistance .  The command also manages two psychological operations groups—tasked to work with foreign nations to induce or reinforce behavior favorable to U.S. objectives—a civil affairs brigade —that enables military commanders and U.S. ambassadors to improve relationships with various stakeholders via five battalions—and a sustainment brigade —that provides combat service support and combat health support units via three distinct battalions.

[ 143 ] Army Special Operations Aviation Command Fort Bragg , North Carolina Commands, organizes, mans, trains, resources, and equips Army special operations aviation units to provide responsive, special operations aviation support to special operations forces consisting of five units, including the 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment (Airborne) .

[ 144 ] 75th Ranger Regiment Fort Benning , Georgia In addition to a regimental headquarters, a special troops battalion, and a military intelligence battalion, the 75th Ranger Regiment has three maneuver battalions of elite airborne infantry specializing in large-scale, joint forcible entry operations and precision targeting raids.  Additional capabilities include special reconnaissance , air assault , and direct action raids seizing key terrain such as airfields, destroying or securing strategic facilities, and capturing or killing enemies of the Nation.  The Regiment also helps develop the equipment, technologies, training, and readiness that bridge the gap between special operations and traditional combat maneuver organizations.

[ 145 ] John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School Fort Bragg , North Carolina Selects and trains special forces, civil affairs, and psychological operations soldiers, consisting of two groups and other various training units and offices.

[ 146 ] 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment-Delta Fort Bragg , North Carolina Commonly referred to as Delta Force, Combat Applications Group (CAG), "The Unit", Army Compartmented Element (ACE), or Task Force Green, SFOD–D is the U.S. Army's Tier 1 Special Mission Unit tasked with performing the most complex, classified, and dangerous missions directed by the National Command Authority .  Under the control of Joint Special Operations Command , SFOD–D specializes in hostage rescue , counter-terrorism , direct action , and special reconnaissance against high-value targets via eight squadrons: four assault, one aviation, one clandestine, one combat support, and one nuclear disposal.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Medical Department [ edit ] Main article: Army Medical Department (United States) The United States Army Medical Department (AMEDD), formerly the Army Medical Service (AMS), is the primary healthcare organization of the United States Army and is led by the Surgeon General of the United States Army (TSG), a three-star lieutenant general , who (by policy) also serves as the Commanding General, United States Army Medical Command (MEDCOM). TSG is assisted by a Deputy Surgeon General and a full staff, the Office of the Surgeon General (OTSG). The incumbent Surgeon General is Lieutenant General Mary K. Izaguirre (since 25 January 2024).

[ 149 ] AMEDD encompasses the Army's six non-combat, medical-focused specialty branches (or "Corps"), these branches are: the Medical Corps , Nurse Corps , Dental Corps , Veterinary Corps , Medical Specialist Corps . Each of these branches is headed by a Corps Chief that reports directly to the Surgeon General.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] Personnel [ edit ] See also: List of ranks used by the United States Army The Army's Talent Management Task Force (TMTF) has deployed IPPS-A, [ 155 ] the Integrated Personnel and Pay System - Army , an app which serves the National Guard, and on 17 January 2023 the Army Reserve and Active Army.

[ 156 ] Soldiers were reminded to update their information using the legacy systems to keep their payroll and personnel information current by December 2021. IPPS-A is the Human Resources system for the Army, is available for download for Android, or the Apple store.

[ 157 ] It will be used for future promotions and other personnel decisions. Among the changes are: BCAP, the Battalion Commander Assessment Program. In January 2020, over 800 majors and lieutenant colonels from all over the Army converged on Fort Knox to take part in a five-day program to select the next battalion commanders for the Army (beginning in FY2021). This process replaces the former selection process which was based solely on rank and individual reviews of past performance. From now on, more consideration will be given to an individual officer's personal preference, as part of 25 other selection criteria.

[ 158 ] "Promotion boards will now be able to see almost all substantiated adverse information".

[ 159 ] The promotion boards will be able to see anything in an officer's human resource record. Officers are encouraged to become familiar with their human resource record, and to file rebuttals to adverse information.

[ 159 ] Depending on the success of this initiative, other assessment programs could be instituted as well, for promotion to sergeants major, [ 160 ] and for assessment of colonels for command.

[ 161 ] Below are the U.S. Army ranks authorized for use today and their equivalent NATO designations. Although no living officer currently holds the rank of General of the Army , it is still authorized by Congress for use in wartime.

Officers [ edit ] Main article: United States Army officer rank insignia There are several paths to becoming a commissioned officer [ 162 ] including the United States Military Academy , [ 163 ] Reserve Officers' Training Corps , [ 164 ] Officer Candidate School , [ 165 ] and direct commissioning . Regardless of which road an officer takes, the insignia are the same. Certain professions including physicians, pharmacists, nurses, lawyers and chaplains are commissioned directly into the Army.

Most army commissioned officers (those who are generalists) [ 166 ] are promoted based on an "up or out" system. A more flexible talent management process is underway.

[ 166 ] The Defense Officer Personnel Management Act of 1980 establishes rules for the timing of promotions and limits the number of officers that can serve at any given time.

[ 167 ] Army regulations call for addressing all personnel with the rank of general as "General (last name)" regardless of the number of stars. Likewise, both colonels and lieutenant colonels are addressed as "Colonel (last name)" and first and second lieutenants as "Lieutenant (last name)".

[ 168 ] US DoD pay grade Special grade [ c ] O-10 O-9 O-8 O-7 O-6 O-5 O-4 O-3 O-2 O-1 NATO code OF-10 OF-9 OF-8 OF-7 OF-6 OF-5 OF-4 OF-3 OF-2 OF-1 Insignia Army Green Service Uniform Army Blue Service Uniform Army Combat Uniform Title General of the Army General Lieutenant general Major general Brigadier general Colonel Lieutenant colonel Major Captain First lieutenant Second lieutenant Abbreviation GA GEN LTG MG BG COL LTC MAJ CPT 1LT 2LT Warrant officers [ edit ] Main article: Warrant officer (United States) Warrant officers [ 162 ] are single track, specialty officers with subject matter expertise in a particular area. They are initially appointed as warrant officers (in the rank of WO1) by the secretary of the Army , but receive their commission upon promotion to chief warrant officer two (CW2).

By regulation, warrant officers are addressed as "Mr. (last name)" or "Ms. (last name)" by senior officers and as "sir" or "ma'am" by all enlisted personnel.

[ 168 ] However, many personnel address warrant officers as "Chief (last name)" within their units regardless of rank.

US DoD pay grade W-5 W-4 W-3 W-2 W-1 NATO code WO-5 WO-4 WO-3 WO-2 WO-1 Insignia Army Green Service Uniform Title Chief warrant officer 5 Chief warrant officer 4 Chief warrant officer 3 Chief warrant officer 2 Warrant officer 1 Abbreviation CW5 CW4 CW3 CW2 WO1 Enlisted personnel [ edit ] Main article: United States Army enlisted rank insignia See also: Enlisted rank Sergeants and corporals are referred to as NCOs, short for non-commissioned officers .

[ 162 ] [ 169 ] This distinguishes corporals from the more numerous specialists who have the same pay grade but do not exercise leadership responsibilities. Beginning in 2021, all corporals will be required to conduct structured self-development for the NCO ranks, completing the basic leader course (BLC), or else be laterally assigned as specialists. Specialists who have completed BLC and who have been recommended for promotion will be permitted to wear corporal rank before their recommended promotion as NCOs.

[ 170 ] Privates and privates first class (E3) are addressed as "Private (last name)", specialists as "Specialist (last name)", corporals as "Corporal (last name)" and sergeants, staff sergeants, sergeants first class and master sergeants all as "Sergeant (last name)". First sergeants are addressed as "First Sergeant (last name)" and sergeants major and command sergeants major are addressed as "Sergeant Major (last name)".

[ 168 ] [ 171 ] US DoD pay grade Special E-9 E-8 E-7 E-6 E-5 E-4 E-3 E-2 E-1 NATO code OR-9 OR-8 OR-7 OR-6 OR-5 OR-4 OR-3 OR-2 OR-1 Dress uniform insignia No insignia Service uniform insignia Title Senior enlisted advisor to the chairman Sergeant major of the Army Senior enlisted advisor to the chief of the National Guard Bureau Command sergeant major Sergeant major First sergeant Master sergeant Sergeant first class Staff sergeant Sergeant Corporal Specialist Private first class Private Private Abbreviation SEAC SMA SEANGB CSM SGM 1SG [ d ] MSG SFC SSG SGT CPL SPC [ e ] PFC PV2 [ f ] PV1 Training [ edit ] Main article: United States Army Basic Training U.S. Army Rangers practicing fast roping techniques from an MH-47 during an exercise at Fort Bragg Training in the U.S. Army is generally divided into two categories – individual and collective. Because of COVID-19 precautions, the first two weeks of basic training — not including processing and out-processing – incorporate social distancing and indoor desk-oriented training. Once the recruits have tested negative for COVID-19 for two weeks, the remaining 8 weeks follow the traditional activities for most recruits, [ 173 ] followed by Advanced Individualized Training (AIT) where they receive training for their military occupational specialties (MOS) .

[ 174 ] Some individual's MOSs range anywhere from 14 to 20 weeks of One Station Unit Training (OSUT), which combines Basic Training and AIT. The length of AIT school varies by the MOS. The length of time spent in AIT depends on the soldier's MOS. Certain highly technical MOS training requires many months (e.g., foreign language translators). Depending on the army's needs, Basic Combat Training for combat arms soldiers is conducted at several locations. Still, two of the longest-running are the Armor School and the Infantry School , both at Fort Moore , Georgia. Sergeant Major of the Army Dailey notes that an infantrymen's pilot program for One Station Unit Training (OSUT) extends 8 weeks beyond Basic Training and AIT, to 22 weeks. The pilot, designed to boost infantry readiness ended in December 2018. The new Infantry OSUT covered the M240 machine gun as well as the M249 squad automatic weapon .

[ 175 ] The redesigned Infantry OSUT started in 2019.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Depending on the result of the 2018 pilot, OSUTs could also extend training in other combat arms beyond the infantry.

[ 176 ] One Station Unit Training will be extended to 22 weeks for Armor by Fiscal Year 2021.

[ 24 ] Additional OSUTs are expanding to Cavalry, Engineer, and Military Police (MP) in the succeeding Fiscal Years.

[ 178 ] A new training assignment for junior officers was instituted, that they serve as platoon leaders for Basic Combat Training (BCT) platoons.

[ 179 ] These lieutenants will assume many of the administrative, logistical, and day-to-day tasks formerly performed by the drill sergeants of those platoons and are expected to "lead, train, and assist with maintaining and enhancing the morale, welfare and readiness" of the drill sergeants and their BCT platoons.

[ 179 ] These lieutenants are also expected to stem any inappropriate behaviors they witness in their platoons, to free up the drill sergeants for training.

[ 179 ] A trainer with Company A, 1st Battalion 502nd Infantry Regiment, Task Force Strike, 101st Airborne Division assisting Iraqi army ranger students during a room clearing drill at Camp Taji, Iraq on 18 July 2016 The United States Army Combat Fitness Test (ACFT) was introduced in 2018 to 60 battalions spread throughout the Army.

[ 180 ] The test and scoring system is the same for all soldiers, regardless of gender.  It takes an hour to complete, including rest periods.

[ 181 ] The ACFT supersedes the Army Physical Fitness Test (APFT), [ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] as being more relevant to survival in combat.

[ 180 ] Six events were determined to better predict which muscle groups of the body were adequately conditioned for combat actions: [ 181 ] three deadlifts, [ 185 ] a standing power throw of a ten-pound medicine ball, [ 186 ] hand-release pushups [ 187 ] (which replace the traditional pushup), a sprint/drag/carry 250 yard event, [ 188 ] three pull-ups with leg tucks (or a plank test in lieu of the leg tuck), [ 189 ] [ 190 ] a mandatory rest period, and a two-mile run.

[ 191 ] As of 1 October 2020 all soldiers from all three components (Regular Army, Reserve, and National Guard) [ 192 ] are subject to this test.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] The ACFT now tests all soldiers in basic training as of October 2020. The ACFT became the official test of record on 1 October 2020; before that day, every Army unit was required to complete a diagnostic ACFT [ 195 ] (All Soldiers with valid APFT scores can use them until March 2022. The Holistic Health and Fitness (H2F) System is one way that soldiers can prepare.).

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] The ACFT movements directly translate to movements on the battlefield.

[ 177 ] Following their basic and advanced training at the individual level, soldiers may choose to continue their training and apply for an "additional skill identifier" (ASI). The ASI allows the army to take a wide-ranging MOS and focus it on a more specific MOS. For example, a combat medic, whose duties are to provide pre-hospital emergency treatment, may receive ASI training to become a cardiovascular specialist, a dialysis specialist, or even a licensed practical nurse. For commissioned officers, training includes pre-commissioning training, known as Basic Officer Leader Course A, either at USMA or via ROTC , or by completing OCS . After commissioning, officers undergo branch-specific training at the Basic Officer Leaders Course B, (formerly called Officer Basic Course), which varies in time and location according to their future assignments. Officers will continue to attend standardized training at different stages of their careers.

[ 199 ] U.S. Army soldiers familiarizing with the latest INSAS 1B1 during exercise Yudh Abhyas 2015 Collective training at the unit level takes place at the unit's assigned station, but the most intensive training at higher echelons is conducted at the three combat training centers (CTC); the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin , California, the Joint Readiness Training Center (JRTC) at Fort Johnson , Louisiana and the Joint Multinational Training Center (JMRC) at the Hohenfels Training Area in Hohenfels and Grafenwöhr , [ 200 ] Germany.

ReARMM is the Army Force Generation process approved in 2020 to meet the need to continuously replenish forces for deployment at the unit level and for other echelons as required by the mission. Individual-level replenishment still requires training at a unit level, which is conducted at the continental U.S. (CONUS) replacement center (CRC) at Fort Bliss , in New Mexico and Texas before their individual deployment.

[ 201 ] Chief of Staff Milley notes that the Army is suboptimized for training in cold-weather regions, jungles, mountains, or urban areas. In contrast, the Army does well when training for deserts or rolling terrain.

[ 202 ] : minute 1:26:00 Post 9/11, Army unit-level training was for counter-insurgency (COIN); by 2014–2017, training had shifted to decisive action training.

[ 203 ] Future Soldier Prep Course [ edit ] The United States Army has faced recruiting challenges since the COVID-19 pandemic. The Army has implemented the Future Soldier Prep Course (FSPC) to address these issues. This program is designed to assist potential recruits who may initially need to meet the Army's physical fitness or academic standards.

[ 204 ] In the fiscal year ending 30 September 2023, approximately 13,000 of the 55,000 recruits, or 24%, participated in the FSPC. This indicates a significant reliance on the program to fill recruitment quotas.

[ 204 ] The FSPC offers both physical fitness and academic training. However, most participants enroll in the academic component, which focuses on subjects like basic math, English, and other essential skills.

[ 204 ] Equipment [ edit ] Main article: List of equipment of the United States Army The chief of staff of the Army has identified six modernization priorities, these being (in order): artillery, ground vehicles, aircraft, network, air/missile defense, and soldier lethality.

[ 205 ] Weapons [ edit ] A Lockheed Martin Terminal High Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system used for ballistic missile protection Individual weapons [ edit ] The United States Army employs various weapons to provide light firepower at short ranges. The most common weapon type used by the army is the M4 carbine , a compact variant of the M16 rifle , [ 206 ] which is being replaced gradually by the M7 rifle among close combat units.

[ 207 ] The primary sidearm in the U.S. Army is the M17 pistol [ 208 ] through the Modular Handgun System program.

[ 209 ] Soldiers are also equipped with various hand grenades , such as the M67 fragmentation grenade and M18 smoke grenade .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Many units are supplemented with a variety of specialized weapons, including the M249 SAW (Squad Automatic Weapon), to provide suppressive fire at the squad level.

[ 212 ] Indirect fire is provided by the M320 grenade launcher .

[ 213 ] The M1014 Joint Service Combat Shotgun or the Mossberg 590 Shotgun are used for door breaching and close-quarters combat. The M14EBR is used by designated marksmen. Snipers use the M107 Long Range Sniper Rifle , the M2010 Enhanced Sniper Rifle and the M110 Semi-Automatic Sniper Rifle .

[ 214 ] Crew-served weapons [ edit ] The army employs various crew-served weapons to provide heavy firepower at ranges exceeding that of individual weapons.

The M240 is the U.S. Army's standard Medium Machine Gun.

[ 215 ] The M2 heavy machine gun is generally used as a vehicle-mounted machine gun. In the same way, the 40 mm MK 19 grenade machine gun is mainly used by motorized units.

[ 216 ] The U.S. Army uses three types of mortar for indirect fire support when heavier artillery may not be appropriate or available. The smallest of these is the 60 mm M224 , normally assigned at the infantry company level.

[ 217 ] At the next higher echelon, infantry battalions are typically supported by a section of 81 mm M252 mortars .

[ 218 ] The largest mortar in the army's inventory is the 120 mm M120/M121 , which is usually employed by mechanized units.

[ 219 ] Fire support for light infantry units is provided by towed howitzers, including the 105 mm M119A1 [ 220 ] and the 155 mm M777 .

[ 221 ] The U.S. Army utilizes a variety of direct-fire rockets and missiles to provide infantry with an Anti-Armor Capability. The AT4 is an unguided projectile that can destroy armor and bunkers at ranges up to 500 meters.

[ 222 ] The FIM-92 Stinger is a shoulder-launched, heat seeking anti-aircraft missile.

[ 223 ] The FGM-148 Javelin and BGM-71 TOW are anti-tank guided missiles.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] Vehicles [ edit ] A U.S. soldier on patrol in Iraq with the support of a Humvee vehicle U.S. Army doctrine puts a premium on mechanized warfare. It fields the highest vehicle-to-soldier ratio in the world as of 2009.

[ 226 ] The army's most common vehicle is the High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), commonly called the Humvee , which is capable of serving as a cargo/troop carrier, weapons platform and ambulance, among many other roles.

[ 227 ] While they operate a wide variety of combat support vehicles, one of the most common types centers on the family of HEMTT vehicles. The M1A2 Abrams is the army's main battle tank , [ 228 ] while the M2A3 Bradley is the standard infantry fighting vehicle .

[ 229 ] Other vehicles include the Stryker , [ 230 ] the M113 armored personnel carrier [ 231 ] and multiple types of Mine Resistant Ambush Protected (MRAP) vehicles.

[ 232 ] 3rd Infantry Division soldiers manning an M1A1 Abrams in Iraq The U.S. Army's principal artillery weapons are the M109A7 Paladin self-propelled howitzer [ 233 ] and the M270 multiple launch rocket system (MLRS), [ 234 ] both mounted on tracked platforms and assigned to heavy mechanized units.

Aviation [ edit ] While the United States Army Aviation Branch operates a few fixed-wing aircraft , it mainly operates several types of rotary-wing aircraft. These include the AH-64 Apache attack helicopter , [ 235 ] the UH-60 Black Hawk utility tactical transport helicopter [ 236 ] and the CH-47 Chinook heavy-lift transport helicopter.

[ 237 ] Restructuring plans call for reduction of 750 aircraft and from seven to four types.

[ 238 ] The Army is evaluating two fixed-wing aircraft demonstrators; ARES, and Artemis are under evaluation to replace the Guardrail ISR (Intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance) aircraft.

[ 239 ] Under the Johnson-McConnell agreement of 1966 , the Army agreed to limit its fixed-wing aviation role to administrative mission support (light unarmed aircraft which cannot operate from forward positions). For UAVs , the Army is deploying at least one company of drone MQ-1C Gray Eagles to each Active Army division.

[ 240 ] Uniforms [ edit ] Main article: Uniforms of the United States Army The Army Combat Uniform (ACU) currently features a camouflage pattern known as Operational Camouflage Pattern (OCP); OCP replaced a pixel-based pattern known as Universal Camouflage Pattern (UCP) in 2019.

On 11 November 2018, the Army announced a new version of 'Army Greens' based on uniforms worn during World War II that will become the standard garrison service uniform.

[ 241 ] The blue Army Service Uniform will remain as the dress uniform. The Army Greens are projected to be first fielded in the summer of 2020.

[ 241 ] [ needs update ] The 2020 Army Greens uniform An element of the 18th Infantry Regiment , wearing ASUs, representing the United States at the 2010 Moscow Victory Day Parade Berets [ edit ] The Ranger Honor Platoon marching in their tan berets and former service uniform The beret flash of enlisted personnel displays their distinctive unit insignia (shown above). The U.S. Army's black beret is no longer worn with the ACU for garrison duty, having been permanently replaced with the patrol cap. After years of complaints that it was not suited well for most work conditions, Army Chief of Staff General Martin Dempsey eliminated it for wear with the ACU in June 2011. Soldiers who are currently in a unit in jump status still wear berets, whether the wearer is parachute-qualified or not (maroon beret), while members of Security Force Assistance Brigades (SFABs) wear brown berets. Members of the 75th Ranger Regiment and the Airborne and Ranger Training Brigade (tan beret) and Special Forces (rifle green beret) may wear it with the Army Service Uniform for non-ceremonial functions. Unit commanders may still direct the wear of patrol caps in these units in training environments or motor pools.

Tents [ edit ] The Army has relied heavily on tents to provide the various facilities needed while on deployment (Force Provider Expeditionary (FPE)).

[ 205 ] : p.146 The most common tent uses for the military are as temporary barracks (sleeping quarters), DFAC buildings (dining facilities), [ 242 ] forward operating bases (FOBs), after-action review (AAR), tactical operations center (TOC), morale, welfare and recreation (MWR) facilities, as well as security checkpoints. Furthermore, most of these tents are set up and operated through the support of Natick Soldier Systems Center .  Each FPE contains billeting, latrines, showers, laundry and kitchen facilities for 50–150 Soldiers, [ 205 ] : p.146 and is stored in Army Prepositioned Stocks 1, 2, 4 and 5 .  This provisioning allows combatant commanders to position soldiers as required in their Area of Responsibility , within 24 to 48 hours.

The U.S. Army is beginning to use a more modern tent called the deployable rapid assembly shelter (DRASH). In 2008, DRASH became part of the Army's Standard Integrated Command Post System.

[ 243 ] See also [ edit ] America's Army (video games for recruitment) Army and Navy stamp issues of 1936–1937 History of the United States Army List of military weapons of the United States Junior Reserve Officers' Training Corps List of active United States military aircraft List of comparative military ranks List of former United States Army medical units List of wars involving the United States Reorganization plan of United States Army Soldier's Creed Timeline of United States military operations U.S. Army Combat Arms Regimental System U.S. Army Regimental System United States Army Basic Training United States Constabulary (United States Gendarmerie) Social history of soldiers and veterans in the United States Notes [ edit ] ^ Adopted in 1962.

^ a b c On 5 January 2023 William A. LaPlante, US under-secretary of defense for acquisition and sustainment ( USD (A&S) ) directed the full implementation of the recommendations of the Naming Commission , DoD-wide.

[ 128 ] ^ Reserved for wartime use only.

^ First sergeant is considered a temporary and lateral rank and is senior to master sergeant. A first sergeant can revert to master sergeant upon leaving assignment.

^ SP4 is sometimes encountered as an abbreviation for specialist instead of SPC. This is a holdover from when there were additional specialist ranks at pay grades E-5 to E-7.

^ PVT is also used as an abbreviation for both private ranks when pay grade need not be distinguished.

[ 172 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Important Information and Guidelines About the Use of Department of Defense Seals, Logos, Insignia, and Service Medals" (PDF) . United States Department of Defense. 16 October 2015. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2016 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ "New Army brand redefines 'Be All You Can Be' for a new generation" .

US Army . 8 March 2023.

^ Wright, Jr., Robert K. (1983).

The Continental Army (Army Lineage Series) . Washington, D.C.: Center of Military History, United States Army.

ISBN 9780160019319 .

OCLC 8806011 . Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 October 2013 .

^ "Defense Manpower Data Center- Monthly Strength Summary" .

Defense Manpower Data Center . Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ "Department of Defense: Selected Reserves by Rank/Grade" .

Defense Manpower Data Center . 31 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ "Army Civilians" .

goarmy.com . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "World Air Forces 2018" .

Flightglobal : 17.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 13 June 2018 .

^ 5 U.S.C.

§ 2101 ^ "Who we are: The Army's Vision & Strategy" .

Army.mil . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Usa, Ibp.

U.S. Future Combat & Weapon Systems Handbook . p. 15.

^ U.S. Army Brand Guide .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 3 November 2022 .

^ a b c CMH .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFCMH ( help ) ^ "ASSIST-QuickSearch Document Details" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 6 February 2018 .

^ "Webcast: Relinquishment of Responsibility for GEN James McConville / Change of Responsibility SMA Michael Grinston" .

DVIDS .

Archived from the original on 5 August 2023 . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ Article II, section 2, clause 1 of the United States Constitution (1789).

See also Title 10, Subtitle B, Chapter 301, Section 3001 Archived 19 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "10 U.S. Code § 7011 - Organization" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2025 . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ "Department of Defense Directive 1005.8 "Order of Precedence of Members of Armed Forces of the United States When in Formation" " .

Permanent.access.gpo.gov . 31 October 1977.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2022 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 .

^ Library of Congress, Journals of the Continental Congress, Volume 27 Archived 18 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Army Birthdays" .

United States Army Center of Military History . 15 November 2004. Archived from the original on 20 April 2010 . Retrieved 3 June 2010 .

^ Cancian, Mark F. (21 October 2021).

"U.S. Military Forces in FY 2022: Army" .

CSIS .

^ a b "The United States Army – Organization" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2003 . Retrieved 1 April 2015 .

^ DA Pamphlet 10–1 Organization of the United States Army ; Figure 1.2 Military Operations .

^ "10 USC 3062: Policy; composition; organized peace establishment" . U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ a b c d The Army Strategy Archived 16 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine 2018 ^ "Army Publishing Directorate" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2020 .

^ Cont'l Cong., Formation of the Continental Army, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 89–90 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905) .

^ Cont'l Cong., Commission for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 96–7 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905) Archived 3 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Cont'l Cong., Instructions for General Washington, in 2 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 100–1 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905) Archived 3 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Cont'l Cong., Resolution Changing "United Colonies" to "United States", in 5 Journals of the Continental Congress, 1774–1789 747 (Library of Cong. eds., 1905) Archived 2 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Buffenbarger, Thomas E. (15 September 2011).

"St. Clair's Campaign of 1791: A Defeat in the Wilderness That Helped Forge Today's U.S. Army" . U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 April 2025 .

^ Gregory J.W.Urwin, The United States Cavalry: An Illustrated History, 1776–1944 , University of Oklahoma Press 2003 (1983), pp. 36—39 ^ "NAMED CAMPAIGNS - WAR OF 1812" .

www.history.army.mil . Archived from the original on 4 May 2024 . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ "Avalon Project - British-American Diplomcay : Treaty of Ghent; 1814" .

avalon.law.yale.edu .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2021 . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ Ron Field and Richard Hook, The Seminole Wars 1818–58 (2009) ^ "The Mexican-American War" .

National Park Service website . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ Tinkler, Robert.

"Southern Unionists in the Civil War" .

csuchico.edu/ .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2017 . Retrieved 21 November 2016 .

^ McPherson, James M., ed.

The Atlas of the Civil War , (Philadelphia, PA, 2010) ^ Maris Vinovskis (1990).

Toward a social history of the American Civil War: exploratory essays [ permanent dead link ] . Cambridge University Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0-521-39559-3 ^ Cragg, Dan, ed., The Guide to Military Installations , Stackpole Books, Harrisburg, 1983, p. 272.

^ "U.S. army was smaller than the army for Portugal before World War II" .

Politifact . Retrieved 23 January 2018 .

^ "Excerpt – General George C. Marshall: Strategic Leadership and the Challenges of Reconstituting the Army, 1939–41" .

Ssi.armywarcollege.edu . Archived from the original on 24 January 2018 . Retrieved 23 January 2018 .

^ Nese DeBruyne, Congressional Research Service (18 September 2018), American War and Military Operations Casualties: Lists and Statistics (PDF) , Page 3, note j —, archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2023 , retrieved 21 April 2019 , World War II: 10.42 million (1 December 1941-31 August 1945) . Other sources count the Army of Occupation up to 31 December 1946. By 30 June 1947 the Army's strength was down to 990,000 troops.

^ "Chapter 4: "GRAND STRATEGY AND THE WASHINGTON HIGH COMMAND" " , American Military History , vol. 2, United States Army Center of Military History , p. 122, archived from the original on 9 June 2023 , retrieved 16 March 2019 , 10.4 million ^ "The Points Were All That Mattered: The US Army's Demobilization After World War II" .

The National WWII Museum New Orleans . 27 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ a b US Army TRADOC (16 September 2015).

"Perkins discusses operationalizing the Army Operating Concept" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Woodruff, Mark.

Unheralded Victory: The Defeat of the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army 1961–1973 (Arlington, VA: Vandamere Press, 1999).

^ Shidler, Derek.

"Vietnam's Changing Historiography: Ngo Dinh Diem and America's Leadership" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ Wilson, John B. (1997).

Maneuver and Firepower: The Evolution of Divisions and Separate Brigades . Washington, DC: Center of Military History, Chapter XII, for references see Note 48.

^ "Army National Guard Constitution" . Archived from the original on 21 May 2013.

^ Carafano, James, Total Force Policy and the Abrams Doctrine: Unfulfilled Promise, Uncertain Future Archived 10 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine , Foreign Policy Research Institute, 3 February 2005.

^ An Army at War: Change in the Midst of Conflict, p. 515, via Google Books ^ "10 Most Epic Tank Battles in Military History" .

Militaryeducation.org . Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ VUA Citation ^ "These were the 6 most massive tank battles in US history" .

Wearethemighty.com . 24 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ Section 1101, National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991 Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Department of Defense Interim Report to Congress, September 1990 (see " rebalancing " as used in finance.) ^ Downey, Chris, The Total Force Policy and Effective Force Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Air War College, 19 March 2004.

^ "September 11, 2001 Pentagon Victims" .

patriotresource.com .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2019 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Burnham, Gilbert; Lafta, Riyadh; Doocy, Shannon; Roberts, Les (12 October 2006). "Mortality after the 2003 invasion of Iraq: a cross-sectional cluster sample survey".

The Lancet .

368 (9545): 1421– 1428.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.88.4036 .

doi : 10.1016/S0140-6736(06)69491-9 .

ISSN 0140-6736 .

PMID 17055943 .

S2CID 23673934 .

^ "The Human Cost of the War in Iraq: A Mortality Study, 2002–2006" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 December 2011 .

(603 KB) . By Gilbert Burnham, Shannon Doocy, Elizabeth Dzeng, Riyadh Lafta, and Les Roberts. A supplement to the second Lancet study.

^ 597 killed in 2003, [1] Archived 28 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 23,984 killed from 2004 through 2009 (with the exceptions of May 2004 and March 2009), [2] Archived 16 January 2025 at the Wayback Machine 652 killed in May 2004, [3] Archived 20 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine 45 killed in March 2009, [4] Archived 3 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine 676 killed in 2010, [5] Archived 4 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine 451 killed in 2011 (with the exception of February), [6] Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine [7] Archived 9 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine [8] Archived 12 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine [9] Archived 9 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine [10] Archived 11 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine [11] Archived 8 December 2011 at Bibliotheca Alexandrina "239 people killed in Iraq in August and killed by the U.S. Military" . Archived from the original on 12 January 2012 . Retrieved 22 October 2011 .

"Gulf Times – Qatar's top-selling English daily newspaper – Gulf/Arab World" . Archived from the original on 2 October 2011 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 .

"Iraq death toll up sharply in October" . Archived from the original on 11 November 2011 . Retrieved 3 November 2011 .

for a total of 26,405 dead.

^ "Defense Secretary Gates observes Army Future Combat Systems progress" .

US Fed News Service . 9 May 2008. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 12 May 2017 .

^ "FCS Program Transitions to Army BCT Modernization" . defencetalk.com. Defencetalk.com. 26 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 28 February 2024 . Retrieved 21 November 2016 .

^ "BMC redesignated JMC New name better reflects evolving organizational mission | Fort Bliss Bugle" . Archived from the original on 16 February 2017 . Retrieved 22 March 2017 .

^ Shanker, Thom; Cooper, Helene (23 February 2014).

"Pentagon Plans to Shrink Army to Pre-World War II Level" .

The New York Times Company . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ "Army to realign brigades, cut 40,000 Soldiers, 17,000 civilians" .

Army.mil . 10 July 2015.

^ Joe Lacdan, Army News Service (March 13, 2019) Soldier pay, quality of life, modernization among priorities in budget proposal Archived 28 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine Requested troop strengths: Active (480,000), NG (336,000), and Reserve (189,500) for 2020 budget ^ "Kiowa Warriors pass torch to Apache attack helicopters in South Korea" .

Stars and Stripes . 26 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2017 . Retrieved 13 May 2017 .

^ Rosenberg, Barry (28 March 2019).

"Don't Panic About Apaches: Army Not Junking Gunships" .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 7 April 2019 .

^ Drwiega, Andrew. " Missions Solutions Summit: Army Leaders Warn of Rough Ride Ahead Archived 14 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine " Rotor&Wing , 4 June 2014. Accessed: 8 June 2014.

^ Army Directive 2017–33 (Enabling the Army Modernization Task Force) (7 November 2017) Archived 3 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine References Decker-Wagner 2011 ^ Secretary of the Army, Mark T. Esper (4 June 2018), ESTABLISHMENT OF UNITED STATES ARMY FUTURES COMMAND Army General order G.O.2018-10 Archived 3 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Center for Strategic & International Studies (29 April 2014).

" "The Future Army," featuring U.S. General David G. Perkins" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Acquisition reform requires culture shift, officials say" .

Army.mil . 9 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 April 2019 .

^ a b "Army FY20 budget proposal realigns $30 billion" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2019 . Retrieved 7 April 2019 .

^ DA Pam 10–1 Organization of the United States Army , Figure 1-1. '"Army Organizations Execute Specific Functions and Assigned Missions" ^ Organization of the United States Army: America's Army 1775 – 1995, DA PAM 10–1 Archived 8 February 2025 at the Wayback Machine . Headquarters, Department of the Army, Washington, 14 June 1994.

^ a b Finnegan, John Patrick; Romana Danysh (1998).

"Chapter 2: World War I" . In Jeffrey J. Clarke (ed.).

Military Intelligence . Army Lineage Series. Washington, D.C., United States: Center of Military History, United States Army . online.

ISBN 978-0160488283 .

OCLC 35741383 . Archived from the original on 30 August 2009.

^ a b Pullen, Randy (23 April 2008).

"Army Reserve Marks First 100 Years" . DefenceTalk. Archived from the original (online article) on 24 April 2008 . Retrieved 8 August 2008 .

^ Vergun, David (9 December 2014).

"America's entry into World War II remembered 73 years later" .

United States Army .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ Department of Defense, Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness, Military compensation background papers, Seventh edition, page 229. Department of Defense, 2005.

^ a b Morris, Aris (August 2018).

"Military (Officer) Corner: Army Acquisition Centralized Selection List" .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 8 August 2018 .

^ New marketing job lets officers steward Army brand Archived 16 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Army.mil, by Thomas Brading (Army News Service), dated 16 December 2019, last accessed 1 January 2020 ^ "History of the Army National Guard" .

Army National Guard .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "About US – United States Army Forces Command" .

forscom.army.mil . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "Army Futures Command – About AFC" .

United States Army .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "AMC History – Army Material Command" .

AMC.Army.mil . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "About TRADOC – United States Army Training and Doctrine" .

tradoc.army.mil .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ a b "About U.S. Army Central" .

usarcent.army.mil . Archived from the original on 19 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "U.S. Army Europe and Africa Leadership" .

www.europeafrica.army.mil .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2025 . Retrieved 5 April 2025 .

^ a b "History of U.S. Army North" .

arnorth.army.mil . Archived from the original on 7 October 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ a b "United States Army Pacific Overview" .

usarpac.army.mil . Archived from the original on 15 May 2023 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ a b "United States Army South Complete Overview" .

arsouth.army.mil .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "Army General Order 2006–34" (PDF) . 16 October 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 January 2019.

^ "General Orders No. 2014–02" (PDF) . Department of the Army.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 February 2015.

^ "General Orders No. 2010-26: Establishment of the United States Army Cyber Command" (PDF) . Department of the Army.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2011.

^ U.S. Army (1 October 2010).

"Army establishes Army Cyber Command" .

army.mil . Retrieved 28 June 2016 .

^ "About the Command – United States Army Space and Missile Defense Command" .

smdc.army.mil .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "USASOC Overview" .

United States Army .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

^ "General Orders No. 2012-02: Redesignation and Assignment of Eighth Army as a Subordinate Command of The United States Army Pacific" (PDF) . Department of the Army. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

^ "Designation of Arlington National Cemetery and Soldiers' and Airmen's Home National Cemetery as a Direct Reporting Unit" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2015 . Retrieved 7 February 2015 .

^ "Who is Kate Kelley?" . allgov.com.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2018 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ "Establishment of the Civilian Protection Center of Excellence as a Direct Reporting Unit" (PDF) .

Army Publishing Directorate . 5 April 2023.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ REDESIGNATION AND REASSIGNMENT OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY JOINT COUNTER-SMALL UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS OFFICE army.mil ^ "Designation of Military Postal Serive Agency and its Subordiante Elements as Direct Reporting Unit" (PDF) .

armypubs.army.mil .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 July 2022 . Retrieved 6 July 2022 .

^ "Designation of the United States Army Acquisition Support Center as a Direct Reporting Unit" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 February 2015 .

^ "Craig Spisak" . asc.army.mil. Archived from the original on 10 August 2016 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ DAGO 2017-03, DESIGNATION OF THE UNITED STATES ARMY CIVILIAN HUMAN RESOURCES AGENCY AND ITS SUBORDINATE ELEMENTS AS DIRECT REPORTING UNIT Archived 17 April 2025 at the Wayback Machine , apd.army.mil, dated 4 January 2017, last accessed 13 January 2017 ^ "About Us" . CHRA.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 .

^ "United States Army Corps of Engineers Official website" .

usace.army.mil . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "army.mil" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ "Department of the Army Criminal Investigation Division Homepage" .

cid.army.mil . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "DAGO 2017-04, Designation of United States Army Human Resources Command and Its Subordinate Elements as Direct Reporting Unit" .

Army Publishing Directorate . 4 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2017 .

^ "The Official website of the U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command" .

usainscom.army.mil . Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Army Medicine Overview" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Joint Task Force-National Capital Region and The U.S. Army Military District of Washington Homepage" .

jtfncr.mdw.army.mil . Archived from the original on 6 April 2025 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Designation of the United States Army War College as a Direct Reporting Unit" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 February 2015 . Retrieved 2 February 2015 .

^ "The official website of the United States Military Academy" .

westpoint.edu . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Perpich v. Department of Defense , 496 U.S. 334 (1990) ^ "10 U.S.C. 3013" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "10 U.S.C. 3033" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "10 U.S.C. 151" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "10 U.S.C. 162" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "U.S. Army Europe & Africa Mission & History" .

europeafrica.army.mil . Archived from the original on 6 January 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "CSA Odierno and SMA Chandler virtual town hall, Jan 6, 2015" .

army.mil . Army.mil.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "Army offers up to $90K bonuses to lure troops back" .

Foxbusiness.com . 6 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ "Needing troops, U.S. Army offers up to $90K bonuses to re-enlist" .

Daily-chronicle.com . Archived from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ "Army Resurrects WWII-Era Airborne Division in Alaska" .

VOA . 6 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 June 2022 .

^ "Pentagon Press Secretary Air Force Brig. Gen. Pat Ryder Holds an On-Camera Press Briefing" .

U.S. Department of Defense .

[ dead link ] ^ "Americas First Corps" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "III Armed Corps History" .

home.army.mil . Archived from the original on 11 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "V Corps Mission & History" .

vcorps.army.mil . Archived from the original on 15 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "XVII Airborne Corps Homepage" .

home.army.mil . Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "First Army – Mission" .

army.mil . Archived from the original on 7 March 2015 . Retrieved 1 April 2015 .

^ "Redesignation and Assignment of the United States Army Reserve Command as a Subordinate Command of the United States Army Forces Command" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 September 2015 . Retrieved 2 February 2015 .

^ "20th Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, Explodes Command Homepage" .

20cbrne.army.mil . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ " 'Ready First' gets an A: 1st SBCT to become 1st ABCT June 20, infantry battalions to reflag – Fort Bliss Bugle" . Archived from the original on 17 June 2019 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

^ "South Korean troops form combined division with U.S. Army" .

Army Times . 14 January 2015 . Retrieved 13 November 2015 .

^ Army announces Afghanistan deployment for 1,000 soldiers , ArmyTimes, by Michelle Tan, dated 2 March 2016, last accessed 3 October 2016 ^ "173rd Airborne Brigade Site Redirect" . Archived from the original on 11 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ 28th Infantry Division , Pennsylvania National Guard official website, last accessed 4 December 2020 ^ 29th Infantry Division Archived 14 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Virginia National Guard official homepage, last accessed 4 December 2020 ^ Army Special Operations Forces Fact Book 2018 Archived 19 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , USASOC official website, dated 2018, last accessed 28 July 2019 ^ "USASFC Home Page" .

soc.mil . Archived from the original on 9 August 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "U.S. Army Special Operations Aviation Command Homepage" .

soc.mil . Archived from the original on 24 June 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "U.S. Army 75th Ranger Reinment website" .

soc.mil . Archived from the original on 4 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "The official website of the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School" .

swcs.mil .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Warisboring (30 April 2019).

"The U.S. Army's Delta Force: How This Secret Group of Deadly Soldiers Came to Be" .

The National Interest .

^ Naylor, Sean (2015).

Relentless Strike: The Secret History of Joint Special Operations Command . St. Martin's Press. pp. 73, 122, 201, 222, 476.

ISBN 9781466876224 .

^ Kumzak, Joseph (26 January 2024).

"U.S. Army Medical Command welcomes 46th Army Surgeon General" .

Joint Base San Antonio .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "About the Medical Corps" .

U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ "U.S. Army Nurse Corps" .

U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2024 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ "Army Dentistry" .

U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2023 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ "U.S. Army Veterinary Corps" .

U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Army Medical Specialist Corps (SP Corps)" .

U.S. Army Medical Center of Excellence . Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "The Integrated Personnel and Pay System - Army" .

ipps-a.army.mil .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 3 May 2021 .

^ IPPS-A (17 January 2023) Release 3 is Live for all component users!!

Archived 3 May 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Army Public Affairs(2 Jun 2021) New Army pay, personnel mobile app Archived 2 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine and unifies unit and location information for all Soldiers Archived 9 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine using Army Organization Server data interface (AOSDI), unified with IPPS-A on the back-end. This allows aggregation of data on ACOM/ASCC, Corps, Division, Brigade, Battalion, Company, Platoon, and Squad levels ^ "Jared Serbu (16 October 2019) Army debuts new system to pick commanders amid focus on talent management" . 16 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 .

^ a b "Promotion boards to receive adverse information earlier when considering officers" .

army.mil . 8 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ "Prototype Sergeants Major Assessment Program at Fort Knox on the right path" .

army.mil . 23 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 .

^ "Army vice chief walks through brigade command program to witness Army's newest assessment tool" .

army.mil . 13 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2021 .

^ a b c From the Future Soldiers Web Site.

^ "About West Point" .

United States Military Academy .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Army ROTC Overview" .

goarmy.com . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Officer Candidate School Overview – U.S. Army" .

goarmy.com .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2024 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ a b Freedberg Jr., Sydney (25 October 2017) "Can The Pentagon Protect Young Innovators?" Archived 22 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Garamone, Jim (25 January 2018).

"Services Detail Efforts to Modernize Personnel System" .

United States Department of Defense . Retrieved 12 July 2024 .

^ a b c "Army Regulation 600–20" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 January 2004 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ From the Enlisted Soldiers Descriptions Archived 25 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine Web Site.

^ "Joseph Lacdan, Army News Service (4 June 2021) Soldiers to pin on corporal after BLC" . 4 June 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 June 2021 . Retrieved 10 June 2021 .

^ "U.S. Army Ranks" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ "Army Regulation 600–20 | Personnel–General | Army Command Policy" (PDF) .

US Army Personnel Department . 18 March 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 February 2012 . Retrieved 8 April 2023 .

^ "Mitch Meador (21 May 2020) Brigades move to new model for basic training" . 21 May 2020.

^ "Advanced Individual Training Overview" .

goarmy.com . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ "Soldiers train on M240 machine gun during 22-week Infantry OSUT transformation" .

Army.mil . 28 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 18 November 2018 . Retrieved 1 November 2018 .

^ a b "Sgt. Maj. of the Army: Extending training would bolster readiness, lethality" .

Army.mil . 28 June 2018.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ a b "Extended OSUT allows repetition to hone combat skills, major general says" .

Army.mil . 6 September 2018.

^ "Preparing for current and future Army drill sergeant mission requirements through adaptive measures" .

Army.mil . 25 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2019 . Retrieved 27 April 2019 .

^ a b c "Lieutenants to become BCT leaders" .

Army.mil . 15 April 2019. Archived from the original on 22 April 2019.

^ a b "ACFT ensures Soldiers are lethal, physically conditioned" .

Army.mil . 28 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ a b "Post gets look at new fitness test" .

Army.mil . 4 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ Joe Lacdan, Army News Service (22 May 2020) SMA expects ACFT to continue as planned in COVID-19 environment Archived 3 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine "Soldiers can use their last APFT score to remain promotion eligible." ^ "Army Directive 2018–22 (8 Nov 2018) Retention Policy for Non-Deployable Soldiers" (PDF) .

Armypubs.army.mil . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "Non-deployable directive to help Army work toward more 'lethal' force" .

Army.mil . 16 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 November 2018 .

^ "Army Combat Fitness Test: 3 Repetition Maximum Deadlift (MDL) (Event 1)" . 24 October 2018. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 – via YouTube.

^ "Army Combat Fitness Test: Standing Power Throw (SPT) (Event 2)" . 24 October 2018. Archived from the original on 12 April 2019 – via YouTube.

^ "5 Hand Release Pushup event execution" . 17 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ "Army Combat Fitness Test: Sprint-Drag-Carry (SDC) (Event 4)" . 29 October 2018. Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 – via YouTube.

^ "Lolita C Baldor (22 Mar 2021) Army revamps fitness exam, kicks out leg tuck requirement" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 March 2021 .

^ "Army Combat Fitness Test: Leg Tuck (LTK) (Event 5)" . 24 October 2018. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019 – via YouTube.

^ "Army Combat Fitness Test (ACFT)" . 25 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ SGT Zach Mott (May 10, 2019) SECFOR Soldiers 'Crawl' Through ACFT Familiarization SECFOR Soldiers serve as the security force (force protection during a deployment) ^ "Army secretary: New fitness test measures combat readiness" .

Army.mil . 7 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "Harry Sarles (July 24, 2019) Pre-Command Course conducts diagnostic Army Combat Fitness Test" .

www.army.mil . 24 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2019 . Retrieved 29 July 2019 .

^ Maj. Stephen Martin (December 27, 2019) Kentucky Guard first to receive ACFT equipment "36,608 ACFT sets for the total army by May 15". "The Army is focused on the tactical athlete".

Staff Sgt. Warren Wright (10 January 2020) NY National Guard finds creative ways to train for new fitness test Archived 23 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine "finding creative ways to exercise at home and on their own time" ^ "Thomas Brading, Army News Service (18 June 2020) SMA takes to social media, addresses ACFT 2.0 concerns" . 18 June 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2020 . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .

^ US Army (2020) US Army soldier prepares for ACFT Archived 14 December 2020 at the Wayback Machine Learning how to retrain an injured body; using resistance bands (good for leg tucks); know your limits; use out-training (see video for sample); practice technique (good for deadlift, and power throw) ^ Haley Britzky (27 Oct 2021) This is the Army's plan to stop physically breaking so many of its soldiers Archived 30 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine Sexual Harassment/Assault Response & Prevention (SHARP) office is located in Falcon Holistic Health and Fitness Center (H2F) at Fort Bragg ^ "Pilot program provides a new option for Army officers' professional military education" .

Army.mil . 25 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2019 . Retrieved 26 June 2019 .

^ "Workshop guides future growth in Grafenwoehr" .

Army.mil . 26 October 2018.

^ (13 December 2017) CONUS Replacement Center receives new command [ usurped ] CRC 5 transition to CRC 6 ^ "Army Officials Testify on FY 2019 Budget Request" . 16 May 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ "Army Updates Mobilization Model" .

Association of the United States Army . 8 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 .

^ a b c Baldor, Lolita C. (10 November 2024).

"The Army's answer to a lack of recruits is a prep course to boost low scores. It's working" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2024 . Retrieved 11 November 2024 .

^ a b c ASA(ALT) Weapon Systems Handbook 2018 Archived 19 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine Page 32 lists how this handbook is organized. 440 pages.

^ M4 . U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Keller, Jared (29 March 2024).

"The Army Has Finally Fielded Its Next Generation Squad Weapons" .

Military.com .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 4 October 2024 .

^ Cox, Matthew; Seck, Hope Hodge (20 January 2017).

"Army Picks Sig Sauer's P320 Handgun to Replace M9 Service Pistol" .

Military.com . Archived from the original on 20 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ Individual Weapons Future Innovations Archived 24 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Project Manager Soldier Weapons.

^ Selby, Rachael (18 August 2014).

"Three million M18 grenades produced without a failure" .

Army.mil .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Mizokami, Kyle (20 September 2016).

"The U.S. Army Is Designing Its First New Grenade in 40 Years" .

popular mechanics .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2016 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ M249 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Robillard, Tracy (19 November 2010).

"M320 Grenade Launcher wins excellent Soldier feedback" .

army.mil . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Sablla, Joe (9 November 2021).

"US Army Tests New M110-A1 Marksman Rifle" .

The Defense Post .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ M240 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ MK 19 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ M224 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ M252 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ M120 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ M119 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Judson, Jen (4 January 2024).

"BAE Systems to build new M777 howitzer structures for U.S. Army" .

Defense News . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Little, Vance (4 June 2010).

"Army tests training rounds for shoulder-launched weapon" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Judson, Jen (9 October 2023).

"US Army pursues faster, more survivable Stinger missile replacement" .

Defense News . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Schauer, Mark (31 August 2023).

"U.S. Army Yuma Providing Ground hosts Javelin missile operational test" .

army.mil .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2024 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ "US Army awards USD322.5 million anti-tank missile contract" .

janes.com . 17 August 2023 . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Us Future Combat & Weapon Systems Handbook . Int'l Business Publications. 30 March 2009. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-4387-5447-5 . Retrieved 12 May 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ HMMWV , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Abrams Archived 15 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Bradley , United States Army Fact Files ^ Stryker , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ M113 , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Fisher, Mark (20 June 2013).

"The U.S. military is scrapping up to 2,000 of its mine-resistant vehicles, which cost $1 million each" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 11 July 2024 .

^ Paladin , Army.mil ^ MLRS , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Apache , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Blackhawk , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Chinook , U.S. Army Fact Files ^ Stevenson, Beth (22 January 2015), "US Army continues to face financial challenge of rotary fleet maintenance" , Flightglobal , Reed Business Information, archived from the original on 23 January 2015 , retrieved 23 January 2015 ^ "Jrn Judson (27 Aug 2021) US Army's recon, electronic warfare-capable aircraft flies for the first time" . 27 August 2021.

^ Jahner, Kyle (7 August 2017).

"Army to build dedicated drone runway at Fort Bliss" .

Army Times .

^ a b "U.S. Army to roll out new Army Greens uniform" .

Army.mil . 11 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Joe Lacdan (August 13, 2018) Automated meal entitlement system, food trucks to improve Soldier dining experience Archived 15 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine Accomplishes paperwork reduction based on reading each soldier's Common Access Card at each use at DFAC.

^ NG, DHS Technologies to support SICPS/TMSS Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine United Press International "June 14th: The Birthday of the U.S. Army" .

U.S. Army Center of Military History . Archived from the original on 8 June 2010 . Retrieved 17 February 2024 .

Excerpt from Robert Wright, The Continental Army.

Further reading [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see Bibliography of United States military history .

Library resources about United States Army Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Bailey, Beth.

America's Army: Making the All-Volunteer Force (2009) ISBN 0674035364 Bluhm, Raymond K. Jr.; Andrade, Dale; Jacobs, Bruce; Langellier, John; Newell, Clayton R.; Seelinger, Matthew (2004).

U.S. Army: A Complete History (Beaux Arts ed.). Arlington County, Virginia: The Army Historical Foundation. p. 744.

ISBN 978-0-88363-640-4 .

Chambers, John Whiteclay, ed.

The Oxford Guide to American Military History (1999), online at many libraries Clark, J. P.

Preparing for War: The Emergence of the Modern U.S. Army, 1815–1917 (Harvard UP, 2017), 336 pp.

Coffman, Edward M.

The War to End All Wars: The American Military Experience in World War I (1998), a standard history Kretchik, Walter E.

U.S. Army Doctrine: From the American Revolution to the War on Terror (University Press of Kansas; 2011) 392 pages; studies military doctrine in four distinct eras: 1779–1904, 1905–1944, 1944–1962, and 1962 to the present.

Quimby, Robert S. (2012).

The US Army in the War of 1812: an operational and command study . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87-013947-5 – via Project MUSE .

Woodward, David R.

The American Army and the First World War (Cambridge University Press, 2014). 484 pp.

online review "Desert Storm/Shield Valorous Unit Award (VUA) Citations" . US Army Center of Military History. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014 . Retrieved 26 December 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Army .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: United States Army Wikiversity has learning resources about US Army Branches Official website Army.mil/photos – United States Army featured photos U.S. Army Collection ( Archived 2 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine ) – Missouri History Museum Finding Aids for researching the U.S. Army .

Archived 9 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine (compiled by the United States Army Center of Military History ).

US-militaria.com – The U.S. Army during the Second World War (archived 26 December 2012) v t e United States Army Leadership Secretary of the Army Under Secretary of the Army Chief of Staff Vice Chief of Staff 4-star generals 3-star generals 1798–1959 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–present Army Staff Senior Warrant Officer Sergeant Major of the Army House Armed Services Committee ( House Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces ) Senate Committee on Armed Services ( Senate Subcommittee on Air and Land Forces ) Components and commands Regular Army Army Reserve Army National Guard Active Units Reorganization plan of United States Army Commands Forces Futures Materiel Training and Doctrine Service components Central Europe and Africa Pacific North South Special Operations Surface Deployment and Distribution Space and Missile Defense Cyber Command Direct reporting units Second Army Medical Intelligence and Security Criminal Investigation Division Corps of Engineers Military District of Washington Test and Evaluation Military Academy Reserve Acquisition Support Center Installation Management War College Field armies First Third Fifth Sixth Seventh Eighth Ninth Branches Acquisition Corps Adjutant General's Corps Air Defense Artillery Branch Armor Branch Aviation Branch Army Band Chaplain Corps Chemical Corps Civil Affairs Corps Corps of Engineers Cyber Corps Dental Corps Field Artillery Branch Finance Corps Infantry Branch Inspector General's Corps Judge Advocate General's Corps Logistics Branch Medical Corps Medical Service Corps Medical Specialist Corps Military Intelligence Corps Military Police Corps Nurse Corps Ordnance Corps Psychological operations Quartermaster Corps Signal Corps Special Forces Transportation Corps Veterinary Corps Installations United States and overseas Germany Japan Kuwait South Korea Training Basic Training BOLC ROTC ( ECP ) OCS WOBC WOCS Military Academy (West Point) MOS Uniforms and insignia Awards and decorations Badges Branch Officer Warrant Enlisted World War I World War II Uniforms Equipment Crew-served weapons Individual weapons Vehicles Premier ensembles Army Band Army Field Band Old Guard Fife and Drum Corps West Point Band History and traditions History Continental Army Union army National Army Army of the United States Center of Military History Institute of Heraldry America's Army Army Art Program Flag National Museum West Point Museum Rangers U.S. Army Regimental System Soldier's Creed " The Army Goes Rolling Along " Division nicknames Draft Service numbers Seventh Army Symphony Orchestra Historical Buffalo Soldiers Army Air Forces Army Service Forces Women's Army Corps Rough Riders U.S. Cavalry United States Colored Troops United States Army Hospital Corps U.S. Sanitary Commission 250th Anniversary Parade Category Links to related articles v t e United States Armed Forces Legend A = Army MC = Marine Corps N = Navy AF = Air Force SF = Space Force CG = Coast Guard Leadership President of the United States Secretary of Defense Deputy Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Deputy Secretary of Homeland Security Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman Vice Chairman Committees on Armed Services Senate House Active duty four-star officers Active duty three-star officers United States military seniority National Security Act of 1947 Goldwater–Nichols Act Components Military departments Department of Defense Secretary Department of the Army Secretary Department of the Navy Secretary Department of the Air Force Secretary Department of Homeland Security Secretary Service branches and heads Chief of Staff of the United States Army Commandant of the Marine Corps Chief of Naval Operations Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force Chief of Space Operations Commandant of the Coast Guard Reserve components Reserves: A MC N AF CG National Guard : A AF Civilian auxiliaries Military Auxiliary Radio System Marine Corps Cyber Auxiliary Merchant Marine Civil Air Patrol Coast Guard Auxiliary Unified combatant command Africa Central European Indo-Pacific Northern Southern Space Cyber Special Operations Strategic Transportation Structure United States Code Title 10 Title 14 Title 32 Title 50 The Pentagon Installations Units: A MC N AF SF CG Logistics Media Unit mottoes Operations and history Budget Current deployments Conflicts Wars Civil affairs History A MC N AF SF CG Timeline Colonial World War II Demographics African Americans Asian Americans Buddhist Americans Jewish Americans Muslim Americans Sikh Americans Hispanic Americans Civil War Air Force Coast Guard Marine Corps Navy Academy History centers Army Center of Military History Marine Corps History Division Naval History and Heritage Command Air Force Historical Research Agency War artists Army Art Program Air Force Art Program Personnel Training Service academies : A ( prep ) MC/N ( prep ) AF/SF ( prep ) CG Merchant Marine ROTC A MC/N AF/SF Officer candidate/training school: A MC N AF/SF Warrant officer : A MEPS ASVAB The Basic School (MC) Enlisted recruit training: A MC N AF/SF CG Other education Uniforms Uniforms : A MC N AF SF CG Awards & decorations : Inter-service A MC/N AF/SF CG Foreign International Devices Badges : Identification A MC N AF SF CG Ranks Officer: A MC N AF SF CG Warrant officers Enlisted: A MC N AF SF CG Other Oath: Enlistment Officer Creeds & Codes: Code of Conduct NCO A MC N AF CG Service numbers : A MC N AF CG Military Occupational Specialty / Rating / Air Force Specialty Code Pay Uniform Code of Military Justice Judge Advocate General's Corps Military Health System / Tricare Separation Veterans Affairs Conscription Chiefs of Chaplains : A MC N AF CG Equipment A ( Designations ) MC: vehicles weapons other N AF CG Land Individual weapons Crew-served weapons Vehicles ( active ) Sea All watercraft Ships: A N active future AF CG MSC Weapons: N Reactors Air Aircraft World War I active future Aircraft designation Helicopter arms Other WWII equipment Nuclear football Electronics ( designations ) Flags : A MC N AF SF CG Ensign Jack Guidons Food WMDs : Nuclear Biological Chemical Category A MC N AF SF CG Navboxes A MC N AF SF CG v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Pete Hegseth , Secretary of Defense Steve Feinberg , Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including defense agencies and DoD field activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Local Defense Community Cooperation Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Defense Microelectronics Activity Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency White House Communications Agency National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service Director/Chief Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute Defense Travel Management Office Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity American Forces Network Defense Information School Defense Visual Information Distribution Service Stars and Stripes Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services ( White House Military Office ) Reports directly Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Programs Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy, Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps : Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations : Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Energy) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff : Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff : Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service v t e Uniformed services of the United States Armed Forces United States Army United States Marine Corps United States Navy United States Air Force United States Space Force United States Coast Guard Non-combatant uniformed services National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Commissioned Officer Corps United States Public Health Service Commissioned Corps v t e NATO Allied Land Command NATO land forces Albania Belgium Bulgaria Canada Croatia Czech Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Carabinieri Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Turkey United Kingdom United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz Museum of Modern Art People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zjj8q
Cached time: 20250818072101
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.403 seconds
Real time usage: 2.957 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21196/1000000
Revision size: 195111/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 832919/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 140082/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 757060/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15559436/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2004.568      1 -total
 49.38%  989.932      2 Template:Reflist
 35.20%  705.563    156 Template:Cite_web
 10.57%  211.813     10 Template:Military_navigation
 10.31%  206.728      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
  9.48%  189.990      1 Template:Navboxes
  9.35%  187.514      1 Template:Infobox
  6.49%  130.053      4 Template:Side_box
  5.93%  118.877      3 Template:Sister_project
  5.31%  106.366      1 Template:Allied_Land_Command Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32087:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818072101 and revision id 1306532163. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Army&oldid=1306532163 " Categories : United States Army 1775 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies Military units and formations established in 1775 Uniformed services of the United States United States Armed Forces service branches Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Harv and Sfn no-target errors Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template other archives CS1: unfit URL Articles with dead external links from April 2025 Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from November 2022 Pages with broken anchors Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 07:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Army 75 languages Add topic

