Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Thermals on Earth 2 Thermals beyond Earth 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Thermal 31 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Thermal column ) Column of rising air in the lower altitudes of Earth's atmosphere This article is about the atmospheric phenomenon. For other uses, see Thermal (disambiguation) .

Example of a thermal column between the ground and a cumulus Bubble or vortex ring thermal model (left), and column or plume thermal model (right) Thermal cross section with stronger lift (rising air) in darker shades of green, while red is sink (descending air).

A thermal column (or thermal ) is a rising mass of buoyant air, a convective current in the atmosphere, that transfers heat energy vertically.

[ 1 ] Thermals are created by the uneven heating of Earth's surface from solar radiation , and are an example of convection , specifically atmospheric convection .

Thermals on Earth [ edit ] The Sun warms the ground, which in turn warms the air directly above.

[ 2 ] The warm air near the surface expands, becoming less dense than the surrounding air. The lighter air rises and cools due to its expansion in the lower pressure at higher altitudes. It stops rising when it has cooled to the same temperature, thus density, as the surrounding air.

Associated with a thermal is a downward flow surrounding the thermal column. The downward-moving exterior is caused by colder air being displaced at the top of the thermal.

The size and strength of thermals are influenced by the properties of the lower atmosphere (the troposphere ). When the air is cold, bubbles of warm air are formed by the ground heating the air above it and can rise like a hot air balloon. The air is then referred to as unstable, as it's suitable for forming thermals. If there is a warm layer of air higher up, an inversion can prevent thermals from rising high and the air is said to be stable, as mature thermals can't form.

Thermals are often indicated by the presence of visible isolated cumulus clouds at the top of the thermal. Cumulus clouds are formed by the rising air in a thermal as it ascends and cools, until the water vapor in the air begins to condense into visible droplets. When a steady wind is present, thermals and their respective cumulus clouds can align in rows oriented with wind direction, sometimes referred to as " cloud streets " by soaring and glider pilots.

The condensing water releases latent heat energy allowing the air to rise higher. Very unstable air can reach the level of free convection (LFC), rising to great heights, condensing large quantities of water and forming convective clouds causing showers or even thunderstorms. The latter are dangerous to any aircraft flying through or nearby.

Thermals are one of the many sources of lift used by soaring birds and gliders to soar .

Thermals beyond Earth [ edit ] Thermals are also seen elsewhere in the Solar System . On Mars , for example, thermals are often seen in the form of dust devils , carrying dust instead of water vapor. Thermals are also seen on the Sun , typically forming hexagonal convective prisms ( Bénard cells ).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Air current Atmospheric thermodynamics Cumulus cloud Gliding Hang gliding Thermal energy References [ edit ] ^ "Glider Flying Handbook, FAA-H-8083-13A" (PDF) .

FAA government handbooks . U.S. Dept. of Transportation, FAA. 2003. pp.

9– 6, 9– 7 . Retrieved 21 January 2021 .

^ Bradbury, Tom (2000).

Meteorology and Flight: Pilot's Guide to Weather (Flying & Gliding) . A & C Black.

ISBN 0-7136-4226-2 .

External links [ edit ] What do thermals look like?

- Thermal Structure and Behavior by Wayne M. Angevine Time-lapse video of clouds caused by thermals forming and decaying Authority control databases : National Germany United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermal&oldid=1306049926 " Categories : Atmospheric thermodynamics Aviation meteorology Gliding technology Severe weather and convection Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 16:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thermal 31 languages Add topic

