Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evolution of Modularity 2 References 3 Sources 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Modularity (biology) 4 languages Français Português Suomi 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biological concept For other uses of "Modularity", see Modularity (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Modularity refers to the ability of a system to organize discrete, individual units that can overall increase the efficiency of network activity and, in a biological sense, facilitates selective forces upon the network. Modularity is observed in all model systems, and can be studied at nearly every scale of biological organization, from molecular interactions all the way up to the whole organism .

Evolution of Modularity [ edit ] The exact evolutionary origins of biological modularity has been debated since the 1990s. In the mid 1990s, Günter Wagner [ 1 ] argued that modularity could have arisen and been maintained through the interaction of four evolutionary modes of action: [1] Selection for the rate of adaptation : If different complexes evolve at different rates, then those evolving more quickly reach fixation in a population faster than other complexes. Thus, common evolutionary rates could be forcing the genes for certain proteins to evolve together while preventing other genes from being co-opted unless there is a shift in evolutionary rate.

[2] Constructional selection: When a gene exists in many duplicated copies, it may be maintained because of the many connections it has (also termed pleiotropy ). There is evidence that this is so following whole genome duplication, or duplication at a single locus. However, the direct relationship that duplication processes have with modularity has yet to be directly examined.

[3] Stabilizing selection : While seeming antithetical to forming novel modules, Wagner maintains that it is important to consider the effects of stabilizing selection as it may be "an important counter force against the evolution of modularity". Stabilizing selection, if ubiquitously spread across the network, could then be a "wall" that makes the formation of novel interactions more difficult and maintains previously established interactions. Against such strong positive selection, other evolutionary forces acting on the network must exist, with gaps of relaxed selection, to allow focused reorganization to occur.

[4] Compounded effect of stabilizing and directional selection : This is the explanation seemingly favored by Wagner and his contemporaries as it provides a model through which modularity is constricted, but still able to unidirectionally explore different evolutionary outcomes. The semi-antagonistic relationship is best illustrated using the corridor model, whereby stabilizing selection forms barriers in phenotype space that only allow the system to move towards the optimum along a single path. This allows directional selection to act and inch the system closer to optimum through this evolutionary corridor.

For over a decade, researchers examined the dynamics of selection on network modularity. However, in 2013 Clune and colleagues [ 2 ] challenged the sole focus on selective forces, and instead provided evidence that there are inherent "connectivity costs" that limit the number of connections between nodes to maximize efficiency of transmission. This hypothesis originated from neurological studies that found that there is an inverse relationship between the number of neural connections and the overall efficiency (more connections seemed to limit the overall performance speed/precision of the network). This connectivity cost had yet to be applied to evolutionary analyses. Clune et al. created a series of models that compared the efficiency of various evolved network topologies in an environment where performance, their only metric for selection, was taken into account, and another treatment where performance as well as the connectivity cost were factored together. The results show not only that modularity formed ubiquitously in the models that factored in connection cost, but that these models also outperformed the performance-only based counterparts in every task. This suggests a potential model for module evolution whereby modules form from a system’s tendency to resist maximizing connections to create more efficient and compartmentalized network topologies.

References [ edit ] ^ GP Wagner. 1996. "Homologues, Natural Kinds and the Evolution of Modularity".

American Zoologist . 36:36-43 ^ J Clune, JB Mouret, and H Lipson. 2013. "The evolutionary origins of modularity".

Proceedings of the Royal Society B . 280: 20122863.

Sources [ edit ] SF Gilbert, JM Opitz, and RA Raff. 1996. "Resynthesizing Evolutionary and Developmental Biology".

Developmental Biology . 173:357-372 G von Dassow and E Munro. "Modularity in Animal Development and Evolution: Elements of a Conceptual Framework for EvoDevo".

J. Exp. Zool . 285:307-325.

MI Arnone and EH Davidson. 1997.

The hardwiring of development: organization and function of genomic regulatory systems .

EH Davidson.

The Regulatory Genome: Gene Regulatory Networks in Development and Evolution . Academic Press, 2006.

S Barolo and JW Posakony. 2002. "Three habits of highly effective signaling pathways: principles of transcriptional control by developmental cell signaling".

Genes and Development . 16:1167-1181 EN Trifonov and ZM Frenkel. 2009. "Evolution of protein modularity. Current Opinion in Structural Biology". 19:335-340.

CR Baker, LN Booth, TR Sorrells, AD Johnson. 2012. "Protein Modularity, Cooperative Binding, and Hybrid Regulatory States Underlie Transcriptional Network Diversification".

Cell . 151:80-95.

Y Pritykin and M Singh. 2012. "Simple Topological Features Reflect Dynamics and Modularity in Protein Interaction Networks".

PLoS Computational Biology . 9(10): e1003243 GP Wagner. 1989. "Origin of Morphological Characters and the Biological Basis of Homology".

Evolution . 43(6):1157-1171 SB Carroll, J Grenier, and S Weatherbee.

From DNA to Diversity: Molecular Genetics and the Evolution of Animal Design . Wiley-Blackwell, 2002.

Further reading [ edit ] W Bateson.

Materials for the Study of Variation . London:Macmillan, 1984.

R Raff.

The Shape of Life . University of Chicago Press, 1996.

EH Davidson.

The Regulatory Genome: Gene Regulatory Networks in Development and Evolution . Academic Press, 2006.

M Ptashne and A Gann.

Genes and Signals . Cold Spring Harbor Press, 2002.

v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal v t e The development of phenotype Key concepts Genotype–phenotype distinction Reaction norm Gene–environment interaction Gene–environment correlation Operon Heritability Quantitative genetics Heterochrony Neoteny Heterotopy Genetic architecture Canalisation Genetic assimilation Dominance Epistasis Fitness landscape / evolutionary landscape Pleiotropy Plasticity Polygenic inheritance Transgressive segregation Sequence space Non-genetic influences Epigenetics Maternal effect Genomic imprinting Dual inheritance theory Polyphenism Developmental architecture Developmental biology Morphogenesis Eyespot Pattern formation Segmentation Metamerism Modularity Evolution of genetic systems Evolvability Robustness Neutral networks Evolution of sexual reproduction Tinkering Control of development Systems Regulation of gene expression Gene regulatory network Evo-devo gene toolkit Evolutionary developmental biology Homeobox Hedgehog signaling pathway Notch signaling pathway Elements Homeotic gene Hox gene Pax genes eyeless gene Distal-less Engrailed cis-regulatory element Ligand Morphogen Cell surface receptor Transcription factor Influential figures C. H. Waddington Richard Lewontin François Jacob + Jacques Monod Lac operon Eric F. Wieschaus Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard William McGinnis Mike Levine Sean B. Carroll Endless Forms Most Beautiful Debates Nature versus nurture Morphogenetic field Index of evolutionary biology articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modularity_(biology)&oldid=1290147427 " Category : Biology terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modularity (biology) 4 languages Add topic

