Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Veneration 3 Writings 4 Scripture 5 Apostolic authority 6 Theology and contrast with Gnosticism Toggle Theology and contrast with Gnosticism subsection 6.1 Unity of salvation history 6.1.1 Christ's life 6.2 Use of Paul's Epistles 6.2.1 Christ as the New Adam 6.3 Valentinian Gnosticism 7 Quartodeciman Controversy 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 10.2 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Irenaeus 61 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Nouormand Picard Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2nd-century Greek bishop and Church Father For other uses, see Irenaeus (disambiguation) .

Saint Irenaeus of Lyon Doctor of the Church Stained-glass portrait by Lucien Bégule , 1901 Diocese Lyon See Lyon Predecessor Pothinus Successor Zechariah Personal details Born c.

125 AD Smyrna , Asia , Roman Empire Died c.

202 AD (aged c.

77) Lugdunum , Gallia Lugdunensis , Roman Empire Sainthood Feast day June 28 (Latin Catholic Church, Orthodox Church, Lutheranism, Anglicanism); August 23 (Eastern Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox Churches); Monday after fourth Sunday of the Exaltation of the Cross (Armenian Apostolic Church) [ 1 ] Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox Church Assyrian Church of the East Lutheranism Anglicanism Title as Saint Bishop of Lyon, Venerable , Hieromartyr , Church Father , Doctor of the Church Theology career Notable work Against Heresies Theological work Era Patristic Age Language Greek Tradition or movement Trinitarianism Main interests Theodicy , millennialism Notable ideas Irenaean theodicy Recapitulation theory of atonement Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Irenaeus Influences Clement , Ignatius , [ 2 ] Justin Martyr , Papias , Polycarp , The Shepherd of Hermas Influenced Agapius , Augustine , [ 3 ] Basil the Great , Epiphanius , Hippolytus , Tertullian Part of a series on Theodicy Key concepts Absence of good Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Divine retribution Dystheism Epicurean paradox Free will Irenaean theodicy Misotheism Moral evil Natural evil Problem of evil Notable figures Saint Augustine Ehrman Epicurus Hick Hume Saint Irenaeus Leibniz Maistre Nietzsche Plantinga Rowe Swinburne Wiesel v t e Irenaeus ( / ɪ r ɪ ˈ n eɪ ə s / or / ˌ aɪ r ɪ ˈ n iː ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Εἰρηναῖος , romanized : Eirēnaîos ; c.

125 – c.

202 AD ) [ 4 ] was a Greek bishop noted for his role in guiding and expanding Christian communities in the southern regions of present-day France and, more widely, for the development of Christian theology by opposing Gnostic interpretations of Christian Scripture and defending orthodoxy .

[ 5 ] Originating from Smyrna , he had seen and heard the preaching of Polycarp , [ 6 ] who in turn was said to have heard John the Evangelist .

[ 5 ] Chosen as Bishop of Lugdunum , now Lyon, Irenaeus wrote his best-known work Against Heresies around 180 as a refutation of gnosticism , in particular that of Valentinus .

[ 7 ] To counter the doctrines of the gnostic sects claiming secret wisdom , he offered three pillars of orthodoxy : the scriptures , the tradition said to be handed down from the apostles , and the teaching of the apostles' successors .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] He is the earliest surviving witness to regard all four of the now- canonical gospels as essential.

[ 10 ] Irenaeus is venerated as a saint in the Catholic Church , Anglican Church , Lutheran Churches , the Eastern Orthodox Church , the Oriental Orthodox Churches , and the Assyrian Church of the East . He was declared a Doctor of the Church in the Catholic Church by Pope Francis in 2022.

[ 11 ] Biography [ edit ] Irenaeus, in Church of St Irenaeus, Lyon Irenaeus was a Greek from Polycarp 's hometown of Smyrna in Anatolia , now İzmir , Turkey, born during the first half of the 2nd century. The exact date is thought to be between the years 120 and 130.

[ 9 ] [ a ] Unlike many of his contemporaries, he was brought up in a Christian family rather than converting as an adult.

During a local persecution of Christians around Lyon during the reign of Marcus Aurelius , the Roman emperor from 161 to 180, Irenaeus was a priest of the Church of Lyon. The clergy of that city, many of whom were suffering imprisonment for the faith, sent him to Rome in 177 with a letter to Pope Eleutherius concerning the heresy of Montanism , [ 5 ] and that occasion bore emphatic testimony to his merits. While Irenaeus was in Rome, the Lyon persecution took place. Returning to Gaul, Irenaeus succeeded the martyr Saint Pothinus and became the second bishop of Lyon .

[ 12 ] During the religious peace which followed the Lyon persecution, the new bishop divided his activities between the duties of a pastor and of a missionary (as to which we have but brief data, late and not very certain). Almost all his writings were directed against Gnosticism. The most famous of these writings is On the Detection and Overthrow of the So-Called Gnosis , usually known by the abbreviated title Against Heresies ( Adversus haereses ). Irenaeus alludes to coming across Gnostic writings, and holding conversations with Gnostics, and this may have taken place in Anatolia or in Rome.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] However, it also appears that Gnosticism was present near Lyon: he writes that there were followers of ' Marcus the Magician ' living and teaching in the Rhone valley .

[ 15 ] Little is known about the career of Irenaeus after he became bishop. The last action reported of him (by Eusebius, 150 years later) is that in 190 or 191, he exerted influence on Pope Victor I not to excommunicate the Christian communities of Anatolia which persevered in the practice of the Quartodeciman celebration of Easter .

[ 16 ] Nothing is known of the date of his death, which must have occurred at the end of the second or the beginning of the third century. He is regarded as a martyr by the Catholic Church and by some within the Orthodox Church.

[ b ] He was buried under the Church of Saint John in Lyon, which was later renamed St Irenaeus in his honour. The church was devastated in 1562 by the Huguenots . Several relics supposedly of Irenaeus are held in various churches in Lyon. Two crania from different churches were dated by carbon-14 to the Middle Ages, but a piece of heelbone kept in the Lyon Cathedral is from the right time period.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Veneration [ edit ] The Latin Catholic Church celebrates Irenaeus' memorial on 28 June.

[ 20 ] Pope Francis declared Irenaeus the 37th Doctor of the Church on 21 January 2022.

[ 21 ] Francis also conferred upon Irenaeus the supplementary title Doctor unitatis ("Doctor of Unity").

[ 22 ] The Eastern Orthodox Church celebrates Irenaeus, the feast being on 23 August.

Lutheran Churches honor Irenaeus on their calendar of saints on 28 June.

[ 23 ] Irenaeus is honored in the Church of England and in the Episcopal Church on 28 June.

[ 24 ] [ 23 ] Writings [ edit ] Irenaeus wrote a number of books, but the most important that survives is the Against Heresies (or, in its Latin title, Adversus haereses ), written around 180. In Book I, Irenaeus talks about the Valentinian Gnostics and their predecessors, who he says go as far back as the magician Simon Magus . In Book II he attempts to provide proof that Valentinianism contains no merit in terms of its doctrines. In Book III, Irenaeus attempts to show that these doctrines are false, by providing counter-evidence gleaned from the Gospels . Book IV consists of Jesus's sayings, and here Irenaeus also stresses the unity of the Old Testament and the Gospel. In the final volume, Book V, Irenaeus focuses on more sayings of Jesus plus the letters of Paul the Apostle .

[ 25 ] Irenaeus wrote: "One should not seek among others the truth that can be easily gotten from the Church. For in her, as in a rich treasury, the apostles have placed all that pertains to truth, so that everyone can drink this beverage of life. She is the door of life." [ 26 ] [ 27 ] But he also said, "Christ came not only for those who believed from the time of Tiberius Caesar, nor did the Father provide only for those who are now, but for absolutely all men from the beginning, who, according to their ability, feared and loved God and lived justly. . . and desired to see Christ and to hear His voice." [ 28 ] Cambridge University library manuscript 4113 / Papyrus Oxyrhynchus 405. Irenaeus.

c.

200 AD .

The purpose of "Against Heresies" was to refute the teachings of various Gnostic groups; apparently, several Greek merchants had begun an oratorial campaign in Irenaeus's bishopric, teaching that the material world was the accidental creation of an evil god, from which we are to escape by the pursuit of gnosis . Irenaeus argued that the true gnosis is in fact knowledge of Christ, which redeems rather than escapes from bodily existence.

[ 29 ] Until the discovery of the Library of Nag Hammadi in 1945, Against Heresies was the best-surviving description of Gnosticism. Some religious scholars have argued the findings at Nag Hammadi have shown Irenaeus's description of Gnosticism to be inaccurate and polemic in nature.

[ 30 ] However, the general consensus among modern scholars is that Irenaeus was fairly accurate in his transmission of gnostic beliefs, and that the Nag Hammadi texts have raised no substantial challenges to the overall accuracy of Irenaeus's information.

[ 31 ] Religious historian Elaine Pagels criticizes Irenaeus for describing Gnostic groups as sexual libertines, for example, when some of their own writings advocated chastity more strongly than did orthodox texts.

[ 32 ] However, the Nag Hammadi texts do not present a single, coherent picture of any unified gnostic system of belief, but rather divergent beliefs of multiple Gnostic sects.

[ 33 ] Some of these sects were indeed libertine because they considered bodily existence meaningless; others praised chastity, and strongly prohibited any sexual activity, even within marriage.

[ 34 ] Irenaeus also wrote The Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching (also known as Proof of the Apostolic Preaching ), an Armenian copy of which was discovered in 1904. This work seems to have been an instruction for recent Christian converts.

[ 35 ] [ c ] Eusebius attests to other works by Irenaeus, today lost, including On the Ogdoad, an untitled letter to Blastus regarding schism, On the Subject of Knowledge , On the Monarchy or How God is not the Cause of Evil , On Easter .

[ 5 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Irenaeus exercised wide influence on the generation which followed. Both Hippolytus and Tertullian freely drew on his writings. However, none of his works aside from Against Heresies and The Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching survive today, perhaps because his literal hope of an earthly millennium may have made him uncongenial reading in the Greek East .

[ 39 ] Even though no complete version of Against Heresies in its original Greek exists, we possess the full ancient Latin version, probably of the third century, as well as thirty-three fragments of a Syrian version and a complete Armenian version of books 4 and 5.

[ 40 ] Evelyn Underhill in her book Mysticism credited Irenaeus as being one of those to whom we owe "the preservation of that mighty system of scaffolding which enabled the Catholic mystics to build up the towers and bulwarks of the City of God." [ 41 ] Irenaeus's works were first translated into English by John Keble and published in 1872 as part of the Library of the Fathers series.

Scripture [ edit ] See also: Development of the New Testament canon Irenaeus pointed to the public rule of faith , authoritatively articulated by the preaching of bishops and inculcated in Church practice, especially worship, as an authentic apostolic tradition by which to read Scripture truly against heresies. He classified as Scripture not only the Old Testament but most of the books now known as the New Testament, [ 7 ] while excluding many works, a large number by Gnostics, that flourished in the 2nd century and claimed scriptural authority.

[ 9 ] Oftentimes, Irenaeus, as a student of Polycarp, who he claimed was a student of John, believed that he was interpreting scriptures in the same hermeneutic as the Apostles.

[ 42 ] This connection to Jesus was important to Irenaeus because both he and the Gnostics based their arguments on Scripture. Irenaeus argued that since he could trace his authority to Jesus and the Gnostics could not, his interpretation of Scripture was correct.

[ 43 ] He also used "the Rule of Faith", [ 44 ] [ 45 ] a "proto-creed" with similarities to the Apostles' Creed , as a hermeneutical key to argue that his interpretation of Scripture was correct.

[ 46 ] Before Irenaeus, Christians differed as to which gospel they preferred. The Christians of Anatolia preferred the Gospel of John. The Gospel of Matthew was the most popular overall.

[ 47 ] Irenaeus asserted that all four of the Gospels, John , Luke , Matthew , and Mark (which is the order presented in his four pillar narrative in Adversus haereses ( Against Heresies ) III 11,8), were canonical scripture.

[ d ] Thus Irenaeus provides the earliest witness to the assertion of the four canonical Gospels, possibly in reaction to Marcion 's edited version of the Gospel of Luke, which Marcion asserted was the one and only true gospel.

[ 10 ] [ 35 ] Based on the arguments Irenaeus made in support of only four authentic gospels, some interpreters deduce that the fourfold Gospel must have still been a novelty in Irenaeus's time.

[ 48 ] Against Heresies 3.11.7 acknowledges that many heterodox Christians use only one gospel while 3.11.9 acknowledges that some use more than four.

[ e ] The success of Tatian 's Diatessaron , a harmonization of the four gospels ( c.

160 –175), is "... a powerful indication that the fourfold Gospel contemporaneously sponsored by Irenaeus was not broadly, let alone universally, recognized." [ 49 ] Irenaeus is also the earliest to say that the Gospel of John was written by John the Apostle , [ 50 ] and that the Gospel of Luke was written by Luke, the companion of Paul .

[ 51 ] Scholars contend that Irenaeus quotes from 21 of the 27 New Testament books.

[ 52 ] [ f ] [ g ] He may refer to Hebrews 2:30 and James 4:16 and maybe even 2 Peter 5:28, [ where?

] but does not cite Philemon.

[ 52 ] Irenaeus cited the New Testament approximately 1,000 times. About one third of his citations are made to Paul's letters. Irenaeus considered all 13 letters belonging to the Pauline corpus to have been written by Paul himself.

[ 54 ] Apostolic authority [ edit ] Irenaeus in the Nuremberg Chronicle In his writing against the Gnostics, who claimed to possess a secret oral tradition from Jesus himself, Irenaeus claimed that the bishops in different cities are known as far back as the Apostles and that the oral tradition he lists from the Apostles is a safe guide to the interpretation of Scripture.

[ h ] In a passage that became a locus classicus of Catholic-Protestant polemics, he cited the Roman church as an example of the unbroken chain of authority, which text Catholic polemics would use to assert the primacy of Rome over Eastern churches by virtue of its preeminent authority.

[ 9 ] [ i ] The succession of bishops and presbyters was important to establish a chain of custody for orthodoxy.

Irenaeus's point when refuting the Gnostics was that all of the Apostolic churches had preserved the same traditions and teachings in many independent streams. It was the unanimous agreement between these many independent streams of transmission that proved the orthodox faith, current in those churches, to be true.

[ 55 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Theology and contrast with Gnosticism [ edit ] The central point of Irenaeus's theology is the unity and the goodness of God , in opposition to the Gnostics' theory of God; a number of divine emanations (Aeons) along with a distinction between the Monad and the Demiurge . Irenaeus uses the Logos theology, common in 2nd Century Christian theology. Irenaeus was a student of Polycarp , who was said to have been tutored by John the Apostle .

[ 50 ] Irenaeus often spoke of the Son and the Spirit as the "hands of God," though he also spoke of the Son as the "Logos." [ 56 ] Unity of salvation history [ edit ] Irenaeus's emphasis on the unity of God is reflected in his corresponding emphasis on the unity of salvation history. Irenaeus repeatedly insists that God began the world and has been overseeing it ever since this creative act; everything that has happened is part of his plan for humanity. The essence of this plan is a process of maturation: Irenaeus believes that humanity was created immature, and God intended his creatures to take a long time to grow into or assume the divine likeness.

Everything that has happened since has therefore been planned by God to help humanity overcome this initial mishap and achieve spiritual maturity. The world has been intentionally designed by God as a difficult place, where human beings are forced to make moral decisions, as only in this way can they mature as moral agents. Irenaeus likens death to the big fish that swallowed Jonah : it was only in the depths of the whale's belly that Jonah could turn to God and act according to the divine will. Similarly, death and suffering appear as evils , but without them we could never come to know God.

According to Irenaeus, the high point in salvation history is the advent of Jesus . For Irenaeus, the Incarnation of Christ was intended by God before he determined that humanity would be created. Irenaeus develops this idea based on Rom. 5:14 , saying "Forinasmuch as He had a pre-existence as a saving Being, it was necessary that what might be saved should also be called into existence, in order that the Being who saves should not exist in vain." [ 57 ] Some theologians maintain that Irenaeus believed that Incarnation would have occurred even if humanity had never sinned; but the fact that they did sin determined his role as the savior .

[ 58 ] Irenaeus sees Christ as the new Adam, who systematically undoes what Adam did: thus, where Adam was disobedient concerning God's edict concerning the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil , Christ was obedient even to death on the wood of a tree. Irenaeus is the first to draw comparisons between Eve and Mary , contrasting the faithlessness of the former with the faithfulness of the latter. In addition to reversing the wrongs done by Adam, Irenaeus thinks of Christ as "recapitulating" or "summing up" human life.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 57 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Irenaeus conceives of our salvation as essentially coming about through the incarnation of God as a man. He characterizes the penalty for sin as death and corruption . God, however, is immortal and incorruptible, and simply by becoming united to human nature in Christ he conveys those qualities to us: they spread, as it were, like a benign infection.

[ 63 ] Irenaeus emphasizes that salvation occurs through Christ's Incarnation, which bestows incorruptibility on humanity, rather than emphasizing His Redemptive death in the crucifixion , although the latter event is an integral part of the former.

[ 64 ] Christ's life [ edit ] Part of the process of recapitulation is for Christ to go through every stage of human life, from infancy to old age, and simply by living it, sanctify it with his divinity. Irenaeus believed Christ did not die until he was older than is conventionally portrayed.

[ 65 ] In the passage of Adversus Haereses under consideration, Irenaeus claims that after receiving baptism at the age of thirty, citing Luke 3:23, Gnostics then falsely assert that "He [Jesus] preached only one year reckoning from His baptism," and also, "On completing His thirtieth year He [Jesus] suffered, being in fact still a young man, and who had by no means attained to advanced age." Irenaeus argues against the Gnostics by using scripture to add several years after his baptism by referencing 3 distinctly separate visits to Jerusalem. The first is when Jesus makes wine out of water, he goes up to the Paschal feast-day, after which he withdraws and is found in Samaria. The second is when Jesus goes up to Jerusalem for Passover and cures the paralytic, after which he withdraws over the sea of Tiberias. The third mention is when he travels to Jerusalem, eats the Passover, and suffers on the following day.

[ 66 ] Irenaeus quotes scripture (John 8:57), to suggest that Jesus ministers while in his 40s. In this passage, Jesus's opponents want to argue that Jesus has not seen Abraham, because Jesus is too young. Jesus's opponents argue that Jesus was not yet 50 years old. Irenaeus argues that if Jesus were in his thirties, his opponents would have argued that he was not yet 40 years old, since that would make him even younger. Irenaeus's argument is that they would not weaken their own argument by adding years to Jesus's age. Irenaeus also writes: "The Elders witness to this, who in Asia conferred with John the Lord's disciple, to the effect that John had delivered these things unto them: for he abode with them until the times of Trajan. And some of them saw not only John, but others also of the Apostles, and had this same account from them, and witness to the aforesaid relation." [ 66 ] In Demonstration (74) Irenaeus notes "For Pontius Pilate was governor of Judæa , and he had at that time resentful enmity against Herod the king of the Jews . But then, when Christ was brought to him bound, Pilate sent Him to Herod, giving command to enquire of him, that he might know of a certainty what he should desire concerning Him; making Christ a convenient occasion of reconciliation with the king." [ 67 ] Pilate was the prefect of the Roman province of Judaea from AD 26–36.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] He served under Emperor Tiberius . Herod Antipas was tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, a client state of the Roman Empire. He ruled from 4 BC to 39 AD.

[ 70 ] In refuting Gnostic claims that Jesus preached for only one year after his baptism, Irenaeus used the "recapitulation" approach to demonstrate that by living beyond the age of thirty Christ sanctified even old age.

Use of Paul's Epistles [ edit ] Many aspects of Irenaeus's presentation of salvation history depend on Paul's Epistles.

Irenaeus's conception of salvation relies heavily on the understanding found in Paul's letters. Irenaeus first brings up the theme of victory over sin and evil that is afforded by Jesus's death. God's intervention has saved humanity from the Fall of Adam and the wickedness of Satan.

[ 71 ] Human nature has become joined with God's in the person of Jesus, thus allowing human nature to have victory over sin.

[ 59 ] Paul writes on the same theme, that Christ has come so that a new order is formed, and being under the Law, is being under the sin of Adam.

[ 72 ] Reconciliation is also a theme of Paul's that Irenaeus stresses in his teachings on Salvation. Irenaeus believes Jesus coming in flesh and blood sanctified humanity so that it might again reflect the perfection associated with the likeness of the Divine. This perfection leads to a new life, in the lineage of God, which is forever striving for eternal life and unity with the Father.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] This is a carryover from Paul, who attributes this reconciliation to the actions of Christ: "For since death came through a human being, the resurrection of the dead has also come through a human being; for as all die in Adam, so all will be made alive in Christ".

[ 75 ] A third theme in both Paul's and Irenaeus's conceptions of salvation is the sacrifice of Christ being necessary for the new life given to humanity in the triumph over evil. It is in this obedient sacrifice that Jesus is victor and reconciler, thus erasing the marks that Adam left on human nature. To argue against the Gnostics on this point, Irenaeus uses Colossians [ 76 ] in showing that the debt which came by a tree has been paid for us in another tree. Furthermore, the first chapter of Ephesians is picked up in Irenaeus's discussion of the topic when he asserts, "By His own blood He redeemed us, as also His apostle declares, 'In whom we have redemption through His blood, even the remission of sins.'" [ 77 ] The frequencies of quotations and allusions to the Pauline Epistles in Against Heresies are: [ 52 ] Epistle Frequency Romans 84 1 Corinthians 102 2 Corinthians 18 Galatians 27 Ephesians 37 Philippians 13 Colossians 18 1 Thessalonians 2 2 Thessalonians 9 1 Timothy 5 2 Timothy 5 Titus 4 Philemon 0 Christ as the New Adam [ edit ] To counter his Gnostic opponents, Irenaeus significantly develops Paul's presentation of Christ as the Last Adam .

Irenaeus's presentation of Christ as the New Adam is based on Paul's Christ-Adam parallel in Romans 5:12–21 , but also derives significantly from the Johannine presentation of the Adam-Christ typology.

[ 78 ] Irenaeus uses this parallel to demonstrate that Christ truly took human flesh. Irenaeus considered it important to emphasize this point because he understands the failure to recognize Christ's full humanity links the various strains of Gnosticism together, as seen in his statement that "according to the opinion of no one of the heretics was the Word of God made flesh." [ 79 ] Irenaeus believes that unless the Word became flesh, humans were not fully redeemed.

[ 80 ] He explains that by becoming man, Christ restored humanity to being in the image and likeness of God, which they had lost in the Fall of man .

[ 73 ] [ 81 ] Just as Adam was the original head of humanity through whom all sinned, Christ is the new head of humanity who fulfills Adam's role in the Economy of Salvation .

[ 82 ] Irenaeus calls this process of restoring humanity recapitulation.

[ 83 ] For Irenaeus, Paul's presentation of the Old Law (the Mosaic covenant ) in this passage indicates that the Old Law revealed humanity's sinfulness but could not save them. He explains that "For as the law was spiritual, it merely made sin to stand out in relief, but did not destroy it. For sin had no dominion over the spirit, but over man." [ 59 ] Since humans have a physical nature, they cannot be saved by a spiritual law. Instead, they need a human Savior. This is why it was necessary for Christ to take human flesh.

[ 59 ] Irenaeus summarizes how Christ's taking human flesh saves humanity with a statement that closely resembles Romans 5:19 , "For as by the disobedience of the one man who was originally moulded from virgin soil, the many were made sinners, and forfeited life; so was it necessary that, by the obedience of one man, who was originally born from a virgin, many should be justified and receive salvation." [ 59 ] The physical creation of Adam and Christ is emphasized by Irenaeus to demonstrate how the Incarnation saves humanity's physical nature.

[ 84 ] Irenaeus emphasizes the importance of Christ's reversal of Adam's action. Through His obedience, Christ undoes Adam's disobedience.

[ 85 ] Irenaeus presents the Passion as the climax of Christ's obedience, emphasizing how this obedience on the tree of the Cross [ 86 ] undoes the disobedience that occurred through a tree.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Irenaeus's interpretation of Paul's discussion of Christ as the New Adam is significant because it helped develop the recapitulation theory of atonement . Irenaeus emphasizes that it is through Christ's reversal of Adam's action that humanity is saved, rather than considering the Redemption to occur in a cultic or juridical way.

[ 89 ] [ j ] The biblical passage, "Death has been swallowed up in victory", [ 90 ] implied for Irenaeus that the Lord will surely resurrect the first human, i.e. Adam, as one of the saved. According to Irenaeus, those who deny Adam's salvation are “shutting themselves out from life for ever” and the first one who did so was Tatian .

[ 91 ] The notion that the Second Adam saved the first Adam was advocated not only by Irenaeus, but also by Gregory Thaumaturgus , [ 92 ] which suggests that it was popular in the Early Church .

Valentinian Gnosticism [ edit ] Valentinian Gnosticism was one of the major forms of Gnosticism that Irenaeus opposed.

According to the Gnostic view of Salvation, creation was perfect to begin with; it did not need time to grow and mature. For the Valentinians, the material world is the result of the loss of perfection which resulted from Sophia's desire to understand the Forefather. Therefore, one is ultimately redeemed, through secret knowledge, to enter the pleroma of which the Achamoth originally fell.

According to the Valentinian Gnostics, there are three classes of human beings. They are the material, who cannot attain salvation; the psychic, who are strengthened by works and faith (they are part of the church); and the spiritual, who cannot decay or be harmed by material actions.

[ 93 ] Essentially, ordinary humans—those who have faith but do not possess the special knowledge—will not attain salvation. Spirituals, on the other hand—those who obtain this great gift—are the only class that will eventually attain salvation.

In his article entitled "The Demiurge", J.P. Arendzen sums up the Valentinian view of the salvation of man. He writes, "The first, or carnal men, will return to the grossness of matter and finally be consumed by fire; the second, or psychic men, together with the Demiurge as their master, will enter a middle state, neither heaven (pleroma) nor hell (whyle); the purely spiritual men will be completely freed from the influence of the Demiurge and together with the Saviour and Achamoth, his spouse, will enter the pleroma divested of body (húle) and soul (psuché)." [ 94 ] In this understanding of salvation, the purpose of the Incarnation was to redeem the Spirituals from their material bodies. By taking a material body, the Son becomes the Savior and facilitates this entrance into the pleroma by making it possible for the Spirituals to receive his spiritual body. However, in becoming a body and soul, the Son Himself becomes one of those needing redemption. Therefore, the Word descends onto the Savior at His Baptism in the Jordan, which liberates the Son from his corruptible body and soul. His redemption from the body and soul is then applied to the Spirituals.

[ 95 ] In response to this Gnostic view of Christ, Irenaeus emphasized that the Word became flesh and developed a soteriology that emphasized the significance of Christ's material Body in saving humanity, as discussed in the sections above.

[ 96 ] In his criticism of Gnosticism, Irenaeus made reference to a Gnostic gospel which portrayed Judas in a positive light, as having acted in accordance with Jesus's instructions. The recently discovered Gospel of Judas dates close to the period when Irenaeus lived (late 2nd century), and scholars typically regard this work as one of many Gnostic texts, showing one of many varieties of Gnostic beliefs of the period.

[ 97 ] Quartodeciman Controversy [ edit ] Irenaeus took part in the Quartodeciman Controversy . When Victor I of Rome tried to force a universal practice of fasting until Easter to supersede the Jewish practice and prevent Christians from partaking of the Passover, Polycrates who led the Churches of Anatolia continued to hold old traditions of the paschal feast. For this reason Victor I wanted to excommunicate Polycrates and his supporters, but this was a step too far for Irenaeus and other bishops.

See also [ edit ] Descriptions in antiquity of the execution cross POxy 405 – 3rd-century papyrus portion of Against Heresies Notes [ edit ] ^ "Since, however, it would be very tedious, in such a volume as this, to reckon up the successions of all the Churches, we do put to confusion all those who, in whatever manner, whether by an evil self-pleasing, by vainglory, or by blindness and perverse opinion, assemble in unauthorized meetings; [we do this, I say,] by indicating that tradition derived from the apostles, of the very great, the very ancient, and universally known Church founded and organized at Rome by the two most glorious apostles, Peter and Paul; as also [by pointing out] the faith preached to men, which comes down to our time by means of the successions of the bishops. For it is a matter of necessity that every Church should agree with this Church, on account of its pre-eminent authority, that is, the faithful everywhere, inasmuch as the apostolical tradition has been preserved continuously by those [faithful men] who exist everywhere."( Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 3 ) ^ Gregory of Tours is the first to mention a tradition which held Irenaeus to be a martyr ^ This work was first published in 1907 in Armenian, along with a German translation by Adolf von Harnack. It is Harnack who divided the text into one hundred numbered sections.

^ "But it is not possible that the Gospels can be either more or fewer in number than they are. For since there are four zones of the world in which we live, and four principal winds, while the church has been scattered throughout the world, and since the 'pillar and ground' of the Church is the Gospel and the spirit of life, it is fitting that she should have four pillars, breathing incorruption on every side, and vivifying human afresh. From this fact, it is evident that the Logos, the fashioner demiourgos of all, he that sits on the cherubim and holds all things together, when he was manifested to humanity, gave us the gospel under four forms but bound together by one spirit."( Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 11, Section 8 ) ^ McDonald & Sanders 2001 , pp. 280, 310 summarizing Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 11, Section 7 : the Ebionites use Matthew's Gospel, Marcion mutilates Luke's, the Docetists use Mark's, the Valentinians use John's ^ * Matthew 3:16 Mark 3 :10 Luke 3 :14 John 3 :11 Acts of the Apostles 3:14 Romans 3 :16 1 Corinthians 1:3 2 Corinthians 3:7 Galatians 3:22 Ephesians 5:2 Philippians 4:18 Colossians 1:3 1 Thessalonians 5:6 2 Thessalonians 5:25 1 Timothy ( Preface ) 2 Timothy 3:14 Titus 3:3 1 Peter 4:9 1 John 3:16 2 John 1:16 Revelation 4:20 ^ Irenaeus, in 'Against Heresies', quotes 626 times from all 4 Gospels; from Acts 54 times." [ 53 ] ^ "Wherefore we must obey the priests of the Church who have succession from the Apostles, as we have shown, who, together with succession in the episcopate, have received the certain mark of truth according to the will of the Father; all others, however, are to be suspected, who separated themselves from the principal succession.( Irenaeus 1885 , Book IV, Chapter 26 ) ^ Irenaeus himself tells us ( Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 3, Section 4 ) cf Eusebius 1890 , Book V Chapter 20, Section 5ff that in his 'youth' he saw Polycarp , the Bishop of Smyrna who was martyred c156. This is the evidence used to assume that Irenaeus was born in Smyrna during the 130s–140s.

^ For other theories of atonement see Atonement in Christianity References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Domar: the calendrical and liturgical cycle of the Armenian Apostolic Orthodox Church Armenian Orthodox Theological Research Institute, 2002, p. 513-14 ^ Against Heresies 5.28.4 ^ Altaner, Bertold (1949), “Augustinus und Irenäus”. Theologische Quartalschrift, 129: 162–172.

^ Jurgens 1970 , p. 84.

^ a b c d Poncelet 1910 .

^ Eusebius 1890 , Book V Chapter 5 .

^ a b c Cross & Livingstone 2005 , p. 852.

^ Durant 1972 .

^ a b c d Wingren n.d .

^ a b Brown 1997 , p. 14.

^ Francis, Pope (21 January 2022).

"Decree of the Holy Father for the conferral of the title of Doctor of the Church on Saint Irenaeus of Lyon" . The Vatican Press Agency . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Eusebius 1890 , Book V Chapter 4, Section 1 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book I, Chapter 2 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book IV, Chapter 2 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book I, Chapter 13, Section 7 .

^ Eusebius 1890 , Book V Chapter 24, Section 1ff .

^ Alain Stevanovitch (2019).

"L'identification individuelle à partir d'ADN et d'ossements : les dessous du travail de la police scientifique" .

Corps .

17 (1): 199– 207.

doi : 10.3917/corp1.017.0199 .

^ Hervé Gattegnno (4 June 2024).

"La Revue de Presse" .

Radio Classique .

^ Christophe Cornevin (1 June 2024).

"D-Day : dans les coulisses du labo de criminalistique qui identifie les héros oubliés de la guerre" .

Le Figaro .

^ Calendarium Romanum , Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969, p. 96 ^ "Decreto del Santo Padre per il conferimento del titolo di Dottore della Chiesa a Sant'Ireneo di Lione" . Press.vatican.va. 21 January 2022 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 .

^ Junno Arocho Esteves (21 January 2022).

"Pope declares St. Irenaeus a doctor of the church" .

National Catholic Reporter .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2022 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 .

^ a b Lutheran Service Book . Concordia Publishing House. 2006. pp. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-7586-1217-5 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Grant 2006 , p. 6.

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 4 .

^ "St. Irenaeus of Lyon" .

Orthodox Church Quotes .

^ Most 1991 , p. 76.

^ Olson, Roger E. (1999).

The Story of Christian Theology: Twenty Centuries of Tradition and Reform . Downers Grove, Ill.: IVP Academic. p. 75 et seq.

ISBN 0-8308-1505-8 .

^ Pagels 2005 , p. 54.

^ Hartog 2015 , pp. 199, 200.

^ Pagels 1979 , p. 90.

^ Ehrman 2005 , p. 122.

^ Stark 2007 , Ch. 6.

^ a b Davis 2010 .

^ Tixeront 1920 , Section IV.

^ Eusebius 1890 , Book V Chapter 20, Section 1 .

^ Irenaeus 1885a .

^ Chadwick 1993 , p. 83.

^ Norris 2004 , p. 47.

^ Mysticism. Pub by E.P.Dutton and Co.Inc.

https://archive.org/details/mysticism00evel/page/104/mode/1up ^ Farmer 1997 .

^ Nielsen 1968 , pp. 48–49.

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 4, Section 2 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book IV, Chapter 33, Section 7 .

^ Parvis 2012 , p. 20.

^ Harris 1985 .

^ McDonald & Sanders 2001 , p. 277.

^ McDonald & Sanders 2001 , p. 280.

^ a b McDonald & Sanders 2001 , p. 368.

^ McDonald & Sanders 2001 , p. 267.

^ a b c Grant 1965 , p. 154.

^ Hoh 1919 , pp. 189–197.

^ Blackwell 2011 , p. 36.

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book IV, Chapter 33, Section 8 .

^ Epid. 1.5.

^ a b Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 22, Section 3 .

^ Carol 1986 , pp. 172–174.

^ a b c d e Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 18, Section 7 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 21, Section 9–10 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book V, Chapter 21, Section 1 .

^ Klager 2007 , p. 462, note 158.

^ Litwa 2014 , pp. 324–325.

^ Bandstra 1970 , pp. 47, 57.

^ "CHURCH FATHERS: Against Heresies, II.22 (St. Irenaeus)" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ a b Irenaeus 1885 , Book II, Chapter 22, Section 5 .

^ Irenaeus 1920 , p.

§77 .

^ "Pontius Pilate" .

Britannica.com . Retrieved 21 March 2012 .

^ Jona Lendering.

"Judaea" . Livius.org. Archived from the original on 3 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 March 2012 .

^ Bruce 1965 .

^ Bandstra 1970 , p. 48.

^ Romans 6:14 , Galatians 5:18 ^ a b Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 18, Section 1 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 19, Section 1 .

^ 1 Cor 15:21–22 ^ Col 2:13–4 ^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book V, Chapter 2, Section 2 .

^ Makowiecki 2024 .

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 11, Section 3 .

^ Litwa 2014 , pp. 312–313.

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book V, Chapter 16, Section 2 .

^ Nielsen 1968 , p. 11.

^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 18, Section 2 .

^ Irenaeus 2012 , pp. 176–177, endnote 48.

^ Bandstra 1970 , p. 50.

^ Phil 2:8 ^ Gen 3:17 ^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book V, Chapter 16, Section 3 .

^ Bandstra 1970 , p. 61.

^ 1 Corinthians 15:54 ^ Irenaeus 1885 , Book III, Chapter 23, Section 7-8 .

^ Gregory Thaumaturgus 1886 .

^ Grant 2006 , p. 23.

^ Arendzen 1908 .

^ Litwa 2014 , pp. 316–317.

^ Litwa 2014 , pp. 313–316.

^ Dickson, Dr. John.

"A Spectators Guide to the Gospel of Judas" (PDF) . Sydneyanglicans.net . Retrieved 24 November 2014 .

Sources [ edit ] Arendzen, John P. (1908).

"Demiurge" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Bandstra, Andrew J. (1970). "Paul and an Ancient Interpreter: A Comparison of the Teaching of Redemption in Paul and Irenaeus".

Calvin Theological Journal .

5 : 43– 63.

Blackwell, Ben C. (2011).

Christosis: Pauline Soteriology in Light of Deification in Irenaeus and Cyril of Alexandria . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-151672-6 .

Brown, Raymond Edward (1997).

An Introduction to the New Testament . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-24767-2 .

Bruce, F. F.

(1965) [1963]. "Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee and Peraea".

Annual of Leeds University Oriental Society .

5 .

Carol, Juniper B. (1986).

Why Jesus Christ?: Thomistic, Scotistic and Conciliatory Perspectives . Trinity Communications.

ISBN 978-0-937495-03-2 .

Cross, Frank Leslie ; Livingstone, Elizabeth A. (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280290-3 .

Chadwick, Henry (1993).

The Early Church (2nd ed.). Penguin.

Davis, Glenn (2010).

"The Development of the Canon of the New Testament – Irenaeus" .

ntcanon.org . Retrieved 24 November 2014 .

Durant, Will (1972).

Caesar and Christ: A History of Roman Civilization and of Christianity from Their Beginnings to A.D. 325 . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-11500-5 .

Ehrman, Bart D.

(2005).

Lost Christianities . Oxford: University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-518249-1 .

Eusebius (1890). Philip Schaff; Henry Wace (eds.).

Church History . Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, Second Series. Vol. 1. Translated by Arthur Cushman McGiffert. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co.

Farmer, David Hugh (1997).

The Oxford Dictionary of Saints . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280058-9 .

Grant, Robert McQueen (1965).

The Formation of the New Testament . Harper & Row.

Grant, Robert M.

(2006).

Irenaeus of Lyons . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-81518-0 .

Gregory Thaumaturgus (1886). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson; A. Cleveland Coxe (eds.).

On All the Saints . Ante-Nicene Fathers. Vol. 6. Translated by S.D.F. Salmond. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co.

Harris, Stephen L.

(1985), Understanding the Bible , Palo Alto: Mayfield Hartog, Paul A. (2015).

Orthodoxy and Heresy in Early Christian Contexts: Reconsidering the Bauer Thesis . Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 978-1-61097-504-9 .

Hoh, J. (1919).

Die Lehre des hl. Irenäus uber das Neue Testament . Munster i. W.: Neutestamentliche Abhandlungen. vii.

Irenaeus (1885). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson; A. Cleveland Coze (eds.).

Against Heresies . Ante-Nicene Fathers. Vol. 1. Translated by Alexander Roberts and William Rambaut. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Co. – via New Advent .

Irenaeus (1885a). Alexander Roberts; James Donaldson; A. Cleveland Coxe (eds.).

Fragments from the Lost Writings of Irenæus . Ante-Nicene Fathers. Vol. 1. Translated by Alexander Roberts. Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Publishing Co. – via New Advent .

Irenaeus (1920).

Demonstration of Apostolic Preaching . Translated by Armitage Robinson.

SPCK .

Irenaeus (2012). Dominic J. Unger (ed.).

St Irenaeus of Lyons: Against the Heresies III . Ancient Christian Writers: The Works of the Fathers in Translation. Translated by M.C. Steenberg. New York: The Newman Press.

Jurgens, W. A., ed. (1970).

The Faith of the Early Fathers: A Source-book of Theological and Historical Passages from the Christian Writings of the Pre-Nicene and Nicene Eras . Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-1021-3 .

Klager, Andrew P. (2007). " "Retaining and Reclaiming the Divine: Identification and the Recapitulation of Peace in St. Irenaeus of Lyons' Atonement Narrative". In Brad Jersak; Michael Hardin (eds.).

Stricken by God? Nonviolent Identification and the Victory of Christ . Grand Rapids: Eerdmans.

Litwa, M. David (2014). "The Wonderous Exchange: Irenaeus and Eastern Valentinians on the Soteriology of Interchange".

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

22 (3): 311– 340.

doi : 10.1353/earl.2014.0029 .

S2CID 170888989 .

Makowiecki, Mark (2024).

"Irenaeus and the Adam-Christ Typology in the Gospel of John" .

Themelios .

49 (2): 323– 333.

Most, William G. (1991).

The Holy Spirit and the Church . Notre Dame Institute Press.

McDonald, Lee Martin; Sanders, James A. (2001).

The Canon Debate . Baker.

ISBN 978-1-4412-4163-4 .

Nielsen, J.T. (1968).

Adam and Christ in the Theology of Irenaeus of Lyons: An Examination of the function of the Adam-Christ Typology in the Adversus Haereses of Ireaneus, against the Background of the Gnosticism of His Time . Van Gorcum's Theologische Bibliotheek. Asen, The Netherlands: Koninkliijke Van Gorcum 7 Comp. N.V.

Norris, Richard A (2004).

"Irenaeus of Lyons" . In Frances Young; Lewis Ayres; Andrew Louth (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Early Christian Literature . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-46083-5 .

Pagels, Elaine (1979).

The Gnostc Gospels . Vintage Books.

Pagels, Elaine (2005).

Beyond Belief . Pan.

Parvis, Paul (2012). "Who was Irenaeus? An Introduction to the Man and His Work". In Sara Parvis; Paul Foster (eds.).

Irenaeus: Life, Scripture, Legacy . Minneanpolis: Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-0-8006-9796-9 .

Poncelet, Albert (1910).

"St. Irenaeus" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Stark, Rodney (2007).

Cities of God . HarperCollins.

Steenberg, Ireaneus M.C. "The Role of Mary as Co-Recapitulator in St. Irenaeus of Lyons." Vigilae Christianae 58 (2004):117–137.

Tixeront, Rev. J. (1920). "Section IV: The Opponents of Heresy in the Second Century".

A Handbook of Patrology . St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co.

Wingren, Gustaf (n.d.), "Saint Irenaeus" , Encyclopædia Britannica Further reading [ edit ] Irenaeus, Proof of the Apostolic Preaching , trans JP Smith, (ACW 16, 1952) Irenaeus, Proof of the Apostolic Preaching , trans John Behr (PPS, 1997) Irenaeus, Against Heresies Archived 16 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine , trans. Alexander Roberts and William Rambaut, in Ante-Nicene Fathers , vol. 1, ed. Alexander Roberts, James Donaldson, and A. Cleveland Coxe (Buffalo, NY: Christian Literature Co., 1885).

Coxe, Arthur Cleveland, ed. (1885).

The Ante-Nicene Fathers . Buffalo, NY: The Christian Literature Company.

ISBN 9780802880871 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Edwards, Mark (2009).

Catholicity and Heresy in the Early Church . Ashgate.

ISBN 9780754662914 .

Eusebius (1932).

The Ecclesiastical History . Kirsopp Lake and John E.L. Oulton, trans. New York: Putnam.

Hägglund, Bengt (1968).

History of Theology . Gene J.Lund, trans. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing.

Minns, Denis (1994).

Irenaeus . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 0-87840-553-4 .

Payton Jr., James R.

Irenaeus on the Christian Faith: A Condensation of 'Against Heresies (Cambridge, James Clarke and Co Ltd, 2012).

Quasten, J. (1960).

Patrology: The Beginnings of Patristic Literature . Westminster, MD: Newman Press.

Schaff, Philip (1980).

History of the Christian Church: Ante-Nicene Christianity, A.D. 100–325 . Grand Rapids, Mich: Wm. Eerdmans.

ISBN 0-8028-8047-9 .

Tyson, Joseph B. (1973).

A Study of Early Christianity . New York: Macmillan.

Wolfson, Henry Austryn (1970).

The Philosophy of the Church Fathers: Faith, Trinity, Incarnation . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

External links [ edit ] Irenaeus at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Early Christian Writings Irenaeus Fragments from his lost works Alexander Roberts and William Rambaut 1885 Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol. 1. translation of Against Heresies A nineteenth-century translation of Irenaeus's work Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching Book II, ch. 22 , where Irenaeus argues his unconventional views about the age of Jesus and the length of his ministry.

EarlyChurch.org.uk Extensive bibliography.

Works by or about Irenaeus at the Internet Archive Works by Irenaeus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) [1] Pope Benedict XVI on St. Irenaeus Gregory S. Neal: "The Nature of Evil and the Irenaean Theodicy" Grace Incarnate (1988) Critique of Irenaeus , Elaine H. Pagels Critique of Pagel's article by Paul Mankowski Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes "St. Irenæus, Bishop of Lyons, Martyr" , Butler's Lives of the Saints "Catholic Online" "Santiebeati" The First Theologians: Irenaeus and Tertullian on YouTube a lecture by James L. Papandrea Catholic Church titles Preceded by Pothinus Bishop of Lyon 2nd century Succeeded by Zechariah v t e History of Christianity Spread History of theology Historicity of the Bible List of martyrs Timeline Centuries 1st 2nd and 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st Early Christianity Origins and Apostolic Age Background Chronology of Jesus birth baptism ministry crucifixion resurrection Great Commission ascension historical Jesus Holy Spirit Apostles in the New Testament Jewish Christianity Split Paul the Apostle Council of Jerusalem Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period Diversity Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Donatism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Canon development Persecution Apostolic / Church Fathers Clement of Rome Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Tertullian Origen Great Church Early African Late antiquity Constantine Constantinian shift Roman state religion Monasticism Councils Nicaea I Creed Christianity Athanasius Jerome Augustine Constantinople I Ephesus I Chalcedon Chalcedonian / Non-Chalcedonian Biblical canon Catholicism ( Timeline ) Papacy Development of primacy Eastern Orthodox opposition Peace and Truce of God Crusading movement Lateran IV Art patronage of Julius II Leo X Counter-Reformation Trent Art Catholic Reformation Jesuits Xavier Thomas More Monastery dissolution Wars Mass rocks and priest holes Guadalupe Jansenists Molinists Neo-Scholasticism Teresa Modernism Independent Catholics Vatican I and Vatican II Ecclesial community Eastern Christianity Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Church of the East Chrysostom Nestorianism Icons Iconodulism Iconoclasm Great Schism Fall of Constantinople Armenia Georgia Greece Egypt Syriac Ethiopia Ottoman Empire Bulgaria Russia Serbia North America Middle Ages Pelagianism Gregory I Celtic Germanic Anglo-Saxon Franks Gothic Scandinavian Iceland Slavs Bohemia Bulgaria Kievan Rus' Moravia Poland Pomerania Investiture Anselm Abelard Bernard Bogomils Bosnian Cathars Apostolic Brethren Dulcinian Crusades Waldensians Inquisition Early Scholasticism Christian mysticism Dominic Francis Bonaventure Aquinas Five Ways Wycliffe Avignon Papal Schism Bohemian Reformation Hus Conciliarism Synods Reformation and Protestantism Erasmus Eucharist Calvinist–Arminian debate Arminianism Wars Resistance theories Separation of church and state Nicodemites Hymnody of continental Europe Formal and material principles Law and Gospel Literature Protestant work ethic Lutheranism Luther Ninety-five Theses Diet of Worms Theology Bible Melanchthon Book of Concord Orthodoxy Eucharist Art Calvinism Zwingli Calvin Huguenots Presbyterianism Scotland Knox TULIP Baptism Dort Three Forms of Unity Westminster Orthodoxy Metrical psalters Anglicanism ( Timeline ) Henry VIII Cranmer Elizabethan 39 Articles Puritans Civil War Church music Book of Common Prayer King James Version Anabaptism Theology Radical Reformation Grebel Swiss Brethren Müntzer Martyrs' Synod Menno Simons Smyth Martyrs Mirror Ausbund 1640–1789 Revivalism Missionaries timeline Baptists Separation of church and state Edicts of toleration Congregationalism First Great Awakening Methodism Millerism Pietism Fostering of early experimental science Neo- and Old Lutherans 1789–present Camp meeting Holiness movement Second Great Awakening Restorationists Jehovah's Witnesses Mormonism Seventh-day Adventist Adventism Oxford Movement Laestadianism Finnish Awakening Christian existentialism Third Great Awakening Azusa Revival Gospel music Fundamentalist – Modernist controversy Pacifism Ecumenism Five solae Jesus movement Pentecostalism Charismatics Liberation theology Reformed epistemology Fourth Great Awakening Evangelical and Mainline Protestants Christian right and left Political influence of Evangelicalism in Latin America v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Irenaeus&oldid=1305818091 " Categories : 140s births 200s deaths 2nd-century apocalypticists 2nd-century bishops in Gaul 2nd-century Christian saints 2nd-century Christian theologians 2nd-century Greek writers 2nd-century Romans 3rd-century apocalypticists 3rd-century Greek writers 3rd-century Romans Ancient Smyrnaeans Anglican saints Bishops of Lyon Catholic Mariology Christian anti-Gnosticism Christian apologists Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Gallo-Roman saints Greek male non-fiction writers Greek religious writers Greek Roman Catholic writers Mariologists Roman Lyon Saints from Roman Anatolia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2019 Pages using infobox theologian with embed equal yes Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from May 2025 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2022 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 07:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Irenaeus 61 languages Add topic

