Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early usages 1.2 20th century 1.3 Modern revival 2 Definitions 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Scientific romance 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lietuvių 日本語 Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archaic literary genre Main article: History of science fiction "Maison tournante aérienne" (aerial rotating house).  This drawing, by French science fiction writer Albert Robida for his book Le Vingtième Siècle , a nineteenth-century conception of life in the twentieth century, depicts a dwelling that can rotate on a post, with an airship in the distance.  Ink over graphite underdrawing, c. 1883, digitally restored.

Scientific romance is an archaic, mainly British term for the genre of fiction now commonly known as science fiction . The term originated in the 1850s to describe both fiction and elements of scientific writing, but it has since come to refer to the science fiction of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, primarily that of Jules Verne , H. G. Wells and Arthur Conan Doyle . In recent years the term has come to be applied to science fiction written in a deliberately anachronistic style as a homage to or pastiche of the original scientific romances.

History [ edit ] Early usages [ edit ] The earliest use of the term "scientific romance" is thought to have been in 1845, when critics applied it to Robert Chambers's Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation , a speculative natural history published in 1844. It was used again in 1851 by the Edinburgh Ecclesiastical Journal and Literary Review in reference to Thoman Hunt's Panthea, or the Spirit of Nature .

[ 1 ] In 1859 the Southern Literary Messenger referred to Balzac's Ursule Mirouët as "a scientific romance of mesmerism".

[ 2 ] In addition, the term was sometimes used to dismiss a scientific principle considered by the writer to be fanciful, as in The Principles of Metaphysical and Ethical Science (1855), which stated that "Milton's conception of inorganic matter left to itself, without an indwelling soul, is not merely more poetical, but more philosophical and just, than the scientific romance, now generally repudiated by all rational inquirers, which represents it as necessarily imbued with the seminal principles of organization and life, and waking up by its own force from eternal quietude to eternal motion." [ 3 ] Then, in 1884, Charles Howard Hinton published a series of scientific and philosophical essays under the title Scientific Romances .

[ 4 ] 20th century [ edit ] "Scientific romance" is now commonly used to refer to science fiction of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, as in the anthologies Under the Moons of Mars: A History and Anthology of "The Scientific Romance" in the Munsey Magazines, 1912–1920 [ 5 ] and Scientific Romance in Britain: 1890–1950 .

[ 6 ] One of the earliest writers to be described in this way was the French astronomer and writer Camille Flammarion , whose Recits de l'infini and La fin du monde have both been described as scientific romances.

[ 7 ] The term is most widely applied to Jules Verne,  as in the 1879 edition of the American Cyclopædia , [ 8 ] and H. G. Wells , whose historical society continues to refer to his work as "scientific romances" today.

[ 9 ] Edgar Rice Burroughs 's A Princess of Mars (1912)  is also sometimes seen as a major work of scientific romance, [ 10 ] and Sam Moskowitz referred to him in 1958 as "the acknowledged master of the scientific romance," [ 11 ] though the scholar E. F. Bleiler views Burroughs as a writer involved in the "new development" of pulp science fiction that arose in the early 20th century.

[ 12 ] The same year as A Princess of Mars , Sir Arthur Conan Doyle published The Lost World , [ 13 ] which is also commonly referred to as a scientific romance.

[ 14 ] 1902 saw the cinematic release of Georges Méliès 's film Le Voyage dans la Lune ( A Trip to the Moon ); the time period and the fact that it is based partially on works by Verne and Wells has led to its being labelled as a scientific romance as well.

[ 15 ] Modern revival [ edit ] In recent years the term "scientific romance" has seen a revival, being self-applied in works of science fiction that deliberately ape previous styles. Examples include Christopher Priest 's The Space Machine: A Scientific Romance , [ 16 ] published in 1976, Ronald Wright 's Wells pastiche A Scientific Romance: A Novel , published in 1998, and the 1993 tabletop roleplaying game Forgotten Futures .

[ 17 ] Though it uses the term, Dennis Overbye 's novel Einstein in Love: A Scientific Romance [ 18 ] does not imitate science fiction of the past in the manner of the other novels mentioned.

Definitions [ edit ] Brian Stableford has argued, in Scientific Romance in Britain: 1890–1950 , [ 6 ] that early British science-fiction writers who used the  term "scientific romance" differed in several significant ways from American science fiction writers of the time. Most notably, the British writers tended to minimise the role of individual "heroes", took an "evolutionary perspective", held a bleak view of the future, and had little interest in space as a new frontier. Regarding "heroes", several novels by H. G. Wells have the protagonist as nameless, and often powerless, in the face of natural forces. The evolutionary perspective can be seen in tales involving long time periods, such as The War of the Worlds and The Time Machine by Wells, or Star Maker by Olaf Stapledon . Even in scientific romances that did not involve vast stretches of time, the issue of whether mankind was just another species subject to evolutionary pressures often arose, as can be seen in parts of The Hampdenshire Wonder by J. D. Beresford and several works by S. Fowler Wright . Regarding space, C. S. Lewis 's Space Trilogy took the position that "as long as humanity remains flawed and sinful, our exploration of other planets will tend to do them more harm than good"; and most scientific romance authors had not even that much interest in the topic. As for bleakness, it can be seen in many of the works by all the authors already cited, who deemed humanity flawed — either by original sin or, much more often, by biological factors inherited from our ape ancestors. Stableford also notes that some of the British scientific romances were saved from "being entirely gloomy" by their philosophical speculation (calling them works of "modest armchair philosophizing"). He cites E. V. Odle 's The Clockwork Man , John Gloag 's Tomorrow's Yesterday and Murray Constantine 's Proud Man as examples of this type of scientific romance.

[ 19 ] Nonetheless, not all British science fiction from that period comports with Stableford's thesis. Some, for example, revelled in adventures in space and took an optimistic view of the future. By the 1930s there were British authors such as Eric Frank Russell who were intentionally writing "science fiction" for American publication. At that point British writers who used the term "scientific romance" did so either because they were unaware of science fiction or because they chose not to be associated with it.

[ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] After the Second World War the influence of American science fiction caused the term "scientific romance" to lose favour, a process accelerated by the fact that few writers of scientific romance considered themselves "scientific romance" writers, instead viewing themselves as just writers  who occasionally happened to write scientific romances. Even so, the influence of the scientific romance era persisted in British science fiction.

John Wyndham 's work has been cited as providing "a bridge between traditional British scientific romance and the more varied science fiction which has replaced it".

[ 20 ] Some commentators believe scientific romance had some impact on the American variety.

See also [ edit ] Planetary romance Edisonade Romanticism in science Voyages Extraordinaires References [ edit ] ^ Before Science Fiction: Romances of Science and Scientific Romances , io9, accessed March 22, 2012 ^ Southern Literary Messenger: A Magazine Devoted to Literature, Science and Art , "Balzac", H.T. Tuckerman , Making of America, accessed March 22, 2012 ^ Bowen, Francis (1855), The Principles of Metaphysical and Ethical Science: Applied to the Evidences of Religion , Brewer and Tileston, p.150 , Google Books, accessed March 23, 2012 ^ Hinton, Charles (1884), Scientific Romances , W. Swan Sonnenschein & Co.

OpenLibrary.org, accessed March 24, 2012 ^ Moskowitz, Sam (1970) Under the Moons of Mars: A History and Anthology of "The Scientific Romance" in the Munsey Magazines, 1912–1920 , Holt Rinehart Winston, 978-0030818585 ^ a b Stableford, Brian (1985), Scientific Romance in Britain, 1890–1950 Palgrave Macmillan, 978-0312703059 ^ The Encyclopedia of Science, Flammarion, (Nicolas) Camille (1842–1925) , accessed March 24, 2012 ^ The American Cyclopædia (Vol. VII, 2nd ed.). New York: D. Appleton and Company. 1879. p. 407 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 .

^ The H.G. Wells Society , accessed March 23, 2012.

^ Voyages Extraordinaire , "1912: Zenith of the Scientific Romances" , accessed March 22, 2012 ^ EdgarRiceBurroughs.ca, "Tributes to Edgar Rice Burroughs" , accessed March 22, 2012.

^ E. F. Bleiler, Science Fiction: The Early Years (1990).  The Kent State University Press: Kent, Ohio.  Pg. xxii.

^ Doyle, Arthur Conan, (1912), The Lost World , Hodder & Stoughton ^ The Lost World 100th Anniversary , accessed March 24, 2012 ^ Spectacular Attractions - A Trip to the Moon / Le Voyage dans la Lune , accessed March 24, 2012.

^ Priest, Christopher (1976), The Space Machine: A Scientific Romance , Harper & Row ^ Forgotten Futures: The Scientific Romance Roleplaying Game , accessed March 24, 2012 ^ Overbye, Dennis (2000), Einstein in Love: A Scientific Romance , Viking Adult ^ Brian Stableford, Creators of Science Fiction , Wildside Press LLC, 2009.

ISBN 1434457591 (p. 57-58) ^ Ian Ousby, The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English , Cambridge University Press, 1993 (p. 1046) Bibliography [ edit ] Flatland by Edwin Abbott Abbott (more of a fantasy, but see its subtitle) The Hampdenshire Wonder by J. D. Beresford The Lost World by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle The Night Land by William Hope Hodgson The Purple Cloud by M. P. Shiel Last and First Men by Olaf Stapledon Last Men in London by Olaf Stapledon Odd John by Olaf Stapledon Star Maker by Olaf Stapledon Journey to the Center of the Earth by Jules Verne From the Earth to the Moon by Jules Verne Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas by Jules Verne The Mysterious Island by Jules Verne The Time Machine by H. G. Wells The War of the Worlds by H. G. Wells The Island of Dr. Moreau by H. G. Wells The Invisible Man by H. G. Wells Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus by Mary Shelley External links [ edit ] "The Victorian Bookshelf: The First Century of the Scientific Romance and other Related Works" v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scientific_romance&oldid=1288855969 " Categories : Science fiction genres Science fantasy Steampunk Submovements of Romanticism Adventure fiction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2008 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scientific romance 8 languages Add topic

