Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Philosophy 3 Christian theology Toggle Christian theology subsection 3.1 New Testament 3.2 Early Christianity 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ousia 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Interlingua 日本語 Português Română Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in ancient Greek philosophy and Christian theology This article is about the philosophical and theological term. For the band, see Ousia (band) . For the military term, see Byzantine navy .

This article should specify the language of its non-English content using {{ lang }} or {{ langx }} , {{ transliteration }} for transliterated languages, and {{ IPA }} for phonetic transcriptions, with an appropriate ISO 639 code . Wikipedia's multilingual support templates may also be used - notably grc for Ancient Greek.

See why .

( November 2021 ) Ousia ( / ˈ uː z i ə , ˈ uː s i ə , ˈ uː ʒ ə , ˈ uː ʃ ə / ; Ancient Greek : οὐσία ) is a philosophical and theological term, originally used in ancient Greek philosophy , then later in Christian theology . It was used by various ancient Greek philosophers, especially Aristotle , as a primary designation for philosophical concepts of essence or substance . It is analogous to concepts of being and the ontological in contemporary philosophy . In Christian theology , the concept of θεία ουσία ( divine essence ) is one of the most important doctrinal concepts, central to the development of trinitarian doctrine .

[ 1 ] The Ancient Greek term θεία ουσία ( theia ousia ; divine essence ) was translated in Latin as essentia or substantia , and hence in English as essence or substance .

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term οὐσία is an Ancient Greek noun, formed on the feminine present participle of the verb εἰμί , eimí , meaning "to be, I am", so similar grammatically to the English noun "being". There was no equivalent grammatical formation in Latin , and it was translated as essentia or substantia .

Cicero coined essentia [ 3 ] and the philosopher Seneca and rhetorician Quintilian used it as equivalent for οὐσία , while Apuleius rendered οὐσία both as essentia or substantia . In order to designate οὐσία , early Christian theologian Tertullian favored the use of substantia over essentia , while Augustine of Hippo and Boethius took the opposite stance, preferring the use of essentia as designation for οὐσία .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Some of the most prominent Latin authors, like Hilary of Poitiers , noted that those variants were often being used with different meanings.

[ 6 ] Some modern authors also suggest that the Ancient Greek term οὐσία is properly translated as essentia ( essence ), while substantia has a wider spectrum of meanings.

[ 7 ] From οὐσία (essence), philosophical and theological term οὐσιότης (essentiality) was also derived. It was used by Platonists , like Alcinous , as designation for one of the basic properties of divinity or godhead.

[ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Aristotle defined πρῶται οὐσίαι ( protai ousiai ; primary essences ) in the Categories as that which is neither said of nor in any subject, e.g., "this human" in particular , or "this ox". The genera in biology and other natural kinds are substances in a secondary sense, as universals , formally defined by the essential qualities of the primary substances; i.e., the individual members of those kinds.

[ 9 ] In Book IV of Metaphysics Aristotle explores the nature and attributes of being (ousia). Aristotle divides the things that there are, or "beings," into categories. Aristotle calls these substances and argues that there are many senses in which a thing may be said "to be" but it is related to one central point and is ambiguous.

[ 10 ] Aristotle states that there are both primary and secondary substances. In Categories Aristotle argues that primary substances are ontologically based and if the primary substances did not exist then it would be impossible for other things to exist.

[ 11 ] The other things are regarded as the secondary substances (also known as accidents). Secondary substances are thus ontologically dependent on substances.

[ 11 ] In Metaphysics , Aristotle states that everything which is healthy is related to health (primary substance) as in one sense because it preserves health and in the other because it is capable of it. Without the primary substance (health) we would not be able to have the secondary substances (anything related to health). While all the secondary substances are deemed "to be" it is in relation to the primary substance .

[ 10 ] The question, what is being, is seeking an answer to something "that is." A contemporary example in rhetoric would be to look at a color. Using white as an example, when we define a color, we define it by association. Snow is white. Paper is white. A cow is white. But what is white? While we are saying things that are white, we are not defining what white is without qualification. Ousia is thus the answer to the question of "what is being" when the question is without qualification. The unqualified answer of what is white is the ousia of white.

Much later, Martin Heidegger said that the original meaning of the word ousia was lost in its translation to the Latin, and, subsequently, in its translation to modern languages. For him, ousia means Being , not substance , that is, not some thing or some being that "stood" (-stance) "under" (sub-). Moreover, he also used the binomial parousia – apousia , denoting presence–absence , [ clarification needed ] and hypostasis denoting existence .

[ 12 ] Christian theology [ edit ] Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e The concept of θεία οὐσία ( theia ousia ; divine essence ) is one of the most important concepts in Christian theology . It was developed gradually by Early Church Fathers during the first centuries of Christian History . Central debates over the doctrinal use and meaning of οὐσία were held during the 4th century, and also continued later, some of them lasting up to the present day.

[ 1 ] New Testament [ edit ] The word ousia is used in the New Testament only in relation to the substance in the sense of goods , twice in the parable of the Prodigal Son where the son asked his father to divide to him his inheritance, and then wasted it on riotous living.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] An apparently related word, epiousios (affixing the prefix epi- to the word), is used in the Lord's Prayer , but nowhere else in the scriptures. Elsewhere, it was believed to be present in one papyrus (a list of expenses) among expenses for chick-peas, straw, etc., and for material.

[ 15 ] In 1998, according to a xerographic copy of a papyrus found in the Yale Papyrus Collection (from the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library) inventory 19 (a.k.a.

P.C.+YBR inv 19 ), it was suggested that the document had been transcribed differently from other early manuscripts and that the actual word used in that particular papyrus was elaiou , meaning "oil".

[ 16 ] Early Christianity [ edit ] Origen (d. 251) used ousia in defining God as one genus of ousia , while being three, distinct species of hypostasis : the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The Synods of Antioch condemned the word homoousios (same essence) because it originated in pagan Greek philosophy.

[ citation needed ] John Chapman's Catholic Encyclopedia entry for Paul of Samosata states: It must be regarded as certain that the council, which condemned Paul, rejected the term homoousios ; but, naturally, only in a false sense, used by Paul; not, it seems, because he meant by it a unity of Hypostasis in the Trinity (so St. Hilary), but because he intended, by it, a common essence, out of which both Father and Son proceeded, or which it divided between them – so St. Basil and St. Athanasius; but the question is not clear. The objectors to the Nicene doctrine in the fourth century made copious use of this disapproval of the Nicene word by a famous council.

[ 17 ] In 325, the First Council of Nicaea condemned Arianism and formulated the Nicene Creed , which stated that in the Godhead the Son was Homoousios (same in essence) of the Father. However, controversy did not stop and many Eastern clerics rejected the term because of its earlier condemnation in the usage of Paul of Samosata. Subsequent Emperors Constantius II (reigned 337–361) and Valens (reigned 364–378) supported Arianism and theologians came up with alternative wordings like Homoios (similar), homoiousios (similar in essence), or Anomoios (unsimilar). While the Homoios achieved the support of several councils and the Emperors, those of an opposing view were suppressed. The adherents of the Homoiousios eventually joined forces with the (mostly Western) adherents of the Homoousios and accepted the formulation of the Nicene Creed .

The generally agreed-upon meaning of ousia in Eastern Christianity is "all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in another" – in contrast to hypostasis , which is used to mean "reality" or "existence".

[ 18 ] John Damascene gives the following definition of the conceptual value of the two terms in his Dialectic: Ousia is a thing that exists by itself, and which has need of nothing else for its consistency . Again, ousia is all that subsists by itself and which has not its being in another.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Philosophy portal Atzmus Consubstantial Duns Scotus Essence–energies distinction Haecceity Hypokeimenon Metousiosis Noumenon Quiddity References [ edit ] ^ a b Athanasopoulos & Schneider 2013 .

^ Aquina, Thomas (2003).

"Book One" .

Commentary on Aristotle's Physics . A&C Black. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1843715450 .

^ Conte, G.B.: "Latin Literature: a history" (1987) p. 199 ^ Owens 1951 , pp. 137–154.

^ Brown 1996 , p. 276.

^ Weedman 2007 .

^ Pásztori-Kupán 2006 , pp. 59–60.

^ Bracht 2009 , p. 111.

^ Cohen, S. Marc (2004).

"Lecture on Categories" .

Primary substances are fundamental in that "if they did not exist it would be impossible for any of the other things to exist." [ Categories , 2b5] ^ a b Aristotle.

"Metaphysics" (PDF) .

^ a b Cohen, Mark.

"Substances" (PDF) .

^ Heidegger 1996 .

^ Thomas Mozley The creed or a philosophy 1893 p. 303 "III 'Ousia' In The New Testament The only appearance of this word in the New Testament is in two successive verses of the Parable of the Prodigal Son. It there designates first the 'living' which the Prodigal Son compelled his father..." ^ "G3776 – ousia – Strong's Greek Lexicon (kjv)" .

Blue Letter Bible .

^ Kittel, G., Bromiley, G. W., & Friedrich, G. (Eds.). Theological dictionary of the New Testament (electronic ed., Vol. 2, pp. 590–591). Grand Rapids, MI: Eerdmans.

^ Discussion on the B-Greek mailing list.

2005 ^ John Chapman.

"Catholic Encyclopedia: Paul of Samosata" .

www.newadvent.org .

^ Lossky 1976 , p. 51.

^ Lossky 1976 , p. 50.

Bibliography [ edit ] Athanasopoulos, Constantinos; Schneider, Christoph, eds. (2013).

Divine Essence and Divine Energies: Ecumenical Reflections on the Presence of God . Cambridge, UK: James Clarke & Co.

ISBN 978-0227900086 .

Bracht, Katharina (2009). "God and Methodius".

God in Early Christian Thought . Leiden; Boston: Brill. pp.

105– 122.

ISBN 978-9004174122 .

Brentano, Franz (1976) [1862].

On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle . Berkeley: University of California Press.

Brown, Stephen F. (1996). "Theology and Philosophy".

Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide . Washington, D.C.: CUA Press. pp.

267– 287.

ISBN 978-0813208428 .

Davis, Leo Donald (1983).

The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325–787): Their History and Theology . Liturgical Press.

ISBN 0814656161 .

) Heidegger, Martin (1996).

Being and Time: A Translation of Sein und Zeit . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0791426777 .

Lossky, Vladimir (1976) [1957].

The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church . Crestwood: St Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 978-0913836316 .

Loux, Michael J. (2008) [1991].

Primary Ousia: An Essay on Aristotle's Metaphysics Z and H . Ithaca & London: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0801474880 .

Motte, André; Somville, Pierre, eds. (2008).

Ousia dans la philosophie grecque des origines à Aristote . Louvain-la-Neuve: Peeters.

ISBN 978-9042919839 .

Owens, Joseph (1951).

The Doctrine of Being in the Aristotelian Metaphysics: A Study in the Greek Background of Mediaeval Thought . Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

Pásztori-Kupán, István (2006).

Theodoret of Cyrus . London & New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1134391769 .

Weedman, Mark (2007).

The Trinitarian Theology of Hilary of Poitiers . Leiden; Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004162242 .

External links [ edit ] Look up ousia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Catholic Encyclopedia: Homoousion Schaff's Seven Ecumenical Councils: Excursus on the Word Homousios v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases : National France BnF data NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐scswz
Cached time: 20250814215706
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.714 seconds
Real time usage: 0.841 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5036/1000000
Revision size: 16269/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 188591/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25067/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 195099/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.438/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23086544/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  709.388      1 -total
 15.72%  111.490     13 Template:Cite_book
 13.71%   97.246      1 Template:Reflist
 13.23%   93.845      1 Template:Eastern_Orthodox_sidebar
 12.86%   91.212      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.06%   85.548      1 Template:Langx
  9.35%   66.349      4 Template:Navbox
  7.45%   52.816      1 Template:Short_description
  7.38%   52.369      1 Template:Cleanup_lang
  6.94%   49.257      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30864783:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215706 and revision id 1300452327. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ousia&oldid=1300452327 " Categories : Philosophy of Aristotle Christian terminology Christianity and Hellenistic philosophy Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Greek words and phrases New Testament Greek words and phrases Religious philosophical concepts Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Trinitarianism Nature of Jesus Christ Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with non-English text lacking appropriate markup from November 2021 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2011 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 11:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ousia 13 languages Add topic

