Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Computational prediction 2 Examples 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Genomic island 6 languages العربية Asturianu Català Español Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a genome that has evidence of horizontal origins This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Genomic island" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A genomic island ( GI ) is part of a genome that has evidence of horizontal origins .

[ 1 ] The term is usually used in microbiology , especially with regard to bacteria . A GI can code for many functions, can be involved in symbiosis or pathogenesis , and may help an organism's adaptation. Many sub-classes of GIs exist that are based on the function that they confer.

[ 2 ] For example, a GI associated with pathogenesis is often called a pathogenicity island (PAIs), while GIs that contain many antibiotic resistant genes are referred to as antibiotic resistance islands. The same GI can occur in distantly related species as a result of various types of horizontal gene transfer (transformation, conjugation, transduction). This can be determined by base composition analysis, as well as phylogeny estimations.

Computational prediction [ edit ] Main article: Inferring horizontal gene transfer Various genomic island predictions programs have been developed. These tools can be broadly grouped into sequence based methods and comparative genomics /phylogeny based methods.

Sequence based methods depend on the naturally occurring variation that exists between the genome sequence composition of different species. Genomic regions that show abnormal sequence composition (such as nucleotide bias or codon bias) suggests that these regions may have been horizontally transferred. Two major problems with these methods are that false predictions can occur due to natural variation in the genome (sometimes due to highly expressed genes) and that horizontally transferred DNA will ameliorate (change to the host genome) over time; therefore, limiting predictions to only recently acquired GIs.

Comparative genomics based methods try to identify regions that show signs that they have been horizontally transferred using information from several related species. For example, a genomic region that is present in one species, but is not present in several other related species suggests that the region may have been horizontally transferred. The alternative explanations are (i) that the region was present in the common ancestor but has been lost in all the other species being compared, or (ii) that the region was absent in the common ancestor but was acquired through mutation and selection in the species in which it is still found. The argument for multiple deletions of the region would be strengthened if there is evidence from outgroups that the region was present in the common ancestor, or if the phylogeny implies relatively few actual deletion events would be required. The argument for acquisition via mutation would be strengthened if the species with the region is known to have diverged substantially from the other species, or if the region in question is small. The plausibility of either (i) or (ii) would be modified if taxon sampling omitted many extinct species that may have possessed the region, and particularly if extinction was correlated with the presence of the region.

One example of a method that integrates several of the most accurate GI prediction methods is IslandViewer.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] In bacteria , many type III and type IV secretion systems are located on genomic islands. These "islands" are characterised by their large size(>10 Kb ), their frequent association with tRNA-encoding genes and a different G+C content compared with the rest of the genome. Many genomic islands are flanked by repeat structures and carry fragments of other mobile elements such as phages and plasmids . Some genomic islands, including those adjacent to integrative and conjugative elements (ICEs), can excise themselves spontaneously from the chromosome and can be transferred to other suitable recipients.

[ 4 ] While excision is dependent on the ICE machinery present, integration is attributed to integrases present on the genomic islands.

References [ edit ] ^ Langille, MG; Hsiao, WW; Brinkman, FS (May 2010). "Detecting genomic islands using bioinformatics approaches".

Nature Reviews. Microbiology .

8 (5): 373– 82.

doi : 10.1038/nrmicro2350 .

PMID 20395967 .

S2CID 2373228 .

^ Juhas, Mario; van der Meer, Jan Roelof; Gaillard, Muriel; Harding, Rosalind M; Hood, Derek W; Crook, Derrick W (March 2009).

"Genomic islands: tools of bacterial horizontal gene transfer and evolution" .

FEMS Microbiology Reviews .

33 (2): 376– 393.

doi : 10.1111/j.1574-6976.2008.00136.x .

ISSN 0168-6445 .

PMC 2704930 .

PMID 19178566 .

^ Langille MG, Brinkman FS (March 2009).

"IslandViewer: an integrated interface for computational identification and visualization of genomic islands" .

Bioinformatics .

25 (5): 664– 5.

doi : 10.1093/bioinformatics/btp030 .

PMC 2647836 .

PMID 19151094 .

^ Johnson, Christopher M.; Grossman, Alan D. (2015).

"Integrative and Conjugative Elements (ICEs): What They Do and How They Work" .

Annual Review of Genetics .

49 : 577– 601.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-genet-112414-055018 .

ISSN 0066-4197 .

PMC 5180612 .

PMID 26473380 .

External links [ edit ] Genomic+islands at the U.S. National Library of Medicine Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) v t e Genetics : repeated sequence , transposon , gene duplication Repeatome Repeated sequence Tandem repeats Satellite DNA Variable number tandem repeat / Minisatellite Short tandem repeat/Microsatellite ( Trinucleotide repeat disorders ) Macrosatellite Interspersed repeat Gene conversion Retrotransposon DNA transposon Polinton Helitron Other Inverted repeat Direct repeat Transposon Retrotransposon SINEs Alu sequence MIR LINEs LINE1 LINE2 LTRs HERV MER4 retroposon DNA transposon Academ Crypton Dada EnSpm/CACTA Ginger1 Ginger2 Harbinger hAT Helitron IS3EU ISL2EU Kolobok Tc1/mariner Merlin MuDR Novosib P element PiggyBac Polinton Sola Transib Zator Zisupton Gene duplication Gene amplification Tandemly arrayed genes Ribosomal DNA Gene family Gene cluster Pseudogene See also Genomic island Pathogenicity island Symbiosis island Low copy repeats CRISPR Telomere Protein tandem repeats v t e Self-replicating organic structures Cellular life Bacteria Archaea Eukaryota Animalia Fungi Plantae Protista Incertae sedis Parakaryon Biological dark matter Virus dsDNA virus Giant virus ssDNA virus dsRNA virus (+)ssRNA virus (−)ssRNA virus ssRNA-RT virus dsDNA-RT virus Subviral agents Viroid Pospiviroidae Avsunviroidae Helper-virus dependent Satellite ssRNA satellite virus dsDNA satellite virus ( Virophage ) ssDNA satellite virus ssDNA satellite dsRNA satellite ssRNA satellite ( Virusoid ) Satellite-like nucleic acids RNA DNA Other Defective interfering particle RNA DNA Prion Mammalian prion Fungal prion Nucleic acid self-replication Mobile genetic elements Mobilome Horizontal gene transfer Genomic island Transposable element Class I or retrotransposon Class II or DNA transposon Plasmid Fertility Resistance Col Degradative Virulence / Ti Cryptic Cosmid Fosmid Phagemid Group I intron Group II intron Retrozyme Other aspects DNA replication RNA replication Chromosome Linear Circular Extrachromosomal DNA Secondary chromosome Genome Gene Gene duplication Non-coding DNA Origin of replication Replicon Endogenous viral element Provirus Prophage Endogenous retrovirus Transpoviron Repeated sequences in DNA Tandem repeat Interspersed repeat Endosymbiosis Mitochondrion Mitosome Hydrogenosome Plastid Chloroplast Chromoplast Gerontoplast Leucoplast Apicoplast Kappa organism Organs Bacteriome Trophosome Nitroplast Abiogenesis Last universal common ancestor Earliest known life forms ?

RNA life Ribozyme † Protocell Coacervate Proteinoid Sulphobe Research Model lipid bilayer Jeewanu See also Organism Cell Cell division Artificial cell Non-cellular life Synthetic virus Viral vector Helper dependent virus ?

Nanobacterium ?

Nanobe Cancer cell HeLa Clonally transmissible cancer Virome Authority control databases IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genomic_island&oldid=1248726118 " Categories : Cell biology Mobile genetic elements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2011 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 October 2024, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Genomic island 6 languages Add topic

