Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Features Toggle Features subsection 2.1 Maintenance and cure 2.2 Personal injuries to passengers 2.3 Maritime liens and mortgages 2.4 Salvage and treasure salvage 2.5 Allision 3 International conventions 4 Piracy 5 Individual countries Toggle Individual countries subsection 5.1 Britain and certain other Commonwealth countries 5.2 Canada 5.3 United States 5.3.1 Jurisdiction 5.3.2 Applicable law 5.3.3 Features of U.S. admiralty law 5.3.3.1 Cargo claims 5.3.3.2 Personal injuries to seamen 5.4 Pakistan 6 Academic programs 7 Conspiracy theory 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Maritime law 31 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law of the oceans and their use Admiralty and maritime law History Code of Hammurabi Corpus Juris Civilis Digesta Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris Amalfian Laws Hanseatic League Features Fishing Illegal Fisheries law Maritime transport Shipping / ferry Cargo Freight Shipbuilding Merchant marine Cargo ship Passenger ship Mortgage Registration Marine insurance Act of God Cargo Collision General average Seaworthiness Total loss Maritime security Letter of marque Drugs Piracy Pollution Smuggling Wartime prizes Contract of carriage / charterparty Affreightment Agency Barratry Bill of lading Brokerage Chartering Consignment Demurrage Force majeure Invoice Commercial Pro forma Laytime Lien Maritime Manifest Packing list Proof of delivery Salvage Law Terms International Waybill Parties Agent Factor Freight forwarder Captain (Master) The captain goes down with the ship Carrier Charterer Freight company Manager Consignee Consignor Principal Owner Seaman Mutiny Stevedore Judiciaries Admiralty court Vice admiralty court International organizations International Maritime Organization Comité Maritime International London Maritime Arbitrators Association International Association of Classification Societies ( Lloyd's Register ) International conventions Hague-Visby Rules Hamburg Rules Rotterdam Rules Maritime Labour Convention International Convention on Salvage United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) International piracy law SOLAS Convention MARPOL Convention Ballast Water Management Convention Anti-fouling Convention International Convention on Load Lines International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea SAR Convention Athens Convention Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic International Codes IMDG Code ISM Code ISPS Code Polar Code IGC Code IBC Code TDC Code IS Code International Grain Code IMSBC Code INF Code v t e Maritime law or admiralty law is a body of law that governs nautical issues and private maritime disputes. Admiralty law consists of both domestic law on maritime activities, and private international law governing the relationships between private parties operating or using ocean-going ships. While each legal jurisdiction usually has its own legislation governing maritime matters, the international nature of the topic and the need for uniformity has, since 1900, led to considerable international maritime law developments, including numerous multilateral treaties.

[ a ] Admiralty law, which mainly governs the relations of private parties, is distinguished from the law of the sea , a body of public international law regulating maritime relationships between nations, such as navigational rights, mineral rights , and jurisdiction over coastal waters. While admiralty law is adjudicated in national courts, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has been adopted by 167 countries [ b ] and the European Union , and disputes are resolved at the ITLOS tribunal in Hamburg.

History [ edit ] Shipping was one of the earliest channels of commerce, and rules for resolving maritime trade disputes were developed early. An ancient example was the Rhodian law ( Nomos Rhodion Nautikos ), of which no extensive written specimen has survived, but which is alluded to in other legal texts (Roman and Byzantine legal codes), and later the customs of the Consulate of the Sea and the Hanseatic League . In southern Italy the Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris (1063) at Trani and the Amalfian Laws were in effect from an early date.

Bracton notes that admiralty law was also used as an alternative to the common law in Norman England, which previously required voluntary submission to it by entering a plea seeking judgment from the court.

[ 2 ] A leading sponsor of admiralty law in Europe was the French Queen Eleanor of Aquitaine . Eleanor had learned about admiralty law while on the Second Crusade in the eastern Mediterranean with her first husband, King Louis VII of France . Eleanor then established admiralty law on the island of Oléron , where it was published as the Rolls of Oléron . Some time later, while she was in London as regent for her son, King Richard I of England , Eleanor instituted admiralty law in England as well.

In England and Wales , a special Admiralty Court handles all admiralty cases. Despite early reliance upon civil law concepts derived from the Corpus Juris Civilis of Justinian , the English Admiralty Court is a common law court, albeit sui generis , that was initially somewhat distinct from other English courts. After around 1750, as the Industrial Revolution took hold and English maritime commerce burgeoned, the Admiralty Court became a fertile source of legal innovation to meet the new situations of the modern economy. The Judicature Acts of 1873–1875 abolished the Admiralty Court as such, and it became conflated in the new Probate, Divorce and Admiralty division of the High Court. However, when the PDA was abolished and replaced by a new Family Division, admiralty jurisdiction passed to a so-called Admiralty Court which was effectively the King's Bench sitting to hear nautical cases. The Senior Courts Act 1981 then clarified the admiralty jurisdiction of the Queen's Bench, so England and Wales once again has a distinct Admiralty Court (albeit no longer based in the Royal Courts of Justice , but in the Rolls Building ).

English Admiralty courts were prominent in the disputes leading to the American Revolution . For example, the phrase in the Declaration of Independence "For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury" refers to the practice of the UK Parliament giving the Admiralty Courts jurisdiction to enforce the Stamp Act 1765 in the American colonies.

[ 3 ] The Stamp Act was unpopular in America, so a colonial jury would be unlikely to convict a colonist of its violation. The Admiralty Court, which has never allowed trial by jury, was thus empowered to enforce the statute more effectively.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Admiralty law gradually became part of United States law through admiralty cases arising after the adoption of the U.S. Constitution in 1789. Many American lawyers prominent in the American Revolution were admiralty and maritime lawyers, including Alexander Hamilton in New York and John Adams in Massachusetts .

In 1787, Thomas Jefferson wrote to James Madison proposing that the US Constitution, then under consideration by the States, be amended to include "trial by jury in all matters of fact triable by the laws of the land and not by the laws of Nations". The result was the United States Bill of Rights .

[ 6 ] Alexander Hamilton and John Adams were both admiralty lawyers and Adams represented John Hancock in an admiralty case in colonial Boston involving seizure of one of Hancock's ships for violations of customs regulations. In the more modern era, Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes was an admiralty lawyer before ascending to the bench.

Features [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Matters dealt by admiralty law include marine commerce, marine navigation , salvage , maritime pollution , seafarers' rights , and the carriage by sea of both passengers and goods . Admiralty law also covers land-based commercial activities that are maritime in character, such as marine insurance. Some lawyers prefer to reserve the term "admiralty law" for "wet law" (e.g. salvage, collisions, ship arrest, towage, liens and limitation), and use "maritime law" only for "dry law" (e.g. carriage of goods and people, marine insurance , and the Maritime Labour Convention ).

[ c ] [ citation needed ] Maintenance and cure [ edit ] The doctrine of maintenance and cure is rooted in Article VI of the Rolls of Oléron promulgated in about 1160 AD. The obligation to "cure" requires a shipowner to provide medical care free of charge to a seaman injured in the service of the ship, until the seaman has reached "maximum medical cure". The concept of "maximum medical cure" is more extensive than the concept "maximum medical improvement". The obligation to "cure" a seaman includes the obligation to provide him with medications and medical devices which improve his ability to function, even if they do not "improve" his actual condition. They may include long-term treatments that permit him to continue to function well. Common examples include prostheses, wheelchairs, and pain medications.

The obligation of "maintenance" requires the shipowner to provide a seaman with his basic living expenses while he is convalescing.  Once a seaman is able to work,  he is expected to maintain himself.  Consequently,  a seaman can lose his right to maintenance,  while the obligation to provide cure is ongoing.

A seaman who is required to sue a shipowner to recover maintenance and cure may also recover his attorneys fees.

Vaughan v. Atkinson , 369 U.S. 527 (1962). If a shipowner's breach of the obligation to provide maintenance and cure is willful and wanton, the shipowner may be subject to punitive damages. See Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend , 557 U.S. 404 (2009) (J. Thomas).

Personal injuries to passengers [ edit ] Main article: Negligence Shipowners owe a duty of reasonable care to passengers. Consequently, passengers who are injured aboard ships may bring suit as if they had been injured ashore through the negligence of a third party. The passenger bears the burden of proving that the shipowner was negligent. While personal injury cases must generally be pursued within three years, suits against cruise lines may need to be brought within one year because of limitations contained in the passenger ticket. Notice requirements in the ticket may require a formal notice to be brought within six months of the injury. Most US cruise line passenger tickets also have provisions requiring that suit to be brought in either Miami or Seattle .

In England , the 1954 case of Adler v Dickson (The Himalaya) [1954] [ 7 ] allowed a shipping line to escape liability when a bosun's negligence resulted in a passenger being injured. Since then, the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 has made it unlawful to exclude liability for death or personal injury caused by one's negligence. (Since then, however, the so-called " Himalaya clause " has become a useful way for a contractor to pass on the protection of a limitation clause to his employees, agents and third-party contractors.) Maritime liens and mortgages [ edit ] See also: Maritime lien Banks which loan money to purchase ships, vendors who supply ships with necessaries like fuel and stores, seamen who are due wages, and many others have a lien against the ship to guarantee payment. To enforce the lien, the ship must be arrested or seized. In the United States, an action to enforce a lien against a US ship must be brought in federal court and cannot be done in state court, except for under the reverse Erie Doctrine whereby state courts can apply federal law.

Salvage and treasure salvage [ edit ] See also: Marine salvage When property is lost at sea and rescued by another, the rescuer (salvor) is entitled to claim a salvage award on the salvaged property. This applies only to the saving of property: there is no "life salvage", as all mariners have a duty to save the lives of others in peril without expectation of reward.

There are two types of salvage: contract salvage and pure salvage (merit salvage). In contract salvage, the owner of the property and the salvor enter into a salvage contract prior to salvage operations, for an agreed payment. The most common form is a " Lloyd's Open Form Salvage Contract ".

In pure salvage, there is no contract between the owner of the goods and the salvor, and the relationship is imputed by law. The salvor must bring his claim for salvage in court, which awards salvage based upon the merit of the service and the value of the salvaged property.

Pure salvage claims are divided into "high-order" and "low-order" salvage. In high-order salvage, the salvor and his crew risk of injury and damage to equipment during salvage operations: for example boarding a sinking ship in heavy weather, boarding a ship on fire, raising a ship which has already sunk, or towing a ship away from the surf near shore. In low-order salvage, the salvor takes little or no personal risk, for example towing a vessel in calm seas, supplying fuel, or pulling a vessel off a sand bar. High-order salvage earns a substantially greater salvage award.

In both high-order and low-order salvage, the amount of the salvage award is based first upon the value of the property saved. If nothing is saved, or if additional damage is done, there will be no award. The other factors to be considered are the skills of the salvor, the peril to which the salvaged property was exposed, the value of the property which was risked in effecting the salvage, the amount of time and money expended, etc.

A pure or merit salvage award will seldom exceed 50 percent of the value of the property saved. The exception is in the case of treasure salvage. Because sunken treasure has generally been lost for hundreds of years, while the original owner (or insurer, if the vessel was insured) continues to have an interest in it, the salvor or finder will generally get the majority of the value of the property. While sunken ships from the Spanish Main (such as Nuestra Señora de Atocha in the Florida Keys ) are the most famous type of treasure salvage, other types – including German submarines from World War II which can hold valuable historical artifacts, American Civil War ships (the USS Maple Leaf in the St. Johns River , and the CSS Virginia in Chesapeake Bay ), and sunken merchant ships (the SS Central America off Cape Hatteras ) – have all been the subject of treasure salvage awards.

[ citation needed ] Due to refinements in side-scanning sonars, many more ships are now being located and treasure salvage is less risky, although it is still highly speculative and expensive.

Allision [ edit ] In maritime law, it is occasionally desirable to distinguish between the situation of a vessel striking a moving object and that of it striking a stationary object. The word " allision " is then used to mean the striking of a stationary object, while " collision " is used to mean the striking of a moving object.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Thus, when two vessels run against each other, courts typically use the term collision whereas when one vessel runs against a stationary object, they typically use the term allision .

[ 11 ] The fixed or stationary object could be a bridge or dock .

While there is no great difference between the two terms and often they are even used interchangeably, determining the difference helps clarify the circumstances of emergencies and adapt accordingly.

[ 12 ] International conventions [ edit ] Before the mid-1970s, most international conventions concerning maritime trade and commerce originated in a private organization of maritime lawyers known as the Comité Maritime International (International Maritime Committee or CMI). Founded in 1897, the CMI drafted numerous international conventions, including the Hague Rules (International Convention on Bills of Lading),  the Visby Amendments (amending the Hague Rules), the Salvage Convention, and many others.  While the CMI continues to function in an advisory capacity, many of its functions have been taken over by the International Maritime Organization (IMO). In 1948 an international conference in Geneva adopted a convention formally establishing IMO (the original name was the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization, or IMCO, but the name was changed in 1982 to IMO with UN Convention on the Law of the Sea). The  IMO Convention entered into force in 1958 and the new Organization met for the first time the following year.

[ 13 ] [ bare URL ] The IMO has prepared numerous international conventions concerning maritime safety, including the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), the Standards for Training, Certification, and Watchkeeping ( STCW ),  the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (Collision Regulations or COLREGS), Maritime Pollution Regulations ( MARPOL ), International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR Convention) and others.  The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) defined a treaty regarding protection of the marine environment and various maritime boundaries . Restrictions on international fishing such as International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling also form part of the body of conventions in international waters. Other commercial conventions include the "International Convention relating to the Limitation of the Liability of Owners of Sea-Going Ships", Brussels , 10 October 1957.

[ 14 ] and International Convention for Safe Containers .

[ 15 ] Once adopted, most international conventions are enforced by the individual signatory nations, either through their Port State Control , or through their national courts. Cases within the ambit of the European Union 's EMSA may be heard by the CJEU in Luxembourg . By contrast, disputes involving the Law of the Sea may be resolved at ITLOS in Hamburg , provided that the parties are signatories to UNCLOS .

Piracy [ edit ] See also: Piracy and International piracy law Throughout history, piracy has been defined as hostis humani generis , or the enemy of all mankind. While the flag state normally has jurisdiction over a ship on the high seas, there is universal jurisdiction in the case of piracy, which means that any nation may pursue pirates on the high seas, including pursuing them into a country's territorial waters. Most nations have signed onto the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea which dictates the legal requirements for pursuing pirates.

Merchant vessels transiting areas of increased pirate activity (i.e. the Gulf of Aden , Somali Basin , Southern Red Sea and Bab-el-Mandeb straits ) are advised to implement self-protective measures, in accordance with most recent best management practices agreed upon by the members of the merchant industry and endorsed by the NATO Shipping Centre, and the Maritime Security Centre Horn-of-Africa (MSCHOA).

[ 16 ] Individual countries [ edit ] Britain and certain other Commonwealth countries [ edit ] The common law of England and Wales , of Northern Ireland law , and of US law , contrast to the continental law (civil law) that prevails in Scottish law and in continental Europe , which trace back to Roman law . Although the English Admiralty court was a development of continental civil law, the Admiralty Court of England and Wales was a common law court, albeit somewhat distanced from the mainstream King's Bench .

Most of the common law countries (including Pakistan , Singapore , India , and many other Commonwealth of Nations countries) follow English statute and case law. India still follows many Victorian-era British statutes such as the Admiralty Court Act 1861 [24 Vict c 10]. While Pakistan now has its own statute, the Admiralty Jurisdiction of High Courts Ordinance, 1980 (Ordinance XLII of 1980), it also follows English case law. One reason for this is that the 1980 Ordinance is partly modelled on old English admiralty law, namely the Administration of Justice Act 1956. The current statute dealing with the Admiralty jurisdiction of the England and Wales High Court is the Senior Courts Act 1981 , ss. 20–24, 37. The provisions in those sections are, in turn, based on the International Arrest Convention 1952. Other countries which do not follow the English statute and case laws, such as Panama , also have established well-known maritime courts which decide international cases on a regular basis.

Admiralty courts assume jurisdiction by virtue of the presence of the vessel in its territorial jurisdiction irrespective of whether the vessel is national or not and whether registered or not, and wherever the residence or domicile or their owners may be. A vessel is usually arrested by the court to retain jurisdiction. State-owned vessels are usually immune from arrest.

Canada [ edit ] Main article: Canadian maritime law Canadian jurisdiction in the area of navigation and shipping is vested in the Parliament of Canada by virtue of s. 91(10) of the Constitution Act, 1867 .

Canada has adopted an expansive definition of its maritime law, which goes beyond traditional admiralty law. The original English admiralty jurisdiction was called "wet", as it concerned itself with things done at sea, including collisions, salvage and the work of mariners, and contracts and torts performed at sea. Canadian law has added "dry" jurisdiction to this field, which includes such matters as: stevedoring , marine insurance , warehousing and security services, contracts of agency , and contracts of carriage .

This list is not exhaustive of the subject matter.

[ 17 ] Canadian jurisdiction was originally consolidated in 1891, with subsequent expansions in 1934 following the passage of the Statute of Westminster 1931 , and in 1971 with the extension to "dry" matters.

[ 18 ] Recent jurisprudence at the Supreme Court of Canada has tended to expand the maritime law power, thus overriding prior provincial laws based on the provinces' power over property and civil rights .

[ 19 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: United States admiralty law Jurisdiction [ edit ] Article III, Section 2 of the United States Constitution grants original jurisdiction to U.S. federal courts over admiralty and maritime matters;  however, that jurisdiction is not exclusive, and most maritime cases can be heard in either state or federal courts under the "saving to suitors" clause.

[ 20 ] There are five types of cases which can only be brought in federal court: limitation of shipowner's liability, vessel arrests in rem , property arrests quasi in rem , salvage cases, and petitory and possession actions.

The common element of those cases are that they require the court to exercise jurisdiction over maritime property. For example, in a petitory and possession action, a vessel whose title is in dispute, usually between co-owners, will be put in the possession of the court until the title dispute can be resolved. In a limitation action, the shipowner will post a bond reflecting the value of the vessel and her pending freight. A sixth category, that of prize , relating to claims over vessels captured during wartime, has been rendered obsolete due to changes in the laws and practices of warfare.

Aside from those five types of cases, all other maritime cases, such as claims for personal injuries, cargo damage, collisions, maritime products liability, and recreational boating accidents may be brought in either federal or state court.

From a tactical standpoint it is important to consider that in federal courts in the United States, there is generally no right to trial by jury in admiralty cases, although the 1920 Jones Act grants a jury trial to seamen suing their employers.

Maritime law is governed by a uniform three-year statute of limitations for personal injury and wrongful death cases. Cargo cases must be brought within two years (extended from the one-year allowance under the Hague-Visby Rules ), pursuant to the adoption of the Rotterdam Rules .

[ 21 ] Most major cruise ship passenger tickets have a one-year statute of limitations.

Applicable law [ edit ] A state court hearing an admiralty or maritime case is required to apply the admiralty and maritime law, even if it conflicts with the law of the state,  under a doctrine known as the "reverse- Erie doctrine". While the " Erie doctrine " requires that federal courts hearing state actions must apply substantive state law, the "reverse- Erie doctrine" requires state courts hearing admiralty cases to apply substantive federal admiralty law. However, state courts are allowed to apply state procedural law.

[ 22 ] [ unreliable source?

] This change can be significant.

Features of U.S. admiralty law [ edit ] Cargo claims [ edit ] Further information: Freight claim Claims for damage to cargo shipped in international commerce are governed by the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act (COGSA), which is the U.S. enactment of the Hague Rules. One of its key features is that a shipowner is liable for cargo damaged from "hook to hook",  meaning from loading to discharge, unless it is exonerated under one of 17 exceptions to liability, such as an " act of God ", the inherent nature of the goods, errors in navigation , and management of the ship. The basis of liability for the shipowner is a bailment and if the carrier is to be liable as a common carrier , it must be established that the goods were placed in the carrier's possession and control for immediate carriage.

[ 23 ] Personal injuries to seamen [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Seamen injured aboard ship have three possible sources of compensation: the principle of maintenance and cure, the doctrine of unseaworthiness, and the Jones Act . The principle of maintenance and cure requires a shipowner to both pay for an injured seaman's medical treatment until maximum medical recovery (MMR) is obtained and provide basic living expenses until completion of the voyage, even if the seaman is no longer aboard ship.

[ 24 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Admiralty law in Pakistan is also classified as shipping law . The Pakistan Merchant Shipping Ordinance 2001 [ 25 ] has replaced the Merchant Shipping Act 1923 .

[ 26 ] This replacement was done in 2001 to handle the constantly upgrading modern shipping industry. The purpose of the Pakistan Merchant Shipping Ordinance 2001 is to provide a strategy and rules under which the government authorities will function in dealing with stuff related to the shipping industry. This law also handles duties internationally required under the ILO ( International Labour Organization ) conventions as Pakistan is an active member of the ILO.

[ 27 ] Academic programs [ edit ] There are several universities that offer maritime law programs. What follows is a partial list of universities offering postgraduate maritime courses: Canada Dalhousie Law School – LLM in marine and environmental law France Panthéon-Assas University – LLM in international, business or private law with marine law courses [ 28 ] University of Nice Sophia Antipolis – LLM in marine and environmental law University of Western Brittany in Brest – LLM in marine law [ 29 ] University of Nantes in Nantes – Master of Laws and Safety of maritime and oceanic activities University of Le Havre in Le Havre – Master of Laws in Maritime & Ports Activities Law Belgium Ghent University - Master of Science in Maritime Science Germany University of Hamburg with Max Planck Institute for Comparative and International Private Law – PhD in maritime law Malaysia Universiti Teknologi Mara – LLM in Legal Aspects of Marine Affairs Netherlands Maritime University College - Diploma in Maritime law Malta International Maritime Law Institute – LLM in International Maritime Law Netherlands Erasmus University Rotterdam – LLM in Business, Corporate, and Maritime Law; Master of Science (MSc) In Maritime Economics and Logistics (MEL) Norway University of Oslo ( Scandinavian Institute of Maritime Law ) – LLM in maritime law University of Oslo – Master of Laws in Maritime Law [ 30 ] Romania Ovidius University of Constanța – Master of Laws in Maritime Law Singapore National University of Singapore – LLM in maritime law (Graduate Diploma in Maritime Law and Arbitration International Maritime Organization) South Africa University of Cape Town – Masters in Maritime Law Spain Comillas Pontifical University – Master in Maritime Business and Maritime Law (ICADE – Spanish Maritime Institute) University of Deusto – Master in Maritime Enterprise Management and Maritime Law Sweden Lund University – LLM in maritime law World Maritime University Master of Science in Maritime Affairs (Maritime Law and Policy) Thailand Thammasat University – LLM in international trade law United Kingdom Bangor University – LLM in Maritime Law and LLM in Law of the Sea Cardiff University – LLM in Shipping Law City University London – LLM in Maritime Law Liverpool John Moores University – BSc & MSc in Maritime, Transport & Logistics (MTL) (with embedded maritime law elements) Queen Mary, University of London – LLM in International Shipping Law Swansea University (Institute of International Shipping and Trade Law) – LLM in International Maritime Law University College London – LLM in Maritime Law University of Hertfordshire – LLM in Maritime Law University of Nottingham – LLM in Maritime Law University of Southampton School of Law (Institute of Maritime Law) – LLB (Maritime Law) and LLM in Maritime Law United States Charleston School of Law – LLM in Admiralty and Maritime Law [ 31 ] Florida Coastal School of Law – LLM in Logistics and Transportation Law St. Thomas University School of Law Tulane University Law School – LLM in admiralty and JD with a Certificate of Specialization in Admiralty & Maritime Law [ 32 ] University of Miami School of Law – LLM in Ocean and Coastal Law William S. Richardson School of Law University of Hawaii – LLM in Ocean Law and Policy [ 33 ] Conspiracy theory [ edit ] See also: Pseudolaw A pseudolegal conspiracy theory of American origin, notably present among the anti-government sovereign citizen and freeman on the land movements, asserts that at some point maritime law, which they consider to be the law of international commerce , [ 34 ] [ 35 ] substituted for the original, legitimate " common law " system  as part of a broader conspiracy which secretly replaced governments with corporations . The judiciary hence became admiralty courts with no jurisdiction over people.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Sovereign citizens notably claim that the presence of gold fringes on the American flags displayed in courtrooms is evidence of maritime law being in effect.

[ 37 ] One variation of this theory is based on a misinterpretation of the English Cestui Que Vie Act 1666 which stated that a person missing at sea shall be assumed to be dead after seven years; conspiracy theorists claim that the government uses this Act to secretly enslave people, by assuming any person to be legally dead from the age of seven and thereafter considering their person and/or property as its possessions.

[ 38 ] The origin of the maritime law conspiracy theory is unknown, though it may stem from a misunderstanding of some nautical-sounding words in common usage in the English-language judiciary such as ownership , citizenship , dock or birth (berth) certificate .

[ 35 ] This theory is entirely devoid of merit: when invoked by litigants, it has been consistently dismissed as frivolous .

[ 35 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Oceans portal Admiralty Barratry (admiralty law) Declaration of London General average Maritime environmental crime Prize (law) Notes [ edit ] ^ Such as the COLREGS , SOLAS , Hague-Visby Rules , ISPS , etc.

^ The Convention on the Law of the Sea has not been ratified by 29 United Nations member and observer states, most notably the United States.

[ 1 ] See United States non-ratification of the UNCLOS .

^ The title of Aleka Mandaraka-Sheppard's book changed from Mandaraka-Sheppard, Aleka (2007).

Modern Admiralty Law (2nd ed.). Cavendish.

ISBN 9781843141969 .

to Mandaraka-Sheppard, Aleka (2014).

Modern Maritime Law (3rd ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 9780415843201 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Agreement relating to the implementation of Part XI of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea" .

United Nations Treaty Series . Retrieved 2015-04-02 .

^ Henry of Bratton and probably others (1220–1250).

"De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae" . Bracton Online home, Harvard Law School Library.

^ Duties in American Colonies Act 1765 (5 Geo. 3 c. 12), 22 March 1765. D. Pickering, Statutes at Large , Vol. XXVI, p. 179ff. (Section LVII relates to jurisdiction in admiralty.) ^ "Stamp Act" .

HISTORY . 9 November 2009 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ "Trial By Jury" .

history.org . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ Hofstadter, Richard (1958).

Great Issues in American History: 1765–1865 . vol. 2: 1864–1957. United States: Vintage Books.

^ Adler v Dickson [1954] 2 LLR 267, [1955] 1 QB 158 ^ merriam-webster.com, " Allision ". Accessed November 7, 2014.

^ "Admiralty Court Rejects Equal Division Rule and Apportions Damages Unequally in Multiple Fault Collision Case".

Columbia Law Review .

63 (3): 554 footnote 1. March 1963.

doi : 10.2307/1120603 .

JSTOR 1120603 .

The striking by a vessel of a fixed object such as a bridge, technically termed 'allision' rather than 'collision' .

^ Talley, Wayne K. (January 1995). "Safety Investments and Operating Conditions: Determinants of Accident Passenger-Vessel Damage Cost".

Southern Economic Journal .

61 (3): 823, note 11.

doi : 10.2307/1061000 .

JSTOR 1061000 .

collision—vessel struck or was struck by another vessel on the water surface, or struck a stationary object, not another ship (an allision) .

^ Healy, Nicholas J.; Sweeney, Joseph C. (July–October 1991). "Basic Principles of the Law of Collision".

Journal of Maritime Law and Commerce .

22 (3): 359.

^ "You Say Collision, I Say Allision; Let's Sort the Whole Thing Out" . Office of Response and Restoration, NOAA. 9 April 2024.

^ "Brief History of IMO" .

^ "International Convention relating to the Limitation of the Liability of Owners of Sea-Going Ships, and Protocol of Signature. ATS 2 of 1981" Archived 2017-04-15 at the Wayback Machine . Australasian  Legal Information Institute, Australian Treaties Library. Retrieved on 15 April 2017.

^ "International Convention for Safe Containers. ATS 3 of 1981" Archived 2017-04-15 at the Wayback Machine . Australasian  Legal Information Institute, Australian Treaties Library.

^ NATO Shipping Centre (www.shipping.nato.int) ^ John G. O'Connor (2004-11-05).

"Why the Full Extent of the Admiralty Jurisdiction of the Federal Courts has yet to be explored" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-04-24 . Retrieved 2011-09-27 .

^ John G. O'Connor (2011-10-28).

"Admiralty Jurisdiction and Canadian Maritime Law in the Federal Courts: The next forty years" (PDF) . Retrieved 2012-05-25 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Christopher J. Giaschi (2000-10-03).

"The Constitutional implications of Ordon v. Grail and the expanding definition of Canadian maritime law" . Archived from the original on 2011-03-19 . Retrieved 2012-01-10 .

^ 28 U.S.C.

§ 1333 ^ Rotterdam Rules: Interpretation .

Archived March 9, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Joseph R. Oliveri (2008).

"Converse-Erie: The Key to Federalism in an Increasingly Administrative State" (essay).

Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Robinson, Gustavus H. (1939).

Handbook of Admiralty Law in the United States . Hornbook Series. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co. p. 439 ^ Healy, Sharpe and Sharpe, Cases and Materials on Admiralty, Thomson West, pp.502-510 (maintenance and cure); pp.510-20 (Jones Act); pp.520-25 (unseaworthiness).

^ "Merchant Shipping Ordinance 2001" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-04-15 . Retrieved 2021-02-25 .

^ "New shipping law to meet modern day requirement" . 12 October 2001.

^ "ILO Homepage | International Labour Organization" .

www.ilo.org .

^ Nathalie Mouly.

"Université Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas – Droit maritime (1230) – programme de cours" . Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 17 August 2015 .

^ Master Droit des Espaces et des Activités Maritimes Archived 2012-06-24 at the Wayback Machine . Formations.univ-brest.fr. Retrieved on 2013-08-02.

^ "University of Oslo (UiO) - Maritime & North Sea Energy Law Education" .

EduMaritime.net . 25 November 2017 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ "Charleston School of Law, An ABA-Accredited Law School" .

Charleston School of Law . Retrieved 2024-07-05 .

^ "Tulane Law School Academics" . Archived from the original on 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 17 August 2015 .

^ "University of Hawaii - Ocean Engineering & Law Education" .

EduMaritime.net . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ Berger, JM (June 2016), Without Prejudice: What Sovereign Citizens Believe (PDF) , George Washington University, archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-02-04 , retrieved 2022-02-07 ^ a b c d "Nonsense or loophole?" , Benchmark , Issue 57, February 2012, pp 18–19 ^ Sovereign Citizens Movement , Southern Poverty Law Center , retrieved January 6, 2022 ^ a b The Sovereigns: A Dictionary of the Peculiar , Southern Poverty Law Center, August 1, 2010 , retrieved 2022-01-20 ^ Freeloaders on the Land , Conway Hall Ethical Society , 3 June 2014 , retrieved 2022-07-12 ^ United States v. Mackovich , 209 F.3d 1227, 1233–1235, fn. 2 (9th Cir. 2000) .

^ United States v. Greenstreet , 912 F. Supp 224 (N.D. Tex. 1996) .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Maritime law .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Maritime law .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Admiralty Jurisdiction ".

Jones Act Law Resource Admiralty and Maritime Law Guide LII: Law about... Admiralty Law of the Sea at the UN web Marine Affairs Institute at Roger Williams University School of Law The Maritime Law Blog v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Seamanship (seafaring) topics Seamanship Navigation Watchkeeping Ice navigation Pilotage Maritime studies Sailing Nautical terms A–L M–Z Naval architecture Ship stability Hydrodynamics Ship-to-ship cargo transfer Propeller walk Passage planning Maritime law Dry-docking Ropework Knots Man overboard rescue turn Buoyage Mooring Anchoring Sea anchor Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Korea Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐nwwd8
Cached time: 20250814222156
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.806 seconds
Real time usage: 1.035 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4423/1000000
Revision size: 43359/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 138328/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7698/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 143937/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.513/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15298124/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  853.581      1 -total
 19.47%  166.217      2 Template:Reflist
 11.77%  100.468      3 Template:Lang
 10.63%   90.773      1 Template:Admiralty_law
 10.30%   87.881      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.26%   87.585      3 Template:Efn
  9.64%   82.287      2 Template:Cite_book
  9.10%   77.686     17 Template:Cite_web
  8.12%   69.312      1 Template:Short_description
  6.41%   54.691      3 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:77396:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222156 and revision id 1299993541. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maritime_law&oldid=1299993541 " Categories : Maritime law Eleanor of Aquitaine Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009 All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from June 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 17:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maritime law 31 languages Add topic

