Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Construction 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Coolamon (vessel) 3 languages Deutsch Français Lietuvių Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian Aboriginal carrying vessel This article is about the Aboriginal carrying vessel. For the Australian town, see Coolamon, New South Wales .

The coolamon in this picture is at top left. It is lined with paperbark , often done when used as a cradle for newborns.

Women using coolamons Coolamon is an anglicised version of the Wiradjuric word guliman [ 1 ] used to describe an Australian Aboriginal carrying vessel .

It is a multi-purpose shallow vessel, or dish with curved sides, ranging in length from 30 to 70 cm, and similar in shape to a canoe.

Coolamons were traditionally used by Aboriginal women to carry water, fruit, nuts, as well as to cradle babies. Today when women gather bush tucker , they usually use a billy can , bucket or flour tin. Coolamons were carried on the head when travelling any distance, or under the arm if used as a cradle. If carried on the head, a ring pad ( akartne in Arrernte ) was placed on the head, made out of possum and/or human hair string , twisted grass, or feathers.

[1] This helped to cushion and support the carriage of the coolamon; the same purpose as those used by women in traditional cultures around the world to carry vessels on their heads. The Pintupi of the Western Desert would attach a double strand of plaited rope ( ngalyibi ) made of hair or plant fibre to sling the coolamon over their shoulders.

[ 2 ] They also wore smaller coolamons as hats, with the twine around the chin.

[ 3 ] Coolamons were used for winnowing grains in the traditional bread -making process, as well as a general heating and cooking vessel. They could even be used as an umbrella .

Construction [ edit ] A scarred tree , probably used to make a coolamon (Parramatta, NSW).

Coolamons are generally made by the men. They are usually made from a hardwood such as mallee . In Central Australia, the bean tree was often used. A piece of the outer bark of the tree is removed, then moulded over the fire to give it its distinctive curved sides. Deep ridges were made using a quartz stone knife. It needed to stand for a number of days, with a stick of wood holding it open to prevent it losing its shape. It may also be made of a knot or excrescence (“wirree”), from a tree.

Coolamons were often ornately decorated on their exterior with various etchings – depicting tribal insignia and totemic designs. They were also used in ceremonies , such as for aromatic smoking , which was believed to have purifying effects. They were rubbed regularly with fat, such as emu fat to keep the wood in good condition.

Many other names are used in other parts of Aboriginal Australia, by Murri , Queensland Aboriginals, and people in the Northern Territory, Victoria, Western Australia as well as by the Dharug , or Eora people from the Sydney area. Some other names, and their respective languages, include: Names Word language piti Pitjantjatjara Martu Wangka pitchi bindgie bingie Ualarai binguie Wollaroi dondee (small) kittee (big) Kutthung oorlarda Bardi tarnuk lijarri Wagiman urtne Arrernte yandandakko Pintupi yandi Noongar yoko Kaurna tjarndu Murrinh Patha gulaman Wiradjuri See also [ edit ] Scarred trees Bush bread Australian Aboriginal artefacts References [ edit ] ^ "Coolamon, NSW" .

Aussie Towns . Retrieved 2023-08-19 .

^ Donald Thomson, Bindibu Country , Thomas Nelson, Melbourne, 1975, ISBN 0-17-005049-1 , p101.

^ Thomson, op cit , illustration 13 External links [ edit ] Aboriginal bowls & baskets Photo from British Museum Aboriginal Economy & Society Arrernte Dictionary Making bush bread from bean tree nb 08.0927 - Website not available Artwork showing woman carrying coolamon Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coolamon_(vessel)&oldid=1270440101 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Australian Aboriginal words and phrases Containers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 January 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coolamon (vessel) 3 languages Add topic

