Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aims 2 Methodology 3 Publications 4 Logo 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents International Commission on Stratigraphy 34 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-governmental geological organization This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "International Commission on Stratigraphy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) International Commission on Stratigraphy Abbreviation ICS Formation 1974 Type INGO Region served Worldwide Official language English, French Parent organization International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) Website stratigraphy .org The International Commission on Stratigraphy ( ICS ), sometimes unofficially referred to as the International Stratigraphic Commission , is a daughter or major subcommittee grade scientific organization that concerns itself with stratigraphical , geological , and geochronological matters, worldwide.

It is the largest subordinate body of the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS). The ICS is essentially a permanent working subcommittee , which meets far more regularly than the quadrennial meetings scheduled by the IUGS, when it meets as a congress or membership of the whole .

Aims [ edit ] Units in geochronology and stratigraphy [ 1 ] Segments of rock ( strata ) in chronostratigraphy Time spans in geochronology Notes to geochronological units Eonothem Eon 4 total, half a billion years or more Erathem Era 10 defined, several hundred million years System Period 22 defined, tens to ~one hundred million years Series Epoch 34 defined, tens of millions of years Stage Age 99 defined, millions of years Chronozone Chron subdivision of an age, not used by the ICS timescale One of its main aims, a project begun in 1974, is to establish a multidisciplinary standard and global geologic time scale that will ease paleontological and geobiological comparisons region to region by benchmarks with stringent and rigorous strata criteria called Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Points (GSSPs) within the fossil record. (i.e. section of the rock record as of a core sample section or accessible exposed strata, which when a core sample are usually "trayed" in long pieces, also called "sections" about a meter in length.) Methodology [ edit ] Additionally the ICS defines an alternative type of benchmark and criteria called Global Standard Stratigraphic Ages (GSSAs) where the characteristics and dating criteria set solely by physical sciences methods (such as magnetic alignment sequences, radiological criteria, etcetera.) as well as encouraging an international and open debate amongst Earth scientists in the paleontology , geology , geobiology and chronostratigraphy fields, among others.

The International Commission on Stratigraphy has spawned numerous subcommittee level organizations organized and mobilized on a local country-wide or regional basis that are the true working committees of the IUGS, and these do the field work, basis comparisons in conference or co-ordination research committee meetings of local or wide-scale scope.

Publications [ edit ] The ICS publishes various reports and findings as well as revised references periodically, summarized in the International Stratigraphic Chart , a combined working proposal and guideline-to-date released after the last ICS deliberations prior to the upcoming (next) meeting of the IUGS. Until the IUGS accepts the recommendations, they are unofficial since the IUGS parent approves or dismisses the individual deliberation reports of the ICS, which are presented as recommendations, and span dating and strata selection criteria, and related issues including nomenclatures. In de facto everyday matters, the deliberative results reported out of any meetings of the ICS are widely accepted and immediately enter everyday use, except in the rare cases where they result in a strong body of dissenting opinion, which matters are resolved before the full IUGS.

One such controversy arose in 2009 when the ICS deliberated and decided that the Pliocene Series of the current but unofficially named Quaternary Period should be shifted into the Neogene System and Neogene Period.

[ 2 ] Despite the strong debate, [ 3 ] the Quaternary saw official ratification as a geological unit from the IUGS in June 2009, placing its lower boundary to the Gelasian Stage/Age at Monte San Nicola, Sicily, Italy (until then uppermost part of the Pliocene Series/Epoch, and thus of the Neogene System/Period), 2.58 Ma BP .

[ 4 ] In addition to publishing paper and document (PDF) versions of the International Stratigraphic Chart, the ICS also provides a machine-readable version of the chart formulated using the Web Ontology Language (OWL) and, in particular, Time Ontology in OWL . The ICS' chart web page also provides an interactive version of the chart, based on the OWL data.

Logo [ edit ] The logo of International Commission on Stratigraphy was designed after the Chinese character of "mountain", 山.

References [ edit ] ^ Cohen, K.M.; Finney, S.; Gibbard, P.L. (2015), International Chronostratigraphic Chart (PDF) , International Commission on Stratigraphy .

^ Riccardi, A.C. (30 June 2009).

"Ratification of the definition of the base of Quaternary System/Period (and top of the Neogene System/Period), and redefinition of the base of the Pleistocene Series/Epoch (and top of the Pliocene Series/Epoch)" (PDF) .

International Union of Geological Sciences . Retrieved 30 December 2011 .

^ Kerr, Richard A. (25 January 2008). "A Time War Over the Period We Live In".

Science .

319 (5862): 402– 403.

doi : 10.1126/science.319.5862.402 .

PMID 18218875 .

S2CID 20171512 .

^ Gibbard, Philip L.; & al. (2009).

"Formal ratification of the Quaternary System/Period and the Pleistocene Series/Epoch with a base at 2.58 Ma" .

Journal of Quaternary Science .

25 (2): 96– 102.

doi : 10.1002/jqs.1338 .

External links [ edit ] "stratigraphy.org" . Retrieved 2024-04-20 .

"Geologic TimeScale Foundation" . Retrieved 2025-02-11 .

v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Commission_on_Stratigraphy&oldid=1275224930 " Categories : International Commission on Stratigraphy geologic time scale of Earth Stratigraphy Geology organizations International scientific organizations International Union of Geological Sciences Scientific organizations established in 1974 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 19:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Commission on Stratigraphy 34 languages Add topic

