Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Topics of research Toggle Topics of research subsection 2.1 Open questions 3 Experimental facilities Toggle Experimental facilities subsection 3.1 Underground laboratories 3.2 Neutrino detectors 3.3 Dark matter detectors 3.4 Cosmic ray observatories 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Astroparticle physics 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of particle physics For the scientific journal, see Astroparticle Physics (journal) .

Astroparticle physics , also called particle astrophysics , is a branch of particle physics that studies elementary particles of astrophysical origin and their relation to astrophysics and cosmology . It is a relatively new field of research emerging at the intersection of particle physics, astronomy , astrophysics, detector physics , relativity , solid state physics , and cosmology . Partly motivated by the discovery of neutrino oscillation , the field has undergone rapid development, both theoretically and experimentally, since the early 2000s.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The field of astroparticle physics is evolved out of optical astronomy. With the growth of detector technology came the more mature astrophysics, which involved multiple physics subtopics, such as mechanics , electrodynamics , thermodynamics , plasma physics , nuclear physics , relativity, and particle physics . Particle physicists found astrophysics necessary due to difficulty in producing particles with comparable energy to those found in space. For example, the cosmic ray spectrum contains particles with energies as high as 10 20 eV , where a proton–proton collision at the Large Hadron Collider occurs at an energy of ~10 12 eV.

The field can be said to have begun in 1910 , when a German physicist named Theodor Wulf measured the ionization in the air, an indicator of gamma radiation, at the bottom and top of the Eiffel Tower . He found that there was far more ionization at the top than what was expected if only terrestrial sources were attributed for this radiation.

[ 2 ] The Austrian physicist Victor Francis Hess hypothesized that some of the ionization was caused by radiation from the sky. In order to defend this hypothesis, Hess designed instruments capable of operating at high altitudes and performed observations on ionization up to an altitude of 5.3 km. From 1911 to 1913, Hess made ten flights to meticulously measure ionization levels. Through prior calculations, he did not expect there to be any ionization above an altitude of 500 m if terrestrial sources were the sole cause of radiation. His measurements however, revealed that although the ionization levels initially decreased with altitude, they began to sharply rise at some point. At the peaks of his flights, he found that the ionization levels were much greater than at the surface. Hess was then able to conclude that "a radiation of very high penetrating power enters our atmosphere from above". Furthermore, one of Hess's flights was during a near-total eclipse of the Sun. Since he did not observe a dip in ionization levels, Hess reasoned that the source had to be further away in space. For this discovery, Hess was one of the people awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1936. In 1925, Robert Millikan confirmed Hess's findings and subsequently coined the term ' cosmic rays '.

[ 3 ] Many physicists knowledgeable about the origins of the field of astroparticle physics prefer to attribute this 'discovery' of cosmic rays by Hess as the starting point for the field.

[ 4 ] Topics of research [ edit ] While it may be difficult to decide on a standard 'textbook' description of the field of astroparticle physics, the field can be characterized by the topics of research that are actively being pursued. The journal Astroparticle Physics accepts papers that are focused on new developments in the following areas: [ 5 ] High-energy cosmic-ray physics and astrophysics ; Particle cosmology; Particle astrophysics; Related astrophysics: supernova , active galactic nuclei , cosmic abundances, dark matter etc.; High-energy, VHE and UHE gamma-ray astronomy; High- and low-energy neutrino astronomy; Instrumentation and detector developments related to the above-mentioned fields.

Open questions [ edit ] One main task for the future of the field is simply to thoroughly define itself beyond working definitions and clearly differentiate itself from astrophysics and other related topics.

[ 4 ] Current unsolved problems for the field of astroparticle physics include characterization of dark matter and dark energy . Observations of the orbital velocities of stars in the Milky Way and other galaxies starting with Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky in the 1930s, along with observed velocities of galaxies in galactic clusters, found motion far exceeding the energy density of the visible matter needed to account for their dynamics. Since the early nineties some candidates have been found to partially explain some of the missing dark matter, but they are nowhere near sufficient to offer a full explanation. The finding of an accelerating universe suggests that a large part of the missing dark matter is stored as dark energy in a dynamical vacuum.

[ 6 ] Another question for astroparticle physicists is why is there so much more matter than antimatter in the universe today.

Baryogenesis is the term for the hypothetical processes that produced the unequal numbers of baryons and antibaryons in the early universe, which is why the universe is made of matter today, and not antimatter.

[ 6 ] Experimental facilities [ edit ] The rapid development of this field has led to the design of new types of infrastructure. In underground laboratories or with specially designed telescopes, antennas and satellite experiments, astroparticle physicists employ new detection methods to observe a wide range of cosmic particles including neutrinos, gamma rays and cosmic rays at the highest energies. They are also searching for dark matter and gravitational waves . Experimental particle physicists are limited by the technology of their terrestrial accelerators, which are only able to produce a small fraction of the energies found in nature.

The following is an incomplete list of laboratories and experiments in astroparticle physics.

Underground laboratories [ edit ] These facilities are located deep underground, to shield very sensitive experiments from cosmic rays that would otherwise preclude the observation of very rare phenomena.

China Jinping Underground Laboratory is a deep underground laboratory in the Jinping Mountains of Sichuan , China.

Kamioka Observatory is a neutrino and gravitational waves laboratory located underground in the Mozumi Mine near the Kamioka section of the city of Hida in Gifu Prefecture, Japan.  It is the site of the Super-Kamiokande experiment.

Laboratori Nazionali del Gran Sasso (LNGS) is a laboratory that hosts experiments requiring a low-background environment. Its experimental halls are located within the Gran Sasso mountain, near L'Aquila (Italy).

SNOLAB is located 2 km underground in an active mine, in Greater Sudbury (Canada).  Expanded from the original Sudbury Neutrino Observatory , the entire underground laboratory is operated as a cleanroom , hosting experiments in neutrino physics and dark matter searches.

Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) located in Lead, South Dakota hosts multiple experiments and is funded in part by the United States Department of Energy .

Neutrino detectors [ edit ] Very large neutrino detectors are required to record the extremely rare interactions of neutrinos with atomic matter.

IceCube ( Antarctica ). The largest particle detector in the world, was completed in December 2010. The purpose of the detector is to investigate high energy neutrinos, search for dark matter, observe supernovae explosions, and search for exotic particles such as magnetic monopoles.

[ 7 ] ANTARES ( Toulon , France ). A Neutrino detector 2.5 km under the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Toulon, France. Designed to locate and observe neutrino flux in the direction of the southern hemisphere.

NESTOR Project ( Pylos , Greece ). The target of the international collaboration is the deployment of a neutrino telescope on the sea floor off of Pylos, Greece.

BOREXINO , a real-time detector, installed at LNGS , designed to detect neutrinos from the Sun with an organic liquid scintillator target.

[ 8 ] Dark matter detectors [ edit ] Experiments are dedicated to the direct detection of dark matter interactions with the detector target material.

LZ experiment is a dark matter direct detection experiment hoping to observe weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) scatters on xenon nuclei. The experiment is located at the Sanford Underground Research Facility (SURF) in South Dakota, and is managed by the United States Department of Energy 's Lawrence Berkeley National Lab .

XENONnT, the upgrade of XENON1T , is a dark matter direct search experiment located at LNGS and is expected to be sensitive to WIMPs with spin-independent cross section of 10 −48 cm 2 .

The Global Argon Dark Matter Collaboration operates a series of liquid argon experiments: DarkSide-50 at LNGS , DEAP-3600 at SNOLAB , and the upcoming DarkSide-20k detector at LNGS . These experiments look for WIMPs and heavier dark matter particle candidates.

The Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) is a series of experiments searching for WIMPs interactions with semiconductor detectors at millikelvin temperatures.

The CERN Axion Solar Telescope (CERN, Switzerland) searches for axions originating from the Sun.

Cosmic ray observatories [ edit ] Interested in high-energy cosmic ray detection are: Pierre Auger Observatory ( Malargüe , Argentina ) detects and investigates high energy cosmic rays using two techniques. One is to study the particles interactions with water placed in surface detector tanks. The other technique is to track the development of air showers through observation of ultraviolet light emitted high in the Earth's atmosphere.

[ 9 ] Telescope Array Project ( Delta, Utah ), an experiment for the detection of ultra high energy cosmic rays (UHECRs) using a ground array and fluorescence techniques in the desert of west Utah.

See also [ edit ] Astroparticle Physics (journal) Urca process Unsolved problems in physics References [ edit ] ^ De Angelis, Alessandro; Pimenta, Mario (2018).

Introduction to particle and astroparticle physics (multimessenger astronomy and its particle physics foundations) . Springer.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-78181-5 .

ISBN 978-3-319-78181-5 .

^ Longair, M. S. (1981).

High energy astrophysics . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press . p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-521-23513-6 .

^ "April 17, 1912: Victor Hess's balloon flight during total eclipse to measure cosmic rays" . Retrieved 2013-09-18 .

^ a b Cirkel-Bartelt, Vanessa (2008).

"History of Astroparticle Physics and its Components" .

Living Reviews in Relativity .

11 (2): 7.

Bibcode : 2008LRR....11....7F .

doi : 10.12942/lrr-2008-7 .

PMC 5256108 .

PMID 28179823 . Retrieved 23 January 2013 .

^ Astroparticle Physics . Retrieved 2013-09-18 .

^ a b Grupen, Claus (2005).

Astroparticle Physics . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-25312-9 .

^ "IceCube - Deutsches Elektronen-Synchrotron DESY" . Archived from the original on 2013-01-23 . Retrieved 2013-01-24 .

^ http://borex.lngs.infn.it Archived 2012-07-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Home" . Archived from the original on 2013-05-06 . Retrieved 2013-04-29 .

Perkins, D.H. (2009).

Particle Astrophysics (2nd ed.).

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-954546-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Astroparticle physics .

Aspera European network portal www.astroparticle.org: all about astroparticle physics...

Aspera news Virtual Institute of Astroparticle Physics Helmholtz Alliance for Astroparticle Physics UCLA Astro-Particle Physics at UCLA Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics Astroparticle Physics in the Netherlands Astroparticle and High Energy Physics ASD: Astroparticle Physics Laboratory at NASA Teaching Astroparticle Physics v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astroparticle_physics&oldid=1232210944 " Categories : Astroparticle physics Particle physics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 July 2024, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astroparticle physics 19 languages Add topic

