Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 The Fable of the Bees 3 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 3.1 Private vice, public benefit 3.2 Vegetarianism 4 Influence 5 Bibliography 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Bernard Mandeville 28 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anglo-Dutch writer and physician (1670–1733) Bernard Mandeville Possible portrait of Mandeville [ 1 ] Born ( 1670-11-15 ) 15 November 1670 Rotterdam , Dutch Republic Died 21 January 1733 (1733-01-21) (aged 62) Hackney , Kingdom of Great Britain Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Classical economics Main interests Political philosophy , ethics, economics Notable ideas The unknowing co-operation of individuals, modern free market , division of labour Signature Bernard Mandeville , or Bernard de Mandeville ( / ˈ m æ n d ə ˌ v ɪ l / ; 15 November 1670 – 21 January 1733), was an Anglo-Dutch philosopher, political economist, satirist, writer and physician. Born in Rotterdam , he lived most of his life in England and used English for most of his published works.  He became famous for The Fable of the Bees .

Life [ edit ] Mandeville was born on 15 November 1670, in Rotterdam , the Netherlands , where his father was a prominent physician of Huguenot origin.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] On leaving the Erasmus school at Rotterdam he showed his ability by an Oratio scholastica de medicina (1685), and at Leiden University in 1689 he produced the thesis De brutorum operationibus , in which he advocated the Cartesian theory of automatism among animals. In 1691 he took his medical degree, pronouncing an inaugural disputation, De chylosi vitiata .  He moved to England to learn the language, [ 4 ] and succeeded so remarkably that many refused to believe he was a foreigner. His father had been banished from Rotterdam in 1693 for involvement in the Costerman tax riots on 5 October 1690; Bernard himself may well have been involved.

[ 5 ] As a physician Mandeville was well respected and his literary works were successful as well. His conversational abilities won him the friendship of Lord Macclesfield (chief justice 1710–1718), who introduced him to Joseph Addison , described by Mandeville as "a parson in a tye-wig." He died of influenza on 21 January 1733 at Hackney , aged 62.

[ 6 ] There is a surviving image of Mandeville but many details of his life still have to be researched. Although the name Mandeville attests a French Huguenot origin, his ancestors had lived in the Netherlands since at least the 16th century.

[ 5 ] However, in the Oxford University Press journal Notes and Queries , Arne Jansen states that Mandeville's family bible shows him to have been "a fifth-generation Dutchman: his great-great-grandfather Johannes or Jean de Mandeville had come from Artesia to Groningen in 1569 as a captain in the companies of Caspar de Robles ".

[ 7 ] Works [ edit ] The Fable of the Bees [ edit ] Main article: The Fable of the Bees The Fable of the Bees , 1924 edition In 1705, Mandeville published a poem under the title The Grumbling Hive, or Knaves Turn'd Honest (two hundred doggerel couplets). In The Grumbling Hive Mandeville describes a bee community thriving until the bees are suddenly made honest and virtuous. Without their desire for personal gain their economy collapses and the remaining bees go to live simple lives in a hollow tree, thus implying that without private vices there exists no public benefit.

[ 8 ] In 1714, the poem was republished as an integral part of the Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Public Benefits , consisting of a prose commentary, called Remarks , and an essay, An Enquiry into the Origin of Moral Virtue . The book was primarily written as a political satire on the state of England in 1705, when the Tories were accusing John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough , and the ministry of advocating the War of the Spanish Succession for personal reasons.

[ 6 ] In 1723, a later edition appeared, including An Essay on Charity and Charity Schools , and A Search into the Nature of Society . The former essay criticised the charity schools, designed to educate the poor and, in doing so, instil virtue in them. Mandeville disagreed with the idea that education adds virtue because he did not believe that evil desires existed only in the poor, but rather he saw the educated and wealthy as much more crafty.

[ 8 ] Mandeville also believed that educating the poor increased their desires for material things, defeating the purpose of the school and making it more difficult to provide for them.

[ 9 ] It was vigorously combatted by, among others, Bishop Berkeley and William Law , author of The Serious Call , and in 1729 was made the subject of a prosecution for its immoral tendency.

[ citation needed ] Ideas [ edit ] Mandeville's philosophy gave great offence at the time, and has always been stigmatised as false, cynical and degrading. His main thesis is that the actions of men cannot be divided into lower and higher. The higher life of man is a mere fiction introduced by philosophers and rulers to simplify government and the relations of society. In fact, virtue (which he defined as "every performance by which man, contrary to the impulse of nature, should endeavour the benefit of others, or the conquest of his own passions, out of a rational ambition of being good") is actually detrimental to the state in its commercial and intellectual progress. This is because it is the vices (i.e., the self-regarding actions of men) which alone, by means of inventions and the circulation of capital in connection with luxurious living, stimulate society into action and progress.

[ 6 ] Private vice, public benefit [ edit ] Mandeville concluded that vice, at variance with the "Christian virtues" of his time, was a necessary condition for economic prosperity. His viewpoint is more severe when juxtaposed to Adam Smith 's. Both Smith and Mandeville believed that individuals' collective actions bring about a public benefit.

[ 10 ] However, what sets his philosophy apart from Smith's is his catalyst to that public benefit. Smith believed in a virtuous self-interest which results in invisible co-operation. For the most part, Smith saw no need for a guide to garner that public benefit. On the other hand, Mandeville believed it was vicious greed which led to invisible co-operation if properly channelled. Mandeville's qualification of proper channelling further parts his philosophy from Smith's laissez-faire attitude. Essentially, Mandeville called for politicians to ensure that the passions of man would result in a public benefit. It was his stated belief in the Fable of the Bees that "Private Vices by the dextrous Management of a skilful Politician may be turned into Publick Benefits".

[ 11 ] In the Fable he shows a society possessed of all the virtues "blest with content and honesty," falling into apathy and utterly paralysed. The absence of self-love (cf.

Hobbes ) is the death of progress. The so-called higher virtues are mere hypocrisy , and arise from the selfish desire to be superior to the brutes. "The moral virtues are the political offspring which flattery begot upon pride." Similarly he arrives at the great paradox that "private vices are public benefits".

[ 6 ] Among other things, Mandeville argues that the basest and vilest behaviours produce positive economic effects. A libertine , for example, is a vicious character, and yet his spending will employ tailors, servants, perfumers, cooks, prostitutes. These persons, in turn, will employ bakers, carpenters, and the like. Therefore, the rapaciousness and violence of the base passions of the libertine benefit society in general. Similar satirical arguments were made by the Restoration and Augustan satirists. A famous example is Mandeville's Modest Defence of Publick Stews, which argued for the introduction of public, state-controlled brothels . The 1726 paper acknowledges women's interests and mentions e.g. the clitoris as the centre of female sexual pleasure.

[ 12 ] Jonathan Swift 's 1729 satire A Modest Proposal is probably an allusion to Mandeville's title.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mandeville was an early describer of the division of labour , and Adam Smith makes use of some of his examples.

Mandeville says: But if one will wholly apply himself to the making of Bows and Arrows, whilst another provides Food, a third builds Huts, a fourth makes Garments, and a fifth Utensils, they not only become useful to one another, but the Callings and Employments themselves will in the same Number of Years receive much greater Improvements, than if all had been promiscuously follow'd by every one of the Five...

In Watch-making, which is come to a higher degree of Perfection, than it would have been arrived at yet, if the whole had always remain'd the Employment of one Person; and I am persuaded, that even the Plenty we have of Clocks and Watches, as well as the Exactness and Beauty they may be made of, are chiefly owing to the Division that has been made of that Art into many Branches. ( The Fable of the Bees , Volume two ) — Adam Smith.

[ 14 ] Vegetarianism [ edit ] In his 1882 book on the history of vegetarianism, The Ethics of Diet , Howard Williams devoted a chapter to Mandeville, arguing that The Fable of the Bees contains a sincere critique of meat consumption. Williams cited Mandeville's words: [ 15 ] I have often thought, if it was not for this tyranny which custom usurps over us, that men of any tolerable good-nature could never be reconciled to the killing of so many animals for their daily food, as long as the bountiful earth so plentifully provides them with varieties of vegetable dainties.

Henry Stephens Salt also recognised The Fable of the Bees in his influential 1892 book on animal rights, Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress , where he included it in the "Bibliography of the Rights of Animals".

[ 16 ] Additionally, the work inspired early vegetarianism activist Joseph Ritson to adopt a vegetarian diet.

[ 17 ] Influence [ edit ] While the author probably had no intention of subverting morality , his views of human nature were seen by his critics as cynical and degraded. Another of his works, A Search into the Nature of Society (1723), appended to the later versions of the Fable , also startled the public mind, which his last works, Free Thoughts on Religion (1720) and An Enquiry into the Origin of Honour and the Usefulness of Christianity (1732) did little to reassure. The work in which he approximates most nearly to modern views is his account of the origin of society. His a priori theories should be compared with the jurist Henry Maine 's historical inquiries ( Ancient Law ). He endeavours to show that all social laws are the crystallised results of selfish aggrandizement and protective alliances among the weak. Denying any form of moral sense or conscience , he regards all the social virtues as evolved from the instinct for self-preservation , the give-and-take arrangements between the partners in a defensive and offensive alliance, and the feelings of pride and vanity artificially fed by politicians, as an antidote to dissension and chaos.

[ citation needed ] Mandeville's ironic paradoxes are a criticism of the "amiable" idealism of the Earl of Shaftesbury ; their irony contrasts with the serious egoistic systems of Hobbes and Helvétius .

[ 6 ] Mandeville's ideas about society and politics were praised by Friedrich Hayek , a proponent of Austrian economics , in his book Law, Legislation and Liberty .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] But it was above all Keynes who put it back in the spotlight in his Essay on Malthus and in the General Theory . Keynes considers Mandeville as a precursor of the foundation of his own theory of insufficient effective demand.

[ citation needed ] Karl Marx , in his seminal work Capital , credited Mandeville as "an honest man with a clear mind" for his conclusion that the wealth of society depended on the relative poverty of workers.

[ 20 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Aesop Dress'd, or a Collection of Fables writ in Familiar Verse (1704) Typhon: a Burlesque Poem (1704) The Planter's Charity (1704) The Virgin Unmasked (1709 , 1724 , 1731, 1742), a work in which the coarser side of his nature is prominent A Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Passions (1711, 1715, 1730 (the issue of 1730 was entitled A Treatise of the Hypochondriack and Hysterick Diseases )) admired by Johnson (Mandeville here protests against speculative therapeutics, and advances fanciful theories of his own about animal spirits in connection with "stomachic ferment": he shows a knowledge of Locke 's methods, and an admiration for Sydenham ) The Fable of the Bees (1714, 1724 ) The Mischiefs that Ought Justly to be Apprehended from a Whig-Government (1714) Free Thoughts on Religion, the Church, and National Happiness (1720 , 1721, 1723, 1729) A Modest Defence of Publick Stews (1724, 1740) Multiple formats at Ex-Classics An Enquiry into the Causes of the Frequent Executions at Tyburn (1725) An Enquiry into the Origin of Honour, and the Usefulness of Christianity in War (1732) A Letter to Dion, occasioned by his book called Alciphron or the Minute Philosopher (1732) Renatus Willemsen, Bernard Mandeville : een ondeugende denker?, Noordboek, 2022.Other works attributed, wrongly, to him are The World Unmasked (1736) and Zoologia medicinalis hibernica (1744).

See also [ edit ] Fable Physician writer Notes [ edit ] ^ "Mandeville's portrait" .

bernard-mandeville.nl . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ Project Bernard Mandeville ^ Fiechter-Widemann, Evelyne (5 May 2017).

The Human Right to Water: Justice ... Or Sham?: The Legal, Philosophical, and Theological Background of the New Human Right to Water . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1498294072 .

^ [1] Britannica Student Encyclopedia Archived 8 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b The Literary Encyclopedia ^ a b c d e Mitchell 1911 .

^ Jansen, Arne C. (June 2009). "Bernard Mandeville: some recent genealogical discoveries".

Notes & Queries .

56 (2). Oxford University Press: 231– 5.

doi : 10.1093/notesj/gjp028 .

^ a b Cook 1999 .

^ The Fable of the Bees, 5 edn, London, 1728, remarks, pp. 212–213, 328, quoted in Marx 1990 [1867], Capital Vol. 1, Chapter 25, The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation, p. 765, Penguin Classics.

^ Hayek, F. A.

(1967).

Dr. Bernard Mandeville: Lecture on a Master Mind .

Proceedings of the British Academy . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) See also Petsoulas, C. (2001).

Hayek's Liberalism and its Origins: His Ideas of Spontaneous Order and the Scottish Enlightenment . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0415183227 .

^ Mandeville , p. 369.

^ a b Eine Streitschrift..., Essay von Ursula Pia Jauch. Carl Hanser Verlag, München 2001.

^ Primer, I. (2006).

Bernard Mandeville's "A Modest Defence of Publick Stews": Prostitution and Its Discontents in Early Georgian England . Springer.

ISBN 978-1403984609 .

^ Smith 1982 , p. 27, section I.ii.3.

^ Williams, Howard (1883).

"Bernard de Mandeville 1670–1733" .

The Ethics of Diet (1st ed.).

^ Salt, Henry Stephens ; Leffingwell, Albert (1894).

Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress . New York, London: Macmillan & Co.

pp.

105 – 106 .

^ Spencer, Colin (2002).

Vegetarianism: A History . New York: Four Walls Eight Windows . pp.

221– 222.

ISBN 1568582382 .

^ See also Hayek, F. A. (1967).

Dr. Bernard Mandeville: Lecture on a Master Mind .

Proceedings of the British Academy . London. pp.

125– 141.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hayek, F.A.

(1978). "Dr. Bernard Mandeville".

New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics and History of Ideas . London and Chicago: Routledge and University of Chicago Press. pp.

249–266 .

^ Marx, Karl.

Capital: A Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1 . Penguin. p. 765.

ISBN 978=0140445688 .

{{ cite book }} : Check |isbn= value: invalid character ( help ) References [ edit ] Cook, Harold John (1999).

"Bernard Mandeville and the Therapy of 'The Clever Politician' " .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

60 (1).

University of Pennsylvania Press : 101– 124.

doi : 10.2307/3654002 .

JSTOR 3654002 .

PMID 11623644 .

.

Mandeville, Bernard, Fable of the Bees , vol. I, Page=369 in the appended "A Search into the Nature of Society." Smith, Adam (1982), The Wealth of Nations , vol. 1 (Glasgow ed.) , footnote to page 27, section I.ii.3 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Mitchell, John Malcolm (1911). " Mandeville, Bernard de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 17 (11th ed.). pp.

559– 560.

This source cites: Hill, Boswell , iii, 291–293; L. Stephen, English Thought in the Eighteenth Century ; Alexander Bain , Moral Science , 593–598; Windelband, W.

, History of Ethics (English translation Tufts); J.M. Robertson, Pioneer Humanists (1907); P. Sakmann, Bernard de Mandeville und die Bienenfabel-Controverse (Freiburg i/Br., 1897), and compare articles Ethics Further reading [ edit ] Gerold Blümle and Nils Goldschmidt: Ein Lob dem Laster.

In: Süddeutsche Zeitung .

17 May 2010 ( sueddeutsche.de ).

in Project Gutenberg Carrive, P. (1980), Bernard Mandeville , Paris {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Clark, Henry, ed. (2003), Commerce, Culture and Liberty: Readings on Capitalism Before Adam Smith , Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, ISBN 0865973792 .

Donati, R. (2011), Le ragioni di un pessimista. Mandeville nella cultura dei Lumi , Pisa: ETS, ISBN 978-8846728029 .

Goldsmith, M. M. (1985), Private Vices, Public Benefits. The Social and Political thought of Bernard Mandeville , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

Horne, T. A. (1978), The Social Thought of Bernard Mandeville: Virtue and Commerce in Early Eighteenth Century England , New York: Columbia University Press .

Hundert, E. G. (1994), The Enlightenment's Fable. Bernard Mandeville and the Discovery of Society , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

Monro, H. (1975), The Ambivalence of Bernard Mandeville , Oxford {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Primer, I., ed. (1975), Mandeville Studies , The Hague : Martin Nijhoff .

Primer, I., ed. (2006), Bernard Mandeville's A Modest Defence of the Publick Stews: Prostitution and Its Discontents in Early Georgian England , New York: Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 1403971676 .

Prior, Charles, ed. (2000), Mandeville and Augustan Ideas: New Essays , English Literary Studies, Victoria, British Columbia: University of Victoria, ISBN 0920604730 .

Rosenthal, Laura (2006), Infamous Commerce: Prostitution in Eighteenth Century British Literature and Culture , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, ISBN 0801444047 .

Schneider, L. (1987), Paradox and Society , New Brunswick {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Scribano, M. E. (1980), Natura umana e società competitiva , Milano {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Simonazzi, M. (2008), Le favole della filosofia , Milano {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

Smith, George H.

(2008). "Mandeville, Bernard (1670–1733)". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

314– 315.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n190 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Stafford, J. Martin, ed. (1997), Private Vices, Publick Benefits? The Contemporary Reception of Bernard Mandeville , Solihull: Ismeron, ISBN 0951259458 .

Tolonen, Mikko (2013), Mandeville and Hume anatomists of civil society , Oxford: Voltaire Foundation .

Kleiman-Lafon, Sylvie (2013), The healing power of words: medicine as literature in Bernard Mandeville's Treatise of the hypochondriack and hysterick diseases , Studies on Voltaire and the Eighteenth century, Oxford: Voltaire Foundation External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Bernard Mandeville .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Bernard Mandeville Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Mandeville, Bernard ".

Works by Bernard Mandeville at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Bernard Mandeville at the Internet Archive Works by Bernard Mandeville at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Bernard Mandeville at Open Library Project Bernard Mandeville – in Dutch, but with some English translations and many biographical details Bernard Mandeville – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Classical economists Francis Hutcheson Bernard Mandeville David Hume Adam Smith Anders Chydenius Jean-Baptiste Say Thomas Malthus James Mill Francis Place David Ricardo Henry Thornton John Ramsay McCulloch James Maitland, 8th Earl of Lauderdale Jeremy Bentham Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi Johann Heinrich von Thünen John Stuart Mill Nassau William Senior Edward Gibbon Wakefield Frédéric Bastiat Thomas Tooke Robert Torrens v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bernard_Mandeville&oldid=1303333946 " Categories : 1670 births 1733 deaths 17th-century Dutch economists 17th-century Dutch philosophers 17th-century Dutch physicians 17th-century English male writers 17th-century English medical doctors 17th-century English philosophers 18th-century Dutch economists 18th-century Dutch philosophers 18th-century Dutch physicians 18th-century English male writers 18th-century English medical doctors 18th-century English non-fiction writers 18th-century English philosophers Classical economists Dutch male writers Dutch non-fiction writers Dutch satirists English economists English non-fiction writers English political philosophers English satirists English vegetarianism activists Leiden University alumni Scientists from Rotterdam Writers from Rotterdam Dutch male non-fiction writers Dutch vegetarianism activists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Open Library ID different from Wikidata Articles with Open Library links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 10:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bernard Mandeville 28 languages Add topic

