Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 The problem of induction 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Circular reasoning 34 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Logical fallacy in which the conclusion provides the premise An example of circular reasoning Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Circular reasoning ( Latin : circulus in probando , "circle in proving"; [ 1 ] also known as circular logic ) is a logical fallacy in which the reasoner begins with what they are trying to end with.

[ 2 ] Circular reasoning is not a formal logical fallacy, but a pragmatic defect in an argument whereby the premises are just as much in need of proof or evidence as the conclusion. As a consequence, the argument becomes a matter of faith and fails to persuade those who do not already accept it. Other ways to express this are that there is no reason to accept the premises unless one already believes the conclusion, or that the premises provide no independent ground or evidence for the conclusion.

[ 3 ] Circular reasoning is closely related to begging the question , and in modern usage the two generally refer to the same thing.

[ 4 ] Circular reasoning is often of the form: "A is true because B is true; B is true because A is true." Circularity can be difficult to detect if it involves a longer chain of propositions.

An example of circular reasoning is: " Alkaline water is healthy because it results in health benefits, and it has health benefits because it is healthy".

History [ edit ] The problem of circular reasoning has been noted in Western philosophy at least as far back as the Pyrrhonist philosopher Agrippa who includes the problem of circular reasoning among his Five Tropes of Agrippa . The Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus described the problem of circular reasoning as "the reciprocal trope ": The reciprocal trope occurs when what ought to be confirmatory of the object under investigation needs to be made convincing by the object under investigation; then, being unable to take either in order to establish the other, we suspend judgement about both.

[ 5 ] The problem of induction [ edit ] Joel Feinberg and Russ Shafer-Landau note that "using the scientific method to judge the scientific method is circular reasoning". Scientists attempt to discover the laws of nature and to predict what will happen in the future, based on those laws. The laws of nature are arrived at through inductive reasoning .

David Hume 's problem of induction demonstrates that one must appeal to the principle of the uniformity of nature if they seek to justify their implicit assumption that laws which held true in the past will also hold true in the future. Since the principle of the uniformity of nature is itself an inductive principle, any justification for induction must be circular. But as Bertrand Russell observed, "The method of 'postulating' what we want has many advantages; they are the same as the advantages of theft over honest toil".

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Affirming the consequent Catch-22 (logic) Circular definition Circular reference Circular reporting Coherentism Formal fallacy Ipse dixit Ringschluss Paradox Polysyllogism Ringschluss , a valid form of reasoning involving a cycle of implications Self-reference Tautology (logic) References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Circulus in Probando" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 389.

^ Dowden, Bradley (27 March 2003).

"Fallacies" . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2014 . Retrieved April 5, 2012 .

^ Nolt, John Eric; Rohatyn, Dennis; Varzi, Achille (1998).

Schaum's outline of theory and problems of logic . McGraw-Hill Professional. p.

205 .

ISBN 9780070466494 .

^ Walton, Douglas (2008).

Informal Logic: A Pragmatic Approach . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521886178 .

^ Sextus Empiricus , Pyrrhōneioi hypotypōseis i., from Annas, J., Outlines of Scepticism Cambridge University Press . (2000).

^ Feinberg, Joel; Shafer-Landau, Russ (2008).

Reason and responsibility: readings in some basic problems of philosophy . Cengage Learning. pp.

257– 58.

ISBN 9780495094920 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Circular reasoning .

v t e Common fallacies ( list ) Formal In propositional logic Affirming a disjunct Affirming the consequent Denying the antecedent Argument from fallacy Masked man Mathematical fallacy In quantificational logic Existential Illicit conversion Proof by example Quantifier shift Syllogistic fallacy Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise Negative conclusion from affirmative premises Exclusive premises Existential Necessity Four terms Illicit major Illicit minor Undistributed middle Informal Equivocation Equivocation False equivalence False attribution Moral equivalence Quoting out of context Loki's Wager No true Scotsman Reification Map–territory relation Question-begging Circular reasoning / Begging the question Loaded language Leading question Compound question / Loaded question / Complex question No true Scotsman Correlative-based False dilemma Perfect solution Denying the correlative Suppressed correlative Illicit transference Composition Division Ecological Secundum quid Accident Converse accident Faulty generalization Anecdotal evidence Sampling bias Cherry picking McNamara Base rate / Conjunction Double counting False analogy Slothful induction Overwhelming exception Ambiguity Accent False precision Moving the goalposts Quoting out of context Slippery slope Sorites paradox Syntactic ambiguity Questionable cause Animistic Furtive Correlation implies causation Cum hoc Post hoc Gambler's Inverse Regression Single cause Slippery slope Texas sharpshooter Appeals Law/Legality Stone / Proof by assertion Consequences Argumentum ad baculum Wishful thinking Emotion Children Fear Flattery Novelty Pity Ridicule In-group favoritism Invented here / Not invented here Island mentality Loyalty Parade of horribles Spite Stirring symbols Wisdom of repugnance Genetic fallacy Ad hominem Appeal to motive Association Reductio ad Hitlerum Reductio ad Stalinum Bulverism Poisoning the well Tone Tu quoque Whataboutism Authority Accomplishment Ipse dixit Poverty / Wealth Etymology Nature Tradition / Novelty Chronological snobbery Other fallacies of relevance Arguments Ad nauseam Sealioning Argument from anecdote Argument from silence Argument to moderation Argumentum ad populum Cliché The Four Great Errors I'm entitled to my opinion Ignoratio elenchi Invincible ignorance Moralistic / Naturalistic Motte-and-bailey fallacy Psychologist's fallacy Rationalization Red herring Two wrongs make a right Special pleading Straw man Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Circular_reasoning&oldid=1305900697 " Categories : Philosophical logic Informal fallacies Pyrrhonism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Circular reasoning 34 languages Add topic

