Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Literature 3 Society 4 Philosophy 5 Aphorists 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Aphorism 71 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Мокшень Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Vahcuengh Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Figure of speech Not to be confused with Aphorismus .

"Aphorisms" redirects here. For the album, see Aphorisms (album) .

An aphorism (from Greek ἀφορισμός: aphorismos , denoting 'delimitation', 'distinction', and 'definition') is a concise, terse, laconic , or memorable expression of a general truth or principle .

[ 1 ] Aphorisms are often handed down by tradition from generation to generation.

The concept is generally distinct from those of an adage , brocard , chiasmus , epigram , maxim ( legal or philosophical ), principle , proverb , and saying ; although some of these concepts could be construed as types of aphorism.

Often aphorisms are distinguished from other short sayings by the need for interpretation to make sense of them. In A Theory of the Aphorism , Andrew Hui defined an aphorism as "a short saying that requires interpretation".

[ 2 ] A famous example is: [ 3 ] You cannot step into the same river twice.

— Heraclitus History [ edit ] The word was first used in the Aphorisms of Hippocrates , a long series of propositions concerning the symptoms and diagnosis of disease and the art of healing and medicine .

[ 4 ] The often-cited first sentence of this work  is: " Ὁ βίος βραχύς, δὲ τέχνη μακρή " – "life is short, art is long", usually reversed in order ( Ars longa, vita brevis ).

This aphorism was later applied or adapted to physical science and then morphed into multifarious aphorisms of philosophy , morality , and literature . Currently, an aphorism is generally understood to be a concise and eloquent statement of truth .

Aphorisms are distinct from axioms : aphorisms generally originate from experience and custom , whereas axioms are self-evident truths and therefore require no additional proof. Aphorisms have been especially used in subjects to which no methodical or scientific treatment was originally applied, such as agriculture , medicine , jurisprudence , and politics .

[ 4 ] Literature [ edit ] Aphoristic collections, sometimes known as wisdom literature , have a prominent place in the canons of several ancient societies, such as the Sutra literature of India , the Biblical Ecclesiastes , Islamic hadiths , the golden verses of Pythagoras , Hesiod 's Works and Days , the Delphic maxims , and Epictetus' Handbook . Aphoristic collections also make up an important part of the work of some modern authors. A 1559 oil–on–oak-panel painting, Netherlandish Proverbs (also called The Blue Cloak or The Topsy Turvy World ) by Pieter Bruegel the Elder , artfully depicts a land populated with literal renditions of Flemish aphorisms ( proverbs ) of the day.

The first noted published collection of aphorisms is Adagia by Erasmus . Other important early aphorists were Baltasar Gracián , François de La Rochefoucauld , and Blaise Pascal .

Two influential collections of aphorisms published in the twentieth century were Unkempt Thoughts by Stanisław Jerzy Lec (in Polish) and Itch of Wisdom by Mikhail Turovsky (in Russian and English).

[ 5 ] Society [ edit ] Many societies have traditional sages or culture heroes to whom aphorisms are commonly attributed, such as the Seven Sages of Greece , Chanakya , Confucius , or King Solomon .

Misquoted or misadvised aphorisms are frequently used as a source of humour ; for instance, wordplays of aphorisms appear in the works of P. G. Wodehouse , Terry Pratchett , and Douglas Adams . Aphorisms being misquoted by sports players, coaches, and commentators form the basis of Private Eye 's Colemanballs section.

Philosophy [ edit ] Professor of Humanities Andrew Hui, author of A Theory of the Aphorism offered the following definition of an aphorism: "a short saying that requires interpretation".

[ 2 ] Hui showed that some of the earliest philosophical texts from traditions around the world used an aphoristic style. Some of the earliest texts in the western philosophical canon feature short statements requiring interpretation, as seen in the Pre-Socratics like Heraclitus and Parmenides . In early Hindu literature, the Vedas were composed of many aphorisms. Likewise, in early Chinese philosophy, Taoist texts like the Tao Te Ching and the Confucian Analects relied on an aphoristic style.

Francis Bacon , Blaise Pascal , Desiderius Erasmus , and Friedrich Nietzsche rank among some of the most notable philosophers who employed them in the modern time.

Andrew Hui argued that aphorisms played an important role in the history of philosophy, influencing the favored mediums of philosophical traditions. He argued for example, that the Platonic Dialogues served as a response to the difficult to interpret fragments and phrases which Pre-Socratic philosophers were famous for. Hui proposes that aphorisms often arrive before, after, or in response to more systematic argumentative philosophy.

[ 2 ] For example, aphorisms may come before a systematic philosophy, because the systematic philosophy consists of the attempt to interpret and explain the aphorisms, as he argues is the case with Confucianism. Alternately, aphorisms may be written against systematic philosophy, as a form of challenge or irreverence, as seen in Nietzsche's work. Lastly, aphorisms may come after or following systematic philosophy, as was the case with Francis Bacon, who sought to bring an end to old ways of thinking.

[ 2 ] Aphorists [ edit ] Main page: Category:Aphorists Theodor W. Adorno ( Minima Moralia: Reflections from Damaged Life ) Georges Bataille Jean Baudrillard Ambrose Bierce ( The Devil's Dictionary ) George E. P. Box F. H. Bradley Burchard of Worms Malcolm de Chazal Cheng Yen ( Jing Si Aphorism ) Emil Cioran Arkady Davidowitz Nicolás Gómez Dávila ( Escolios a un texto implícito ) Desiderius Erasmus Gustave Flaubert ( Dictionary of Received Ideas ) Benjamin Franklin Andrzej Maksymilian Fredro Robert A. Heinlein ( The Notebooks of Lazarus Long ) Edmond Jabès Tomáš Janovic Joseph Joubert Franz Kafka Karl Kraus Lao Tze Stanisław Jerzy Lec Georg Christoph Lichtenberg Andrzej Majewski Juan Manuel (the second, third and fourth parts of his famous work El Conde Lucanor ) [ citation needed ] Mark Miremont Friedrich Nietzsche Oiva Paloheimo Dorothy Parker Patanjali Petar II Petrović-Njegoš Faina Ranevskaya François de La Rochefoucauld George Santayana Arthur Schopenhauer Seneca the Younger [ citation needed ] George Bernard Shaw Lev Shestov Sun Tzu Nassim Nicholas Taleb ( The Bed of Procrustes ) Mikhail Turovsky Mark Twain Voltaire Wasif Ali Wasif Oscar Wilde Alexander Woollcott Joan Fuster See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Aphorisms .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Aphorisms Adagia by Desiderius Erasmus Roterodamus Brocard Chiasmus Epigram Epitaph French moralists Gospel of Thomas Greguería Legal maxim Mahavakya Maxim Proverb Pseudo-Phocylides Sacred Scripture : Book of Proverbs Ecclesiastes Hidden Words Wisdom of Sirach Saying Sūtra The Triads of Ireland , and the Welsh Triads References [ edit ] ^ Definition of Aphorism from the Online Etymology Dictionary ^ a b c d Hui, Andrew (2019).

A Theory of the Aphorism: from Confucius to Twitter . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

doi : 10.23943/princeton/9780691188959.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780691188959 .

^ "Heraclitus' Poetic Ideas" (PDF) .

University of North Carolina . Retrieved 26 October 2024 .

^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Aphorism ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 165.

^ Заголовок (2003-06-30).

ЗАЛОЖНИК ВЕЧНОСТИ Михаил Туровский/ЗАЛОЖНИК ВЕЧНОСТИ Михаил Туровский (in Russian). Peoples.ru . Retrieved 2013-10-15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Geary, James (2005).

The World in a Phrase: A Brief History of the Aphorism . New York: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 9781608197620 .

Gopnik, Adam , "Brevity, Soul, Wit:  The art of the aphorism" (includes discussion of Andrew Hui, A Theory of the Aphorism:  From Confucius to Twitter , Princeton, 2019), The New Yorker , 22 July 2019, pp. 67–69.  "The aphorism [...] is [...] always an epitome , and seeks an essence.  The ability to elide the extraneous is what makes the aphorism bite, but the possibility of inferring backward to a missing text is what makes the aphorism poetic ."  (p.69.) John Morley (1887), Aphorisms: an address delivered before the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution, November 11, 1887 (1st ed.), London: Macmillan Publishers , Wikidata Q19045853 External links [ edit ] Look up aphorism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

(in English and Arabic) Commentary on Hippocrates' Aphorisms v t e Figures of speech Schemes Alliteration Anadiplosis Anaphora Antimetabole Antithesis Aposiopesis Assonance Asyndeton Chiasmus Climax Anti Consonance Epanadiplosis Epiphrase Epistrophe Epizeuxis Hendiadys Homeoteleuton Hypallage Hyperbaton Hysteron proteron Isocolon Parallelism Polyptoton Polysyndeton Spoonerism Symploce Tmesis Zeugma Tropes Allegory Allusion Antiphrasis Antonomasia Aphorism Apostrophe Catachresis Ecphonesis Ekphrasis Epanorthosis Hyperbole Adynaton Dysphemism Euphemism Meiosis Innuendo Irony Apophasis Sarcasm Litotes Metaphor Metonymy Oxymoron Onomatopoeia Personification Pleonasm Procatalepsis Pun Antanaclasis Rhetorical question Simile Synecdoche Tautology Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8kjz8
Cached time: 20250814214948
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.521 seconds
Real time usage: 0.713 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2598/1000000
Revision size: 10479/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 45957/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3303/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42563/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26342131/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  651.249      1 -total
 14.51%   94.474      1 Template:Reflist
 12.74%   82.941      1 Template:Distinguish
 12.70%   82.736      1 Template:Cite_Q
 12.46%   81.121      2 Template:Lang
 11.58%   75.387      1 Template:Figures_of_speech
 11.39%   74.209      1 Template:Navbox
 10.19%   66.376      3 Template:Sister_project
  9.99%   65.057      3 Template:Side_box
  9.73%   63.368      2 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:256799:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214948 and revision id 1294604109. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aphorism&oldid=1294604109 " Categories : Aphorisms Narrative techniques Paremiology Phrases Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Wikisource templates with missing id Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with Arabic-language sources (ar) This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 18:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aphorism 71 languages Add topic

