Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Representing spatial phenomena Toggle Representing spatial phenomena subsection 1.1 Ontological form 1.2 Dimensionality 1.3 Level of Measurement of Property 2 Cognition and semiotics 3 Visual variables 4 Visual hierarchy 5 Map legend 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Map symbol 11 languages Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Հայերեն Қазақша Lëtzebuergesch 日本語 Polski Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Graphic depiction of a geographic phenomenon In this map, the city points, highway lines, and the fill colors of the ocean and different countries are all considered map symbols. These symbols show location, convey information, increase aesthetic appeal, and create a gestalt order to the map.

A map symbol or cartographic symbol is a graphical device used to visually represent a real-world feature on a map , working in the same fashion as other forms of symbols . Map symbols may include point markers, lines, regions, continuous fields , or text; these can be designed visually in their shape, size, color, pattern, and other graphic variables to represent a variety of information about each phenomenon being represented.

Map symbols simultaneously serve several purposes: Declare the existence of geographic phenomena Show location and extent Visualize attribute information Add to (or detract from) the aesthetic appeal of the map, and/or evoke a particular aesthetic reaction (a "look and feel") Establish an overall gestalt order to make the map more or less useful, including visual hierarchy Representing spatial phenomena [ edit ] Symbols are used to represent geographic phenomena, which exist in, and are represented by, a variety of spatial forms. Different kinds of symbols are used to portray different spatial forms.

[ 1 ] Phenomena can be categorized a number of ways, but two are most relevant to symbology: ontological form and dimensionality. When a symbol is representing a property of the phenomenon as well as its location, the choice of symbol also depends on the nature of that property, usually classified as a Level of measurement .

Ontological form [ edit ] Geographic phenomena can be categorized into objects , which are recognizable as a unified whole with a relevant boundary and shape; and masses , in which the notion of boundary and wholeness are not relevant to their identity. Features such as buildings, cities, roads, lakes, and countries are geographic objects that are often portrayed on maps using symbols. Mass phenomena include air, water, vegetation, and rock. These are rarely represented directly on maps; instead, map symbols portray their properties, which usually take the form of geographic fields , such as temperature, moisture content, density, and composition.

Dimensionality [ edit ] Main article: Dimension The number of spatial dimensions needed to represent a phenomenon determine a choice of Geometric primitive ; each type of geometric primitive is drawn with a different type of visual symbol.

[ 2 ] Dimensions of Map Symbols Shape Dimensions Geometric Primitive Symbol Elements, Visual Variables Point 0 Coordinate Marker (shape, size, color, opacity) Line/Curve 1 Polyline (linear or curved segments) Stroke (color, size/weight, opacity, texture) Planar Region/Field 2 Polygon, Raster Boundary Stroke Fill (color, opacity, texture) Volumetric Region/Field 3 Polygon Mesh, Raster Surface (color, size/weight, opacity, pattern) Interior (color, opacity, texture) The dimensionality of a map symbol representing a feature may or may not be the same as the dimensionality of the feature in the real world; discrepancies are the result of cartographic generalization to simplify features based on purpose and scale. For example, a three-dimensional road is often represented as a one-dimensional line symbol, while two-dimensional cities are frequently represented by zero-dimensional points.

[ 3 ] Level of Measurement of Property [ edit ] Main article: Level of measurement Many map symbols visualize not just the location and shape of a geographic phenomenon, but also one or more of its properties or attributes. Geographers and cartographers usually categorize properties according to the classification system of Stanley Smith Stevens , or some revision thereof, such as that of Chrisman.

[ 4 ] Different kinds of symbols and visual variables are better at intuitively representing some levels than others, especially when the visual variable portrays the same kind of differences as the represented attribute.

[ 3 ] Property Levels and Map Symbols Level Distinction Preferred Visual Variables Secondary Visual Variables Map Examples Nominal Same or different Color Hue, Shape, Texture/Arrangement Owner, Facility type Hierarchical Qualitative amount of difference Color Hue Shape, Arrangement Languages, Geologic formation Ordinal Order Color value, Color saturation Size, Color Hue Socioeconomic status (rich, middle class, poor) Interval Quantitative amount of difference Color value Size, Color saturation, Opacity, Hue Temperature , Year Ratio Proportional difference Size, Color value, Texture density Opacity Population growth rate, population density Cyclical [ 4 ] Angular difference Color hue, orientation Day of the year, Aspect of terrain Amount/Count [ 4 ] Total number Size Color value, Opacity Population, Total Income Cognition and semiotics [ edit ] The dark green patch on this map is an ad hoc symbol for the country of Poland.

In cartography , the principles of cognition are important since they explain why certain map symbols work.

[ 5 ] In the past, mapmakers did not care why the symbols worked. This behaviorist view treats the human brain like a black box.  Modern cartographers are curious why certain symbols are the most effective. This should help develop a theoretical basis for how brains recognize symbols and, in turn, provide a platform for creating new symbols.

According to semiotics , specifically the Semiotic theory of Charles Sanders Peirce , map symbols are "read" by map users when they make a connection between the graphic mark on the map (the sign ), a general or specific concept (the interpretant ), and a particular feature of the real world (the object or referent ). Map symbols can thus be categorized by how they suggest this connection: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Iconic symbols (also "image", "pictorial", or "replicative") have a similar appearance to the real-world feature, although it is often in a generalized manner; e.g. a tree icon to represent a forest, brown denoting desert, or green denoting vegetation.

Functional symbols (also "representational") directly represent the activity that takes place at the represented feature; e.g. a picture of a skier to represent a ski resort or a tent to represent a campground.

Conceptual symbols directly represent a concept related to the represented feature; e.g. a dollar sign to represent an ATM, or a Star of David to represent a Jewish synagogue.

Conventional symbols (also "associative") do not have any intuitive relationship but are so commonly used that map readers eventually learn to recognize them; e.g. a red line to represent a highway or a Swiss cross to represent a hospital.

Ad hoc symbols (also "abstract") are arbitrary symbols chosen by the cartographer to represent a feature, with no intuitive connection to the interpretant or referent. These can only be interpreted with a legend. An example would be using various colors to represent geologic layers.

Visual variables [ edit ] Main article: Visual variable A map symbol is created by altering the visual appearance of a feature, whether a point, line, or region; this appearance can be controlled using one or more visual variables .

Jacques Bertin , a French cartographer, developed the concept of visual variables in his 1967 book, "Sémiologie Graphique." [ 8 ] Bertin identified seven main categories of visual variables: position, size, shape, value, color, orientation, and texture/grain.

[ 9 ] Since then, cartographers have modified and expanded this set.

[ 10 ] Each of these variables may be employed to convey information, to provide contrast between different features and layers, to establish figure-ground contrast and a clear visual hierarchy , or add to the aesthetic appeal of the map.

[ 11 ] The most common set of visual variables, as canonized in cartography textbooks and the Geographic Information Science and Technology Body of Knowledge , [ 3 ] includes the following: National Park standard point symbols, using shape to represent different types of facilities, a nominal variable.

Size , how much space a symbol occupies on a map, most commonly refers to the area of point symbols, and the thickness of line symbols, although the cartogram controls the size of area features proportional to a given variable. Size has been shown to be very effective at conveying quantitative data, and in the visual hierarchy.

[ 11 ] Shape is most commonly discussed in the context of point symbols (as the shapes of lines and areas are typically fixed by geographic reality), and is generally only used to differentiate nominal categories.

[ 12 ] That said, some maps purposefully manipulate the shape of lines and areas, often for purposes of Cartographic generalization , such as in schematic transit maps , although this distortion is rarely used to convey information, only to reduce emphasis on shape and location.

Color Hue is the visual property caused by the blending of various wavelengths of light, which we commonly refer to by color names like "red," "green," or "blue." Maps often use hue to differentiate categories of nominal variables, such as land cover types or geologic layers, [ 13 ] or for its psychological connotations , such as red implying heat or danger and blue implying cold or water.

The synergy of Saturation (color vs. gray), value (dark vs. light), and position (centrality) to strongly establish figure-ground and visual hierarchy Color value or lightness , how light or dark an object appears. Value effectively connotes "more" and "less," an ordinal measure; this makes it a very useful form of symbology in thematic maps , especially choropleth maps . Value also contributes strongly to Visual hierarchy ; elements that contrast most with the value of the background tend to stand out most (e.g., black on a white sheet of paper, white on a black computer screen).

Color saturation/intensity is the purity or intensity of a color, created by the degree of variety of light composing it; a single wavelength of light is of the highest saturation, while white, black, or gray has no saturation (being an even mixture of all visible wavelengths). Saturation has been found to be of marginal value in representing property information, but is very effective at establishing figure-ground and visual hierarchy , with bright colors generally standing out more than muted tones or shades of gray.

Orientation , the direction labels and symbols are facing on a map.  Although it is not used as often as many of the other visual variables, it can be useful for communicating information about the real-world orientation of features, such as wind direction and the direction in which a spring flows.

Pattern or Texture is the aggregation of large numbers of similar symbols into a composite symbol, such as a forest represented by a random scattering of tree icons. In addition to the visual variables that make up the sub-symbols, there are variables for controlling the pattern as a whole: Grain or Spacing , the distance between the individual symbols. Typically seen as similar to value, only with a weaker effect.

Arrangement , the pattern of distribution of the sub-symbols, often either random or as a regular grid.

Transparency is used effectively here to indicate overlapping sovereignty claims.

Transparency or Opacity , the mathematical blending of symbols of overlapping features, giving the illusion of underlying symbols being partially visible through overlying symbols. This is a recent addition due to software advancements, and is rarely used to convey specific information, but is used increasingly commonly for aiding the visual hierarchy and increasing aesthetic quality.

Cartographers have also proposed analogous sets of controllable variables for animated maps, [ 14 ] [ 2 ] haptic (touch) maps, [ 15 ] and even the use of sound in digital maps.

[ 16 ] Visual hierarchy [ edit ] Main article: Visual hierarchy An important factor in map symbols is the order in which they are ranked according to their relative importance. This is known as intellectual hierarchy. The most important hierarchy is the thematic symbols and type labels that are directly related to the theme. Next comes the title, subtitle, and legend .

[ 1 ] The map must also contain base information, such as boundaries, roads, and place names. Data source and notes should be on all maps. Lastly, the scale, neat lines, and north arrow are the least important of the hierarchy of the map. From this we see that the symbols are the single most important thing to build a good visual hierarchy that shows proper graphical representation. When producing a map with good visual hierarchy, thematic symbols should be graphically emphasized. A map with a visual hierarchy that is effective attracts the map user's eyes to the symbols with the most important aspects of the map first and to the symbols with the lesser importance later.

Map legend [ edit ] The legend of the map also contains important information and all of the thematic symbols of the map. Symbols that need no explanations, or do not coincide with the theme of the map, are normally omitted from the map legend. Thematic symbols directly represent the maps theme and should stand out.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Hatching ; use of hatching and cross-hatching in cartography NATO Joint Military Symbology Map coloring References [ edit ] ^ a b Krygier, J. & Wood, D. (2005).

Making Maps: A Visual Guide to Map Design for GIS . New York: Guilford Press.

^ a b MacEachren, A.M. (1994).

Some truth with maps: A primer on symbolization and design.

Association of American Geographers.

ISBN 9780892912148 ^ a b c White, Travis (2017).

"Symbolization and the Visual Variables" . In Wilson, Jody P. (ed.).

Geographic Information Science & Technology Body of Knowledge (2nd Quarter 2017 ed.).

doi : 10.22224/gistbok/2017.2.3 .

^ a b c Chrisman, Nicholas R. (1998). "Rethinking Levels of Measurement for Cartography".

Cartography and Geographic Information Science .

25 (4): 231– 242.

doi : 10.1559/152304098782383043 .

^ Olson, J. M. (1979).

"Cognitive Cartographic Experimentation" .

The Canadian Cartographer .

16 (1): 34– 44.

doi : 10.3138/R342-258H-5K6N-4351 .

^ MacEachren, Alan (1995) How Maps Work: Representation, visualization, and design , New York: Guilford Press ^ Dent, Borden D. (1999).

Cartography : thematic map design (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 0697384950 .

^ Jacque Bertin, Sémiologie Graphique. Les diagrammes, les réseaux, les cartes . With Marc Barbut [et al.]. Paris : Gauthier-Villars. (Translation 1983.

Semiology of Graphics by William J. Berg.) ^ "Visual Variables – InfoVis:Wiki" .

infovis-wiki.net . Archived from the original on 2008-05-17.

^ Tyner, J. A. (2010).

Principles of map design . New York: The Guilford Press.

^ a b Roth, Robert E. (2017).

"Visual Variables" . In Richardson, D.; Castree, N.; Goodchild, M.F.; Kobayashki, A.; Liu, W.; Marston, R.A. (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Geography . pp.

1– 11.

doi : 10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0761 .

ISBN 9780470659632 .

^ "Visual Variables" , Westfaelische Wilhelms Universitaet ^ https://www.e-education.psu.edu/geog486/node/1864 [ dead link ] ^ Dibiase, David; MacEachren, Alan M.; Krygier, John B.; Reeves, Catherine (1992). "Animation and the Role of Map Design in Scientific Visualization".

Cartography and Geographic Information Systems .

19 (4): 201– 214.

doi : 10.1559/152304092783721295 .

^ Griffin, Amy L. (2001).

"Feeling It Out: The Use of Haptic Visualization for Exploratory Geographic Analysis" .

Cartographic Perspectives (39): 12– 29.

doi : 10.14714/CP39.636 .

^ Krygier, J. B. (1994). Sound and geographic visualization. In Visualization in Modern Cartography . A. M. MacEachren and D. R. F. Taylor (Eds.). Oxford: Pergamon, pp. 149–166 ^ "Map Symbols" .

Compass Dude . n.d . Retrieved May 4, 2011 .

This article incorporates text by Wiki.GIS.com available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license.

External links [ edit ] Symbolization & the Visual Variables , Topic CV-08 in the 2017 Geographic Information Science and Technology Body of Knowledge NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐ftj2w
Cached time: 20250818135232
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.231 seconds
Real time usage: 0.287 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1200/1000000
Revision size: 19065/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 22007/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1395/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44455/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.136/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5578392/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  243.446      1 -total
 60.89%  148.242      1 Template:Reflist
 32.44%   78.976      4 Template:Cite_book
 19.65%   47.828      1 Template:Short_description
 11.80%   28.736      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.06%   22.054      1 Template:Dead_link
  8.37%   20.378      4 Template:Main
  8.25%   20.082      4 Template:Cite_journal
  7.74%   18.832      1 Template:Fix
  6.99%   17.024      2 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31680083:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818135232 and revision id 1306570730. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Map_symbol&oldid=1306570730 " Categories : Cartography Symbols Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Map symbol 11 languages Add topic

