Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Musical instruments 2 See also 3 References and notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Fokker 18 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Malagasy مصرى Nederlands Português Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch physicist (1887–1972) Adriaan Fokker Adriaan Fokker in 1926 Born Adriaan Daniël Fokker ( 1887-08-17 ) 17 August 1887 Buitenzorg , Dutch East Indies Died 24 September 1972 (1972-09-24) (aged 85) Beekbergen , Netherlands Alma mater Delft University of Technology University of Leiden Known for Fokker–Planck equation Fokker periodicity block Scientific career Fields Physicist Institutions University of Leiden Teylers Museum Doctoral advisor Hendrik Lorentz Adriaan Daniël Fokker ( Dutch pronunciation: [ˈaːdrijaːn ˈdaːnijɛl ˈfɔkər] ; 17 August 1887 – 24 September 1972) was a Dutch physicist . He worked in the fields of special relativity and statistical mechanics . He was the inventor of the Fokker organ , a 31-tone equal-tempered (31-TET) organ.

Life and work [ edit ] Adriaan Daniël Fokker was born on 17 August 1887 in Buitenzorg, Dutch East Indies (now Bogor , Indonesia ), the son of Anthony Herman Gerard Fokker, president of the branch of the Netherlands Trading Society in Batavia, Dutch East Indies , and Susanna Alida der Kinderen. He was a cousin of the aeronautical engineer Anthony Fokker .

[ 1 ] A.D. Fokker in his organ in 1950 Fokker studied mining engineering at the Delft University of Technology and physics at the University of Leiden with Hendrik Lorentz , where he earned his doctorate in 1913. He continued his studies with Albert Einstein , Ernest Rutherford and William Bragg . In his 1913 thesis, [ 2 ] he derived the Fokker–Planck equation along with Max Planck . After his military service during World War I he returned to Leiden as Lorentz' and Ehrenfest 's assistant. Fokker became a physics teacher at the Gymnasium of Delft after 1918 and was appointed in 1923 as the first professor of Applied Physics at the Technische Hoogeschool Delft (today Delft University of Technology).

[ 3 ] In 1928 Fokker succeeded Hendrik Lorentz as director of research at Teylers Museum in Haarlem .

Fokker made several contributions to special relativity , and some less well-known contributions to general relativity , particularly in the area of geodetic precession , the phenomena of precession of a freely falling gyroscope in a gravitational field.

[ 4 ] Fokker began to study music theory during the Second World War , when the University of Leiden was closed; partly this was due to a desire to convince the Nazis he would be of no use to the war effort, and partly it was a response to reading the work of Christiaan Huygens on the 31 equal temperament .

In 1938, Fokker – along with Dirk Coster and Otto Hahn – helped Jewish-born physicist Lise Meitner escape from Austria to the Netherlands. Historian Ruth Lewin Sime writes "Fokker and Coster both knew that university positions were virtually unavailable for foreigners. Laboratory space was not a problem, however, either in Groningen or Haarlem. 'Perhaps we can tap colleagues for regular contributions,' Coster suggested. Fokker set a goal of f.20,000, enough to support Meitner for five years, and immediately began contacting colleagues for advice and donations." They were unsuccessful in obtaining funding, but Fokker succeeded in getting official permission for Meitner to leave, although he was unable to telegraph that to her due to secrecy. She escaped barely in time to evade arrest.

[ 5 ] The year 1942 consequently marked a turning point in his life; after then he wrote many pieces in 31-equal, which are notable for using the 7th harmonic as a consonant interval (31-equal has a much better approximation of the 7th harmonic than the ubiquitous 12-equal). He also made notable contributions to music theory, such as the Fokker periodicity block .

In 1949 he became member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences .

[ 6 ] He died on 24 September 1972, at the age of 85, in Beekbergen near Apeldoorn .

Musical instruments [ edit ] Schematic representation of Fokker's microtonal keyboard for a 31EDO pipe organ (Fokker organ) with two manuals and pedal, built by him.

Fokker designed and had built a number of keyboard instruments capable of playing microtonal scales via a generalized keyboard .  The best-known of these is his 31-tone equal-tempered organ, which was installed in Teyler's Museum in Haarlem in 1951.  It is commonly called the Fokker organ. The Fokker organ is currently property of the Huygens-Fokker Foundation and it moved to the Bamzaal in Muziekgebouw aan 't IJ . Regularly concerts take place on this instrument in the Bamzaal.

See also [ edit ] Action at a distance Archicembalo , another instrument that was sometimes tuned in 31TET.

Born rigidity Euler–Fokker genus Geodetic effect Nordström's theory of gravitation Relativistic center of mass References and notes [ edit ] ^ H.A.M. Snelders (2013). "FOKKER, Adriaan Daniël (1887-1972)".

Biografisch Woordenboek van Nederland (in Dutch) . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ Adriaan Fokker (1913).

"Over Brown'sche bewegingen in het stralingsveld, en waarschijnlijkheids-beschouwingen in de stralingstheorie" (PDF) .

^ "Biography Adriaan Daniël Fokker (1887-1972) (in Dutch)" .

^ Jean Eisenstaedt, Anne J. Kox (1988).

Studies in the History of General Relativity . Birkhäuser. p. 42.

ISBN 0-8176-3479-7 .

^ Ruth Lewin Sime , "Lise Meitner: A Life in Physics" , University of California Press , June 1997. Retrieved September 19, 2013. See chapter 8, "Escape." ^ "A.D. Fokker (1889 - 1972)" . Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 27 July 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Adriaan Fokker .

Fokker organ , Huygens-Fokker Foundation.

Oral history interview transcript with Adriaan Fokker on 1 April 1963, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library & Archives Adriaan Fokker and the Archiphone on '120 Years Of Electronic Music' Short biography from the Huygens–Fokker Foundation H.A.M. Snelders, " Fokker, Adriaan Daniël (1887–1972) ", in Biografisch Woordenboek van Nederland. [13-03-2008] v t e Microtonal music Composers Richard Barrett Béla Bartók Easley Blackwood Jr.

Heinz Bohlen Julián Carrillo Franklin Cox Mildred Couper John Eaton Brian Ferneyhough Michael Finnissy Bjørn Fongaard Alois Hába Christiaan Huygens Charles Ives Ben Johnston György Ligeti Stu Mackenzie Claus-Steffen Mahnkopf Joel Mandelbaum Joe Maneri Roger Redgate John Schneider Sevish Ezra Sims Nicola Vicentino Claude Vivier Elaine Walker Ivan Wyschnegradsky La Monte Young Inventors Glenn Branca Wendy Carlos Ivor Darreg Adriaan Fokker Lou Harrison Yuri Landman Harry Partch Tui St. George Tucker Nicola Vicentino Tunings and scales Non-octave- repeating scales Alpha scale Beta scale Gamma scale Delta scale Lambda scale (Bohlen–Pierce scale) Equal temperament 15 17 19 22 23 24 31 34 41 53 58 72 96 Just intonation Harry Partch's 43-tone scale Double diatonic Concepts and techniques Limit Otonality and Utonality Semitone Sonido 13 Xenharmonicity Tonality diamond Groups and publications Boston Microtonal Society Genesis of a Music Huygens-Fokker Foundation Compositions Beauty in the Beast quarter tone pieces just pieces Mother Sonata for Microtonal Piano Suite for Microtonal Piano Twelve Microtonal Etudes for Electronic Music Media Flying Microtonal Banana K.G.

L.W.

Other topics Enharmonic keyboard Generalized keyboard Modernism (music) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Netherlands BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adriaan_Fokker&oldid=1282987337 " Categories : 1887 births 1972 deaths 20th-century Dutch physicists 20th-century Dutch inventors Microtonal musicians Dutch music theorists Delft University of Technology alumni Leiden University alumni People from Bogor Musicians from West Java Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences Members of Teylers Tweede Genootschap 20th-century musicologists Dutch people of the Dutch East Indies Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Dutch IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 19:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Fokker 18 languages Add topic

