Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of Jewish mysticism 2 Traditions Toggle Traditions subsection 2.1 Jewish and non-Jewish Kabbalah 3 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 3.1 Concealed and revealed God 3.2 Sephirot 3.2.1 Ten sephirot as process of creation 3.2.2 Ten Sephirot as process of ethics 3.3 Partzufim 3.4 Descending spiritual worlds 3.5 Origin of evil 3.6 Role of Man 3.7 Levels of the soul 3.8 Reincarnation 3.9 Tzimtzum, Shevirah and Tikkun 3.10 Linguistic mysticism and the mystical Torah 4 Cognition, mysticism, or values Toggle Cognition, mysticism, or values subsection 4.1 Kabbalists as mystics 4.2 Paradoxical coincidence of opposites 4.3 Metaphysics or axiology 5 Primary texts 6 Scholarship Toggle Scholarship subsection 6.1 Claims for authority 7 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 7.1 Distinction between Jews and non-Jews 7.2 Medieval views 7.3 Orthodox Judaism 7.4 Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism 7.5 Antinomian Kabbalah 8 Contemporary study Toggle Contemporary study subsection 8.1 Universalist Jewish organisations 8.2 Hasidic 8.3 Neo-Hasidic 8.4 Rav Kook 9 Cathar and Mandaean parallels 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Works cited 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Kabbalah 83 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of Jewish mysticism For other uses, see Cabala .

Latin translation of Gikatilla's Shaarei Ora Part of a series on Kabbalah Concepts Ein Sof Tzimtzum Ohr Ayin and Yesh Sefirot Four Worlds Seder hishtalshelut Tree of Life The path of the flaming sword Merkavah Jewish angelic hierarchy Shekhinah Partzufim Qlippoth Tohu and Tikun Sparks of holiness Messianic rectification Gilgul Kabbalistic astrology Gematria Notarikon Temurah Names of God in Judaism Shemhamphorasch Tzadik Tzadikim Nistarim Anthropomorphism in Kabbalah Panentheism History Pre-Kabbalistic Jewish mysticism Tannaim Heichalot Sefer Yetzirah Chassidei Ashkenaz Medieval Bahir Toledano tradition Prophetic Kabbalah Zohar Kabbalistic commentaries on the Bible Mainstream displacement of rationalism with Kabbalah Renaissance Selective influence on Western thought Hermetic Qabalah Mysticism after Spanish expulsion Mystics of 16th-century Safed Cordoveran Kabbalah Lurianic Kabbalah Maharal's thought Popular Kabbalistic Mussar Early modern Baal Shem-Nistarim Sabbatean mystical heresies Emden–Eybeschutz controversy Immigration to the Land of Israel Traditional Oriental Kabbalists Beit El Synagogue Eastern European Judaism Hasidic Judaism / philosophy Lithuanian Jews Hasidic-Mitnagdic schism Modern Hasidic dynasties Mysticism in religious Zionism Academic interest in Jewish mysticism Non-Orthodox interest in Jewish mysticism English James Lees' Practices Torah study Mystical exegesis Mitzvot Minhag Customary immersion in mikveh Meditation Kavanot Teshuvah Deveikut Prayer Nusach Tikkun Chatzot Tikkun Leil Shavuot Pilgrimage to Tzadik Pilgrimage to holy grave Lag BaOmer at Meron Asceticism Rosicrucianism Practical Kabbalah People 100s Four Who Entered the Pardes Simeon bar Yochai Akiva ben Joseph 1100s Isaac the Blind Azriel Judah ben Kalonymus 1200s Nahmanides Abraham Abulafia Joseph ben Abraham Gikatilla Moses de Leon Menahem Recanati Judah Ha-Hasid Eleazar of Worms Isaac ben Moses of Vienna Abraham ben Isaac of Granada 1300s Bahya ben Asher 1400s Shem Tov ibn Shem Tov Yohanan Alemanno Moses Botarel Joseph De La Reina 1500s Meir ibn Gabbai Joseph Karo Shlomo Alkabetz Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chełm Moshe Alshich Moses ben Jacob Cordovero Isaac Luria Chaim Vital Mordechai HaKohen of Safed Kalonymus Haberkasten Joseph Saragossi 1600s Judah Loew ben Bezalel Isaiah Horowitz Eliyahu Baal Shem Ben Yosef Yutzpa Abraham Azulai Shimon Lavi Joel Sirkis Elijah Loans Yoel Baal Shem Shabbatai HaKohen Jacob ben Aaron Sasportas 1700s Chaim ibn Attar Naphtali Cohen Joseph Ergas Hayyim Samuel Jacob Falk Jonathan Eybeschutz Baal Shem Tov Dov Ber of Mezeritch Moshe Chaim Luzzatto Shalom Sharabi Vilna Gaon Chaim Joseph David Azulai Nathan Adler Schneur Zalman of Liadi Chaim Volozhin 1800s Nachman of Breslov Tzvi Hirsh of Zidichov Ben Ish Chai Shlomo Eliyashiv Chaim Pinto Yedidyah Raphael Chai Abulafiya Chaim Yehuda Leib Auerbach 1900s Aharon Roth Yehudah Yudel Rosenberg Solomon Eliezer Alfandari Baba Sali Sholom Dovber Schneersohn Abraham Isaac Kook Salman Eliyahu Yaakov Chaim Sofer Levi Yitzchak Schneerson Yehuda Fatiyah Hillel Zeitlin Kalonymus Kalman Shapira Yehuda Ashlag Yitzhak Kaduri Yechiel Fishel Eisenbach Monsieur Chouchani Baruch Shalom HaLevi Ashlag Mordechai Sharabi Aryeh Kaplan Menachem Mendel Schneerson 2000s Avraham Brandwein Menachem Froman Eliyahu Leon Levi Adin Steinsaltz Gamliel Rabinowitz Yoshiyahu Yosef Pinto Moshe Weinberger Yitzchak Meir Morgenstern Avraham Mordechai Gottlieb Role History Torah Tanakh Prophecy Ruach HaKodesh Pardes exegesis Talmudical hermeneutics Midrash Jewish commentaries on the Bible Oral Torah Eras of Rabbinic Judaism Generational descent in Halacha Generational ascent in Kabbalah Rabbinic literature Talmudic theology Halakha Aggadah Hakira Classic Mussar literature Ashkenazi Judaism Sephardi Judaism Modern Jewish philosophies Jewish studies Topics God in Judaism Divine transcendence Divine immanence Free will Divine providence Kabbalistic reasons for the 613 Mitzvot Jewish principles of faith Jewish eschatology Primary texts v t e Part of a series on Judaism Movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Conservative Conservadox Reform Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic Haymanot Lemba Philosophy Principles of faith Kabbalah Messiah Ethics Chosenness God Names Musar movement Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Ḥumash Siddur Piyutim Zohar Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Midrash Tosefta Law Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Mishnah Berurah Aruch HaShulchan Kashrut Tzniut Tzedakah Niddah Noahide laws Holy cities / places Jerusalem Safed Hebron Tiberias Synagogue Beth midrash Mikveh Sukkah Chevra kadisha Holy Temple Tabernacle Important figures Abraham Isaac Jacob Moses Aaron David Solomon Sarah Rebecca Rachel Leah Rabbinic sages Chazal Tannaim Amoraim Savoraim Geonim Rishonim Acharonim Religious roles Rabbi Rebbe Posek Hazzan Dayan Rosh yeshiva Mohel Kohen Culture and education Brit Zeved habat Pidyon haben Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Yeshiva Kollel Cheder Ritual objects Sefer Torah Tallit Tefillin Tzitzit Kippah Mezuzah Menorah Shofar Four species Etrog Lulav Hadass Arava Kittel Gartel Prayers Shema Amidah Aleinu Kaddish Minyan Birkat Hamazon Shehecheyanu Hallel Havdalah Tachanun Kol Nidre Selichot (S'lichot) Major holidays Rosh Hashanah Yom Kippur Sukkot Pesach Shavuot Purim Hanukkah Other religions Christianity Hinduism Islam Mormonism Samaritanism Abrahamic religions Judeo-Christian Pluralism Related topics Jews Zionism Israel Criticism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Holocaust theology Music Jesus Muhammad Judaism portal v t e Part of a series on Esotericism Key concepts Western esotericism Eastern esotericism Alchemy Astrology Egregore Gnosis Hermeticism Kabbalah Magic Metaphysics Mystical theology Mysticism Occult Tantra Thelema Theosophy Traditionalism Rites Astral projection Body of light Divination Esoteric transmission Evocation Exorcism Initiation Invocation Meditation Propitiation Rite of passage Ritual purification Sacrifice Societies A∴A∴ Élus Coëns Freemasonry Golden Dawn Martinism Ordo Templi Orientis Rosicrucianism Tariqa Typhonian Order UR List of magical organizations Notable figures Ibn Arabi Blavatsky Böhme Burckhardt Crowley Dee Dionysius Evola Faivre Guénon Gurdjieff Hall Hermes Trismegistus Jung Kremmerz Lavey Lévi Mathers Nasr Oldmeadow Papus Paracelsus Pythagoras Schuon Steiner Waite Related topics Anthroposophy Esoteric Hitlerism Gnosticism v t e Kabbalah or Qabalah ( / k ə ˈ b ɑː l ə , ˈ k æ b ə l ə / kə- BAH -lə, KAB -ə-lə ; Hebrew : קַבָּלָה ‎ , romanized : Qabbālā , pronounced [kabaˈla] ⓘ ; lit.

' reception, tradition ' ) [ 1 ] [ a ] is an esoteric method, discipline and school of thought in Jewish mysticism .

[ 2 ] It forms the foundation of mystical religious interpretations within Judaism.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] A traditional Kabbalist is called a Mekubbal ( מְקֻובָּל ‎ , Məqubbāl , 'receiver').

[ 2 ] Jewish Kabbalists originally developed transmissions of the primary texts of Kabbalah within the realm of Jewish tradition [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and often use classical Jewish scriptures to explain and demonstrate its mystical teachings. Kabbalists hold these teachings to define the inner meaning of both the Hebrew Bible and traditional rabbinic literature and their formerly concealed transmitted dimension, as well as to explain the significance of Jewish religious observances.

[ 4 ] Historically, Kabbalah emerged from earlier forms of Jewish mysticism , in 12th- to 13th-century Hakhmei Provence (re: Bahir ), Rhineland school of Judah the Pious , [ 5 ] al-Andalus (re: Zohar ) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and was reinterpreted during the Jewish mystical renaissance in 16th-century Ottoman Palestine .

[ 2 ] The Zohar , the foundational text of Kabbalah, was authored in the late 13th century, likely by Moses de León .

[ 6 ] Isaac Luria (16th century) is considered the father of contemporary Kabbalah; Lurianic Kabbalah was popularised in the form of Hasidic Judaism from the 18th century onwards.

[ 2 ] During the 20th century, academic interest in Kabbalistic texts led primarily by the Jewish historian Gershom Scholem has inspired the development of historical research on Kabbalah in the field of Judaic studies .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Though minor works contribute to an understanding of the Kabbalah as an evolving tradition, the primary texts of the major lineage in medieval Jewish tradition are the Bahir , Zohar , Pardes Rimonim , and Etz Chayim ('Ein Sof') .

[ 9 ] The early Hekhalot literature is acknowledged as ancestral to the sensibilities of this later flowering of the Kabbalah [ 10 ] and more especially the Sefer Yetzirah is acknowledged as the antecedent from which all these books draw many of their formal inspirations. The document has striking similarities to a possible antecedent from the Lesser Hekhalot, the Alphabet of Rabbi Akiva , which in turn  seems to recall a style of responsa by students that arose in the classroom of Joshua ben-Levi in Tractate Shabbat .

[ 11 ] The Sefer Yetzirah is a brief document of only a few pages that was written many centuries before the high and late medieval works (sometime between 200-600CE), detailing an alphanumeric vision of cosmology and may be understood as a kind of prelude to the major phase of Kabbalah.

[ 9 ] History of Jewish mysticism [ edit ] Main article: History of Jewish mysticism Jewish mysticism History of Jewish mysticism Forms Prophets 800–400s BCE Apocalyptic literature 300–100 BCE Pardes Rabbinic esotericism c. 1 – 200 CE Merkabah - Hekhalot c. 100 BCE – 1000 CE Practical Kabbalah early CE–modernity Sefer Yetzirah 200–600 CE Ashkenazi Hasidim c. 1150 – 1250 CE Medieval Kabbalah Ecstatic Kabbalah c. 1175 – 1500s CE Zohar 1280s–1400s CE Cordoverian Kabbalah 1500s CE Lurianic Kabbalah 1570 CE – today Sabbatean sects 1665 – c. 1800 CE Hasidism Hasidic schools 1730s CE – today Academic study c. 1920s – today v t e The history of Jewish mysticism encompasses various forms of esoteric and spiritual practices aimed at understanding the divine and the hidden aspects of existence.

[ 12 ] [ b ] This mystical tradition has evolved significantly over millennia, influencing and being influenced by different historical, cultural, and religious contexts. Among the most prominent forms of Jewish mysticism is Kabbalah, which emerged in the 12th century and has since become a central component of Jewish mystical thought.

[ 13 ] Other notable early forms include prophetic and apocalyptic mysticism, which are evident in biblical and post-biblical texts.

The roots of Jewish mysticism can be traced back to the biblical era, with prophetic figures such as Elijah and Ezekiel experiencing divine visions and encounters.

[ 14 ] This tradition continued into the apocalyptic period, where texts like 1 Enoch and the Book of Daniel introduced complex angelology and eschatological themes.

[ 15 ] The Hekhalot and Merkabah literature, dating from the 2nd century to the early medieval period, further developed these mystical themes, focusing on visionary ascents to the heavenly palaces and the divine chariot.

[ 16 ] The medieval period saw the formalization of Kabbalah, particularly in southern France and Spain.

[ 17 ] Foundational texts such as the Bahir and the Zohar were composed during this time, laying the groundwork for later developments.

[ 18 ] The Kabbalistic teachings of this era delved deeply into the nature of the divine, the structure of the universe, and the process of creation. Notable Kabbalists like Moses de León played crucial roles in disseminating these teachings, which were characterized by their profound symbolic and allegorical interpretations of the Torah.

In the early modern period, Lurianic Kabbalah , founded by Isaac Luria in the 16th century, introduced new metaphysical concepts such as Tzimtzum (divine contraction) and Tikkun (cosmic repair), which have had a lasting impact on Jewish thought.

[ 19 ] The 18th century saw the rise of Hasidism , a movement that integrated Kabbalistic ideas into a popular, revivalist context, emphasizing personal mystical experience and the presence of the divine in everyday life.

[ 20 ] Traditions [ edit ] See also: Ecstatic Kabbalah and Practical Kabbalah According to the Zohar , a foundational text for kabbalistic thought, [ 21 ] Torah study can proceed along four levels of interpretation ( exegesis ).

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] These four levels are called pardes from their initial letters (PRDS פַּרדֵס ‎ , 'orchard'): Peshat (Hebrew: פשט lit.

' simple ' ): the direct interpretations of meaning.

[ 24 ] Remez ( רֶמֶז ‎ lit.

' hint[s] ' ): the allegoric meanings (through allusion ).

Derash ( דְרָשׁ ‎ from the Hebrew darash : 'inquire' or 'seek'): midrashic (rabbinic) meanings, often with imaginative comparisons with similar words or verses.

Sod ( סוֹד , lit.

' secret ' or ' mystery ' ): the inner, esoteric ( metaphysical ) meanings, expressed in kabbalah.

Kabbalah is considered by its followers as a necessary part of the study of Torah – the study of Torah (the Tanakh and rabbinic literature) being an inherent duty of observant Jews.

[ 25 ] Modern academic-historical study of Jewish mysticism reserves the term kabbalah to designate the particular, distinctive doctrines that textually emerged fully expressed in the Middle Ages, as distinct from the earlier Merkabah mystical concepts and methods.

[ 26 ] According to this descriptive categorization, both versions of Kabbalistic theory, the medieval-Zoharic and the early-modern Lurianic Kabbalah together comprise the Theosophical tradition in Kabbalah, while the Meditative - Ecstatic Kabbalah incorporates a parallel inter-related Medieval tradition. A third tradition, related but more shunned, involves the magical aims of Practical Kabbalah .

Moshe Idel , for example, writes that these 3 basic models can be discerned operating and competing throughout the whole history of Jewish mysticism, beyond the particular Kabbalistic background of the Middle Ages.

[ 27 ] They can be readily distinguished by their basic intent with respect to God: [ citation needed ] The Theosophical or Theosophical- Theurgic tradition of Theoretical Kabbalah (the main focus of the Zohar and Luria) seeks to understand and describe the divine realm using the imaginative and mythic symbols of human psychological experience. As an intuitive conceptual alternative to rationalist Jewish philosophy , particularly Maimonides ' Aristotelianism, this speculation became the central stream of Kabbalah, and the usual reference of the term kabbalah . Its theosophy also implies the innate, centrally important theurgic influence of human conduct on redeeming or damaging the spiritual realms, as man is a divine microcosm, and the spiritual realms the divine macrocosm. The purpose of traditional theosophical kabbalah was to give the whole of normative Jewish religious practice this mystical metaphysical meaning.

[ citation needed ] The Meditative tradition of Ecstatic Kabbalah (exemplified by Abraham Abulafia and Isaac of Acre ) strives to achieve a mystical union with God, or nullification of the meditator in God's Active intellect . Abraham Abulafia's "Prophetic Kabbalah" was the supreme example of this, though marginal in Kabbalistic development, and his alternative to the program of theosophical Kabbalah. Abulafian meditation built upon the philosophy of Maimonides, whose following remained the rationalist threat to theosophical Kabbalists.

[ 28 ] The Magico-Talismanic tradition of Practical Kabbalah (in often unpublished manuscripts) endeavours to alter both the Divine realms and the World using practical methods . While theosophical interpretations of worship see its redemptive role as harmonising heavenly forces, Practical Kabbalah properly involved white-magical acts, and was censored by Kabbalists for only those completely pure of intent, as it relates to lower realms where purity and impurity are mixed. Consequently, it formed a separate minor tradition shunned from Kabbalah. Practical Kabbalah was prohibited by the Arizal until the Temple in Jerusalem is rebuilt and the required state of ritual purity is attainable.

[ 29 ] According to Kabbalistic belief, early kabbalistic knowledge was transmitted orally by the Patriarchs, prophets , and sages, eventually to be "interwoven" into Jewish religious writings and culture.

[ 30 ] According to this view, early kabbalah was, in around the 10th century BCE, an open knowledge practiced by over a million people in ancient Israel.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Foreign conquests drove the Jewish spiritual leadership of the time (the Sanhedrin ) to hide the knowledge and make it secret, fearing that it might be misused if it fell into the wrong hands.

[ 33 ] It is hard to clarify with any degree of certainty the exact concepts within kabbalah. There are several different schools of thought with very different outlooks; however, all are accepted as correct.

[ 34 ] Modern halakhic authorities have tried to narrow the scope and diversity within kabbalah, by restricting study to certain texts, notably Zohar and the teachings of Isaac Luria as passed down through Hayyim ben Joseph Vital .

[ 35 ] However, even this qualification does little to limit the scope of understanding and expression, as included in those works are commentaries on Abulafian writings, Sefer Yetzirah , Albotonian writings, and the Berit Menuhah , [ 36 ] which is known to the kabbalistic elect and which, as described more recently by Gershom Scholem , combined ecstatic with theosophical mysticism. It is therefore important to bear in mind when discussing things such as the sephirot and their interactions that one is dealing with highly abstract concepts that at best can only be understood intuitively.

[ 37 ] Jewish and non-Jewish Kabbalah [ edit ] See also: Christian Cabala and Hermetic Qabalah From the Renaissance onwards Jewish Kabbalah texts entered non-Jewish culture, where they were studied and translated by Christian Hebraists and Hermetic occultists.

[ 38 ] The syncretic traditions of Christian Cabala and Hermetic Qabalah developed independently of Judaic Kabbalah, reading the Jewish texts as universalist ancient wisdom preserved from the Gnostic traditions of antiquity.

[ 39 ] Both adapted the Jewish concepts freely from their Jewish understanding, to merge with multiple other theologies, religious traditions and magical associations. With the decline of Christian Cabala in the Age of Reason , Hermetic Qabalah continued as a central underground tradition in Western esotericism . Through these non-Jewish associations with magic, alchemy and divination, Kabbalah acquired some popular occult connotations forbidden within Judaism, where Jewish Practical Kabbalah was a minor, permitted tradition restricted for a few elite. Today, many publications on Kabbalah belong to the non-Jewish New Age and occult traditions of Cabala, rather than giving an accurate picture of Judaic Kabbalah.

[ 40 ] Instead, academic and traditional Jewish publications now translate and study Judaic Kabbalah for wide readership.

Concepts [ edit ] The definition of Kabbalah varies according to the tradition and aims of those following it.

[ 41 ] According to its earliest and original usage in ancient Hebrew it means 'reception' or 'tradition', and in this context it tends to refer to any sacred writing composed after (or otherwise outside of) the five books of the Torah.

[ 42 ] After the Talmud is written, it refers to the Oral Law (both in the sense of the 'Talmud' itself and in the sense of continuing dialog and thought devoted to the scripture in every generation).

[ 42 ] In the much later writings of Eleazar of Worms (c. 1350), it refers to theurgy or the conjuring of demons and angels by the invocation of their secret names.

[ 42 ] The understanding of the word Kabbalah undergoes a transformation of its meaning in medieval Judaism, in the books which are now primarily referred to as 'the Kabbalah': the Bahir , the Zohar , Etz Hayim etc.

[ 42 ] In these books the word Kabbalah is used in manifold new senses. During this major phase it refers to the continuity of revelation in every generation, on the one hand, while also suggesting the necessity of revelation to remain concealed and secret or esoteric in every period by formal requirements native to sacred truth.

[ 42 ] When the term Kabbalah is used to refer to a canon of secret mystical books by medieval Jews, these aforementioned books and other works in their constellation are the books and the literary sensibility to which the term refers.

[ 42 ] Even later the word is adapted or appropriated in Western esotericism ( Christian Kabbalah and Hermetic Qabalah ), where it influences the tenor and aesthetics of European occultism practiced by gentiles or non-Jews. But above all, Jewish Kabbalah is a set of sacred and magical teachings meant to explain the relationship between the unchanging, eternal God —the mysterious Ein Sof ( אֵין סוֹף ‎ , 'The Infinite') [ 43 ] [ 44 ] —and the mortal, finite universe (God's creation ).

[ 2 ] [ 43 ] Concealed and revealed God [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Metaphorical scheme of emanated spiritual worlds within the Ein Sof See also: Atzmus and Anthropomorphism in Kabbalah The nature of the divine prompted kabbalists to envision two aspects to God: (a) God in essence, absolutely transcendent , unknowable, limitless divine simplicity beyond revelation, and (b) God in manifestation, the revealed persona of God through which he creates and sustains and relates to humankind. Kabbalists speak of the first as Ein/Ayn Sof (אין סוף "the infinite/endless", literally "there is no end"). Of the impersonal Ein Sof nothing can be grasped. However, the second aspect of divine emanations, accessible to human perception, dynamically interacting throughout spiritual and physical existence, reveal the divine immanently , and are bound up in the life of man. Kabbalists believe that these two aspects are not contradictory but complement one another, emanations mystically revealing the concealed mystery from within the Godhead .

[ citation needed ] As a term describing the Infinite Godhead beyond Creation, Kabbalists viewed the Ein Sof itself as too sublime to be referred to directly in the Torah. It is not a Holy Name in Judaism , as no name could contain a revelation of the Ein Sof. Even terming it "No End" is an inadequate representation of its true nature, the description only bearing its designation in relation to Creation. However, the Torah does narrate God speaking in the first person, most memorably the first word of the Ten Commandments , a reference without any description or name to the simple Divine essence (termed also Atzmus Ein Sof – Essence of the Infinite) beyond even the duality of Infinitude/Finitude. In contrast, the term Ein Sof describes the Godhead as Infinite lifeforce first cause, continuously keeping all Creation in existence. The Zohar reads the first words of Genesis , BeReishit Bara Elohim – In the beginning God created , as " With (the level of) Reishit (Beginning) (the Ein Sof) created Elohim (God's manifestation in creation)": [ 45 ] At the very beginning the King made engravings in the supernal purity. A spark of blackness emerged in the sealed within the sealed, from the mystery of the Ayn Sof, a mist within matter, implanted in a ring, no white, no black, no red, no yellow, no colour at all. When He measured with the standard of measure, He made colours to provide light. Within the spark, in the innermost part, emerged a source, from which the colours are painted below; it is sealed among the sealed things of the mystery of Ayn Sof. It penetrated, yet did not penetrate its air. It was not known at all until, from the pressure of its penetration, a single point shone, sealed, supernal. Beyond this point nothing is known, so it is called reishit (beginning): the first word of all ...

The structure of emanations has been described in various ways: Sephirot (divine attributes) and Partzufim (divine "faces"), Ohr (spiritual light and flow), Names of God and the supernal Torah , Olamot (Spiritual Worlds), a Divine Tree and Archetypal Man , Angelic Chariot and Palaces , male and female, enclothed layers of reality, inwardly holy vitality and external Kelipot shells, 613 channels ("limbs" of the King) and the divine Souls of Man . These symbols are used to describe various levels and aspects of Divine manifestation, from the Pnimi (inner) dimensions to the Hitzoni (outer).

[ citation needed ] It is solely in relation to the emanations, certainly not the Ein Sof Ground of all Being, that Kabbalah uses anthropomorphic symbolism to relate psychologically to divinity. Kabbalists debated the validity of anthropomorphic symbolism, between its disclosure as mystical allusion, versus its instrumental use as allegorical metaphor; in the language of the Zohar, symbolism "touches yet does not touch" its point.

[ 46 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Sephirot [ edit ] Main article: Sefirot Scheme of descending Sephirot in three columns, as a tree with roots above and branches below The Sephirot (also spelled "sefirot"; singular sefirah ) are the ten emanations and attributes of God with which he continually sustains the existence of the universe. These emanations are viewed as parts of God's divine nature, which reveal themselves in different ways. The Zohar and other Kabbalistic texts elaborate on the emergence of the sephirot from a state of concealed potential in the Ein Sof until their manifestation in the mundane world. In particular, Moses ben Jacob Cordovero (known as "the Ramak"), describes how God emanated the myriad details of finite reality out of the absolute unity of Divine light via the ten sephirot, or vessels.

[ 47 ] Ten sephirot as process of creation [ edit ] According to Lurianic cosmology, the sephirot correspond to various levels of creation (ten sephirot in each of the Four Worlds, and four worlds within each of the larger four worlds, each containing ten sephirot , which themselves contain ten sephirot , to an infinite number of possibilities), [ 48 ] and are emanated from the Creator for the purpose of creating the universe. The sephirot are considered revelations of the Creator's will ( ratzon ), [ 49 ] and they should not be understood as ten different "gods" but as ten different ways the one God reveals his will through the Emanations. It is not God who changes but the ability to perceive God that changes.

[ citation needed ] Ten Sephirot as process of ethics [ edit ] In the 16–17th centuries Kabbalah was popularised through a new genre of ethical literature, related to Kabbalistic meditation Divine creation by means of the Ten Sephirot is an ethical process. They represent the different aspects of Morality. Loving-Kindness is a possible moral justification found in Chessed, and Gevurah is the Moral Justification of Justice and both are mediated by Mercy which is Rachamim. However, these pillars of morality become immoral once they become extremes. When Loving-Kindness becomes extreme it can lead to sexual depravity and lack of Justice to the wicked. When Justice becomes extreme, it can lead to torture and the Murder of innocents and unfair punishment.

[ citation needed ] "Righteous" humans ( tzadikim plural of Tzadik ) ascend these ethical qualities of the ten sephirot by doing righteous actions. If there were no righteous humans, the blessings of God would become completely hidden, and creation would cease to exist. While real human actions are the "Foundation" ( Yesod ) of this universe ( Malchut ), these actions must accompany the conscious intention of compassion. Compassionate actions are often impossible without faith ( Emunah ), meaning to trust that God always supports compassionate actions even when God seems hidden. Ultimately, it is necessary to show compassion toward oneself too in order to share compassion toward others. This "selfish" enjoyment of God's blessings but only in order to empower oneself to assist others is an important aspect of "Restriction", and is considered a kind of golden mean in kabbalah, corresponding to the sefirah of Adornment ( Tiferet ) being part of the "Middle Column".

[ citation needed ] Moses ben Jacob Cordovero, wrote Tomer Devorah ( Palm Tree of Deborah ), in which he presents an ethical teaching of Judaism in the kabbalistic context of the ten sephirot .

Tomer Devorah has become also a foundational Musar text .

[ 50 ] Partzufim [ edit ] Main article: Partzufim The most esoteric Idrot sections of the classic Zohar make reference to hypostatic male and female Partzufim (Divine Personas) displacing the Sephirot, manifestations of God in particular Anthropomorphic symbolic personalities based on Biblical esoteric exegesis and midrashic narratives. Lurianic Kabbalah places these at the centre of our existence, rather than earlier Kabbalah's Sephirot, which Luria saw as broken in Divine crisis. Contemporary cognitive understanding of the Partzuf symbols relates them to Jungian archetypes of the collective unconscious , reflecting a psychologised progression from youth to sage in therapeutic healing back to the infinite Ein Sof/Unconscious, as Kabbalah is simultaneously both theology and psychology .

[ 51 ] Descending spiritual worlds [ edit ] Main articles: Four Worlds and Seder hishtalshelus Medieval Kabbalists believed that all things are linked to God through these emanations , making all levels in creation part of one great, gradually descending chain of being . Through this any lower creation reflects its particular roots in supernal divinity. Kabbalists agreed with the divine transcendence described by Jewish philosophy , but as only referring to the Ein Sof unknowable Godhead. They reinterpreted the theistic philosophical concept of creation from nothing, replacing God's creative act with panentheistic continual self-emanation by the mystical Ayin Nothingness/No-thing sustaining all spiritual and physical realms as successively more corporeal garments, veils and condensations of divine immanence . The innumerable levels of descent divide into Four comprehensive spiritual worlds , Atziluth ("Closeness" – Divine Wisdom), Beriah ("Creation" – Divine Understanding), Yetzirah ("Formation" – Divine Emotions), Assiah ("Action" – Divine Activity), with a preceding Fifth World Adam Kadmon ("Primordial Man" – Divine Will) sometimes excluded due to its sublimity. Together the whole spiritual heavens form the Divine Persona/ Anthropos .

[ citation needed ] Hasidic thought extends the divine immanence of Kabbalah by holding that God is all that really exists, all else being completely undifferentiated from God's perspective. This view can be defined as acosmic monistic panentheism. According to this philosophy, God's existence is higher than anything that this world can express, yet he includes all things of this world within his divine reality in perfect unity, so that the creation effected no change in him at all. This paradox as seen from dual human and divine perspectives is dealt with at length in Chabad texts .

[ 52 ] Origin of evil [ edit ] Amulet from the 15th century. Theosophical kabbalists, especially Luria, censored contemporary Practical Kabbalah, but allowed amulets by Sages [ 53 ] Among problems considered in the Hebrew Kabbalah is the theological issue of the nature and origin of evil. In the views of some Kabbalists this conceives "evil" as a "quality of God", asserting that negativity enters into the essence of the Absolute. In this view it is conceived that the Absolute needs evil to "be what it is", i.e., to exist.

[ 54 ] Foundational texts of Medieval Kabbalism conceived evil as a demonic parallel to the holy, called the Sitra Achra (the "Other Side"), and the qlippoth (the "shells/husks") that cover and conceal the holy, are nurtured from it, and yet also protect it by limiting its revelation. Scholem termed this element of the Spanish Kabbalah a "Jewish gnostic" motif, in the sense of dual powers in the divine realm of manifestation. In a radical notion, the root of evil is found within the 10 holy Sephirot, through an imbalance of Gevurah , the power of "Strength/Judgement/Severity".

[ 55 ] Gevurah is necessary for Creation to exist as it counterposes Chesed ("loving-kindness"), restricting the unlimited divine bounty within suitable vessels, so forming the Worlds. However, if man sins (actualising impure judgement within his soul), the supernal Judgement is reciprocally empowered over the Kindness, introducing disharmony among the Sephirot in the divine realm and exile from God throughout Creation. The demonic realm, though illusory in its holy origin, becomes the real apparent realm of impurity in lower Creation. In the Zohar , the sin of Adam and Eve (who embodied Adam Kadmon below) took place in the spiritual realms. Their sin was that they separated the Tree of knowledge (10 sefirot within Malkuth , representing Divine immanence ), from the Tree of life within it (10 sefirot within Tiferet , representing Divine transcendence ). This introduced the false perception of duality into lower creation, an external Tree of Death nurtured from holiness, and an Adam Belial of impurity.

[ 56 ] In Lurianic Kabbalah, evil originates from a primordial shattering of the sephirot of God's Persona before creation of the stable spiritual worlds , mystically represented by the 8 Kings of Edom (the derivative of Gevurah ) "who died" before any king reigned in Israel from Genesis 36 . In the divine view from above within Kabbalah, emphasised in Hasidic Panentheism , the appearance of duality and pluralism below dissolves into the absolute Monism of God, psychologising evil.

[ 57 ] Though impure below, what appears as evil derives from a divine blessing too high to be contained openly.

[ 58 ] The mystical task of the righteous in the Zohar is to reveal this concealed Divine Oneness and absolute good, to "convert bitterness into sweetness, darkness into light".

[ This quote needs a citation ] Role of Man [ edit ] Joseph Karo 's role as both legalist and mystic underscores Kabbalah's spiritualisation of normative Jewish observance Kabbalistic doctrine gives man the central role in Creation, as his soul and body correspond to the supernal divine manifestations. In the Christian Kabbalah this scheme was universalised to describe harmonia mundi , the harmony of Creation within man.

[ 59 ] In Judaism, it gave a profound spiritualisation of Jewish practice. While the kabbalistic scheme gave a radically innovative, though conceptually continuous, development of mainstream Midrashic and Talmudic rabbinic notions, kabbalistic thought underscored and invigorated conservative Jewish observance. The esoteric teachings of kabbalah gave the traditional mitzvot observances the central role in spiritual creation, whether the practitioner was learned in this knowledge or not. Accompanying normative Jewish observance and worship with elite mystical kavanot intentions gave them theurgic power, but sincere observance by common folk, especially in the Hasidic popularisation of kabbalah, could replace esoteric abilities. Many kabbalists were also leading legal figures in Judaism, such as Nachmanides and Joseph Karo .

[ citation needed ] Medieval kabbalah elaborates particular reasons for each Biblical mitzvah , and their role in harmonising the supernal divine flow, uniting masculine and feminine forces on High. With this, the feminine Divine presence in this world is drawn from exile to the Holy One Above. The 613 mitzvot are embodied in the organs and soul of man. Lurianic Kabbalah incorporates this in the more inclusive scheme of Jewish messianic rectification of exiled divinity. Jewish mysticism, in contrast to Divine transcendence rationalist human-centred reasons for Jewish observance, gave Divine-immanent providential cosmic significance to the daily events in the worldly life of man in general, and the spiritual role of Jewish observance in particular.

[ citation needed ] Levels of the soul [ edit ] Building on Kabbalah's conception of the soul, Abraham Abulafia 's meditations included the "inner illumination of" the human form [ 60 ] The Kabbalah posits that the human soul has three elements: the nefesh , ru'ach , and neshamah . The nefesh is found in all humans, and enters the physical body at birth. It is the source of one's physical and psychological nature. The next two parts of the soul are not implanted at birth, but can be developed over time; their development depends on the actions and beliefs of the individual. They are said to only fully exist in people awakened spiritually. A common way of explaining the three parts of the soul is as follows: [ 61 ] Nefesh (נֶפֶשׁ): the lower part, or "animal part", of the soul. It is linked to instincts and bodily cravings. This part of the soul is provided at birth.

Ruach (רוּחַ): the middle soul, the "spirit". It contains the moral virtues and the ability to distinguish between good and evil.

Neshamah (נְשָׁמָה): the higher soul, or "super-soul". This separates man from all other life-forms. It is related to the intellect and allows man to enjoy and benefit from the afterlife. It allows one to have some awareness of the existence and presence of God.

Chayyah (חיה): The part of the soul that allows one to have an awareness of the divine life force itself.

Yehidah (יחידה): The highest plane of the soul, in which one can achieve as full a union with God as is possible.

Reincarnation [ edit ] Main article: Gilgul Reincarnation , the transmigration of the soul after death, was introduced into Judaism as a central esoteric tenet of Kabbalah from the Medieval period onwards, called Gilgul neshamot ("cycles of the soul"). The concept does not appear overtly in the Hebrew Bible or classic rabbinic literature, and was rejected by various Medieval Jewish philosophers. However, the Kabbalists explained a number of scriptural passages in reference to Gilgulim. The concept became central to the later Kabbalah of Isaac Luria, who systemised it as the personal parallel to the cosmic process of rectification. Through Lurianic Kabbalah and Hasidic Judaism, reincarnation entered popular Jewish culture as a literary motif.

[ 62 ] Tzimtzum, Shevirah and Tikkun [ edit ] Main article: Lurianic Kabbalah 16th-century graves of Safed , Galilee . The messianic focus of its mystical renaissance culminated in Lurianic thought.

Tzimtzum (Constriction/Concentration) is the primordial cosmic act whereby God "contracted" His infinite light, leaving a "void" into which the light of existence was poured. This allowed the emergence of independent existence that would not become nullified by the pristine Infinite Light, reconciling the unity of the Ein Sof with the plurality of creation. This changed the first creative act into one of withdrawal/exile, the antithesis of the ultimate Divine Will. In contrast, a new emanation after the Tzimtzum shone into the vacuum to begin creation, but led to an initial instability called Tohu (Chaos), leading to a new crisis of Shevirah (Shattering) of the sephirot vessels. The shards of the broken vessels fell down into the lower realms, animated by remnants of their divine light, causing primordial exile within the Divine Persona before the creation of man. Exile and enclothement of higher divinity within lower realms throughout existence requires man to complete the Tikkun olam (Rectification) process. Rectification Above corresponds to the reorganization of the independent sephirot into relating Partzufim (Divine Personas), previously referred to obliquely in the Zohar. From the catastrophe stems the possibility of self-aware Creation, and also the Kelipot (Impure Shells) of previous Medieval kabbalah. The metaphorical anthropomorphism of the partzufim accentuates the sexual unifications of the redemption process, while Gilgul reincarnation emerges from the scheme. Uniquely, Lurianism gave formerly private mysticism the urgency of Messianic social involvement.

[ citation needed ] According to interpretations of Luria, the catastrophe stemmed from the "unwillingness" of the residue imprint after the Tzimtzum to relate to the new vitality that began creation. The process was arranged to shed and harmonise the Divine Infinity with the latent potential of evil.

[ 63 ] The creation of Adam would have redeemed existence, but his sin caused new shevirah of Divine vitality, requiring the Giving of the Torah to begin Messianic rectification. Historical and individual history becomes the narrative of reclaiming exiled Divine sparks.

[ citation needed ] Linguistic mysticism and the mystical Torah [ edit ] Kabbalistic thought extended Biblical and Midrashic notions that God enacted Creation through the Hebrew language and through the Torah into a full linguistic mysticism.

[ 64 ] In this, every Hebrew letter, word, number, even accent on words of the Hebrew Bible contain Jewish mystical meanings , describing the spiritual dimensions within exoteric ideas, and it teaches the hermeneutic methods of interpretation for ascertaining these meanings.

Names of God in Judaism have further prominence, though infinite meaning turns the whole Torah into a Divine name. As the Hebrew name of things is the channel of their lifeforce, parallel to the sephirot, so concepts such as "holiness" and " mitzvot " embody ontological Divine immanence, as God can be known in manifestation as well as transcendence. The infinite potential of meaning in the Torah, as in the Ein Sof , is reflected in the symbol of the two trees of the Garden of Eden; the Torah of the Tree of Knowledge is the external, finite Halachic Torah, enclothed within which the mystics perceive the unlimited infinite plurality of meanings of the Torah of the Tree of Life . In Lurianic terms, each of the 600,000 root souls of Israel find their own interpretation in Torah, as "God, the Torah and Israel are all One".

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] The reapers of the Field are the Comrades, masters of this wisdom, because Malkhut is called the Apple Field, and She grows sprouts of secrets and new meanings of Torah. Those who constantly create new interpretations of Torah are the ones who reap Her.

[ 66 ] As early as the 1st century BCE Jews believed that the Torah and other canonical texts contained encoded messages and hidden meanings.

[ 67 ] Gematria is one method for discovering its hidden meanings. In this system, each Hebrew letter also represents a number. By converting letters to numbers, Kabbalists were able to find a hidden meaning in each word. This method of interpretation was used extensively by various schools.

[ 68 ] In contemporary interpretation of kabbalah, Sanford Drob makes cognitive sense of this linguistic mythos by relating it to postmodern philosophical concepts described by Jacques Derrida and others, where all reality embodies narrative texts with infinite plurality of meanings brought by the reader. In this dialogue, kabbalah survives the nihilism of Deconstruction by incorporating its own Lurianic Shevirah , and by the dialectical paradox where man and God imply each other.

[ 69 ] Cognition, mysticism, or values [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A swastika composed of Hebrew letters as a mystical symbol from the Jewish Kabbalistic work Parashat Eliezer , from the 18th century or earlier Kabbalists as mystics [ edit ] The founder of the academic study of Jewish mysticism, Gershom Scholem , privileged an intellectual view of the nature of Kabbalistic symbols as dialectic Theosophical speculation. In contrast, contemporary scholarship of Moshe Idel and Elliot R. Wolfson has opened a phenomenological understanding of the mystical nature of Kabbalistic experience, based on a close reading of the historical texts. Wolfson has shown that among the closed elite circles of mystical activity, medieval Theosophical Kabbalists held that an intellectual view of their symbols was secondary to the experiential. In the context of medieval Jewish philosophical debates on the role of imagination in Biblical prophecy, and essentialist versus instrumental kabbalistic debates about the relation of sephirot to God, they saw contemplation on the sephirot as a vehicle for prophecy. Judaism's ban on physical iconography, along with anthropomorphic metaphors for Divinity in the Hebrew Bible and midrash , enabled their internal visualisation of the Divine sephirot Anthropos in imagination. Disclosure of the aniconic in iconic internal psychology, involved sublimatory revelation of Kabbalah's sexual unifications. Previous academic distinction between Theosophical versus Abulafian Ecstatic-Prophetic Kabbalah overstated their division of aims, which revolved around visual versus verbal/auditory views of prophecy.

[ 70 ] In addition, throughout the history of Judaic Kabbalah, the greatest mystics claimed to receive new teachings from Elijah the Prophet , the souls of earlier sages (a purpose of Lurianic meditation prostrated on the graves of Talmudic Tannaim , Amoraim and Kabbalists), the soul of the mishnah , ascents during sleep, heavenly messengers, etc. A tradition of parapsychology abilities, psychic knowledge, and theurgic intercessions in heaven for the community is recounted in the hagiographic works Praises of the Ari , Praises of the Besht , and in many other Kabbalistic and Hasidic tales. Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts are concerned to apply themselves from exegesis and theory to spiritual practice, including prophetic drawing of new mystical revelations in Torah. The mythological symbols Kabbalah uses to answer philosophical questions, themselves invite mystical contemplation, intuitive apprehension and psychological engagement.

[ 71 ] Paradoxical coincidence of opposites [ edit ] In bringing Theosophical Kabbalah into contemporary intellectual understanding, using the tools of modern and postmodern philosophy and psychology , Sanford Drob shows philosophically how every symbol of the Kabbalah embodies the simultaneous dialectical paradox of mystical Coincidentia oppositorum , the conjoining of two opposite dualities.

[ 72 ] Thus the Infinite Ein Sof is above the duality of Yesh/Ayin Being/Non-Being transcending Existence/Nothingness ( Becoming into Existence through the souls of Man who are the inner dimension of all spiritual and physical worlds, yet simultaneously the Infinite Divine generative lifesource beyond Creation that continuously keeps everything spiritual and physical in existence); Sephirot bridge the philosophical problem of the One and the Many; Man is both Divine ( Adam Kadmon ) and human (invited to project human psychology onto Divinity to understand it); Tzimtzum is both illusion and real from Divine and human perspectives; evil and good imply each other ( Kelipah draws from Divinity, good arises only from overcoming evil); Existence is simultaneously partial (Tzimtzum), broken ( Shevirah ), and whole ( Tikun ) from different perspectives; God experiences Himself as Other through Man, Man embodies and completes (Tikun) the Divine Persona Above. In Kabbalah's reciprocal Panentheism , Theism and Atheism / Humanism represent two incomplete poles of a mutual dialectic that imply and include each other's partial validity.

[ 69 ] This was expressed by the Chabad Hasidic thinker Aaron of Staroselye , that the truth of any concept is revealed only in its opposite.

Metaphysics or axiology [ edit ] They wish to convey here that if arms were a disgrace to the hero, it would not have used them as a parable for words of Torah. Instead, they are an adornment for him, so the verse used them for its parable, saying that he should have words of Torah and wisdom in hand, like the sword on the hero’s thigh, girded and accessible to him whenever he wishes to unsheathe it and use it to overpower his fellow—this is his glory and splendor. This is the idea wherever they expound a midrashic parable or allegory ; they believe that both “the internal and external” are true [ 73 ] — Nahmanides By expressing itself using symbols and myth that transcend single interpretations, Theosophical Kabbalah incorporates aspects of philosophy , Jewish theology , psychology and unconscious depth psychology , mysticism and meditation , Jewish exegesis , theurgy , and ethics , as well as overlapping with theory from magical elements . Its symbols can be read as questions which are their own existentialist answers (the Hebrew sephirah Chokmah -Wisdom, the beginning of Existence, is read etymologically by Kabbalists as the question "Koach Mah?" the "Power of What?"). Alternative listings of the Sephirot start with either Keter (Unconscious Will/Volition), or Chokmah (Wisdom), a philosophical duality between a Rational or Supra-Rational Creation, between whether the Mitzvot Judaic observances have reasons or transcend reasons in Divine Will, between whether study or good deeds is superior, and whether the symbols of Kabbalah should be read as primarily metaphysical intellectual cognition or Axiology values. Messianic redemption requires both ethical Tikkun olam and contemplative Kavanah . Sanford Drob sees every attempt to limit Kabbalah to one fixed dogmatic interpretation as necessarily bringing its own Deconstruction (Lurianic Kabbalah incorporates its own Shevirah self shattering; the Ein Sof transcends all of its infinite expressions; the infinite mystical Torah of the Tree of Life has no/infinite interpretations). The infinite axiology of the Ein Sof One, expressed through the Plural Many, overcomes the dangers of nihilism, or the antinomian mystical breaking of Jewish observance alluded to throughout Kabbalistic and Hasidic mysticisms.

[ 69 ] Primary texts [ edit ] Main article: Primary texts of Kabbalah Title page of first printed edition of the Zohar , main sourcebook of Kabbalah, from Mantua , Italy in 1558 Like the rest of the rabbinic literature, the texts of kabbalah were once part of an ongoing oral tradition , though, over the centuries, much of the oral tradition has been written down.

Jewish forms of esotericism existed over 2,000 years ago.

Ben Sira (born c.

170 BCE ) warns against it, saying: "You shall have no business with secret things".

[ 74 ] Nonetheless, mystical studies were undertaken and resulted in mystical literature, the first being the Apocalyptic literature of the second and first pre-Christian centuries and which contained elements that carried over to later kabbalah.

Throughout the centuries since, many texts have been produced, among them the ancient descriptions of Sefer Yetzirah , the Heichalot mystical ascent literature, the Bahir , Sefer Raziel HaMalakh and the Zohar , the main text of Kabbalistic exegesis. Classic mystical Bible commentaries are included in fuller versions of the Mikraot Gedolot (Main Commentators). Cordoveran systemisation is presented in Pardes Rimonim , philosophical articulation in the works of the Maharal , and Lurianic rectification in Etz Chayim . Subsequent interpretation of Lurianic Kabbalah was made in the writings of Shalom Sharabi, in Nefesh HaChaim and the 20th-century Sulam . Hasidism interpreted kabbalistic structures to their correspondence in inward perception.

[ 75 ] The Hasidic development of kabbalah incorporates a successive stage of Jewish mysticism from historical kabbalistic metaphysics.

[ 76 ] Scholarship [ edit ] Main article: List of Jewish mysticism scholars The first modern-academic historians of Judaism, the " Wissenschaft des Judentums " school of the 19th century, framed Judaism in solely rational terms in the emancipatory Haskalah spirit of their age. They opposed kabbalah and restricted its significance from Jewish historiography. In the mid-20th century, it was left to Gershom Scholem to overturn their stance, establishing the flourishing present-day academic investigation of Jewish mysticism, and making Heichalot, Kabbalistic and Hasidic texts the objects of scholarly critical-historical study. In Scholem's opinion, the mythical and mystical components of Judaism were at least as important as the rational ones, and he thought that they, rather than the exoteric Halakha or intellectualist Jewish philosophy , were the living subterranean stream in historical Jewish development that periodically broke out to renew the Jewish spirit and social life of the community. Scholem's magisterial Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism (1941) among his other seminal works, remains the major historical standard survey covering all main historical periods of Jewish mysticism .

[ 77 ] Though the work has sometimes been subject to criticism of various particularities , [ 78 ] and proposals of a hermeneutical revision in emphasis were introduced, the encompassing sweep and depth of historical analysis in Major Trends remains without equal almost one hundred years later despite voluminous clarifying scholarship on the subject produced in the meantime expanding and deepening thd terrain.

[ 78 ] The Hebrew University of Jerusalem has been a centre of this research, including Scholem and Isaiah Tishby , and more recently Joseph Dan , Yehuda Liebes , Rachel Elior , and Moshe Idel .

[ 79 ] Scholars across the eras of Jewish mysticism in America and Britain have included Alexander Altmann , Arthur Green , Lawrence Fine , Elliot Wolfson , Daniel Matt , [ 80 ] Louis Jacobs and Ada Rapoport-Albert .

Moshe Idel has opened up research on the Ecstatic Kabbalah alongside the theosophical, and has called for new multi-disciplinary approaches, beyond the philological and historical that have dominated until now, to include phenomenology , psychology , anthropology and comparative studies .

[ 81 ] Claims for authority [ edit ] Scholem provides a map of how authority is determined within the tradition in the document Revelation & Tradition as Religious Categories , first sent as the postscript to a letter from Jerusalem to Berlin in the early hours of 1933. The letter is addressed to Walter Benjamin . This postscript was published with minimal alterations as a chapter in Scholem’s anthology of miscellaneous, longer articles some forty years later.

[ 82 ] The document resists summary encapsulation but, taken according to its own terms (and especially considering the context of its composition), it can scarcely be argued with even by rigorous atheists outside the tradition. This explanation is intended for the modern reader, ensconced in a secular world (in point of fact, it is literally intended for the reader Walter Benjamin ).

[ 82 ] A version of the above-mentioned diagram for the attainment of authority within the tradition appears in a more open and less precise form in the first lecture of Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism , [ 83 ] and an account in yet another work explains that the Kabbalists themselves expressively describe the nomination of authority as proceeding from conversations with the Prophet Elijah .

[ 84 ] Scholem writes: “Since the beginnings of Rabbinical Judaism the Prophet Elijah has been a figure profoundly identified with the central preoccupations of Jewry: it is he who carries the divine message from generation to generation, he who at the end of time will reconcile all the conflicting opinions, traditions, and doctrines manifested in Judaism. Men of true piety meet him in the market place no less than in visions. Since he was conceived as the vigilant custodian of the Jewish religious ideal, the Messianic guardian and guarantor of the tradition, it was impossible to suppose that he would ever reveal or communicate anything that was in fundamental contradiction with the tradition. Thus by its very nature the interpretation of mystical experience as a revelation of the Prophet Elijah tended far more to confirm than to question the traditional authority [of the Torah and its acknowledged library of commentaries].” [ 84 ] Methods of Calling Upon Authority The entire frame and character of composition  in early Kabbalah, prior to the late-phase in Safed , appeals to an argument of authority grounded in the antiquity of authority, by speaking in ancient voices and mimicking ancient texts from a contemporary present in the high and late Middle Ages.

[ 85 ] As a result the foundational works in the main phase of Kabbalah as a literature, from Bahir to the Zohar , pseudepigraphically claim, or are ascribed, ancient authorship. For example, Sefer Raziel HaMalach , an astro-magical text partly based on a magical manual of late antiquity, Sefer ha-Razim , was, according to the Kabbalists, transmitted by the angel Raziel to Adam after he was evicted from Eden. Another famous work, the early Sefer Yetzirah , is dated back to the patriarch Abraham .

[ 86 ] Most (in fact, to our knowledge, all) of the earliest extant versions of the Sefer Yetzirah do not internally claim authorship by Abraham, but this attribution grows up as a tradition or rumor following the text.  This tendency toward pseudepigraphy has its roots in apocalyptic literature, which claims that esoteric knowledge such as magic, divination and astrology was transmitted to humans in the mythic past by the two angels, Aza and Azaz'el (in other places, Azaz'el and Uzaz'el) who fell from heaven (see Genesis 6:4). This tendency relates to a phase so early that it can scarcely be called Kabbalah, according to the trend in historiography, but relates to the twin traditions referred to as the way of the chariot and the account of creation .

[ 87 ] The book of Enoch (in which conversations between angels and sn antediluvian patriarch are recorded), for example, may be almost as old as our extant version of the Book of Daniel if ascriptions of the Aramaic Fragment of Enoch are found to be reliable.

[ 88 ] As well as ascribing ancient origins to texts, and reception of Oral Torah transmission, the greatest and most innovative Kabbalists claimed mystical reception of direct personal divine revelations, by heavenly mentors such as Elijah the Prophet , the souls of Talmudic sages , prophetic revelation , soul ascents on high, etc. On this basis Arthur Green speculates, that while the Zohar was written by a circle of Kabbalists in medieval Spain, they may have believed they were channeling the souls and direct revelations from the earlier mystic circle of Shimon bar Yochai in 2nd century Galilee depicted in the Zohar's narrative.

[ 89 ] Academics have compared the Zohar mystic circle of Spain with the romanticised wandering mystic circle of Galilee described in the text. Similarly, Isaac Luria gathered his disciples at the traditional Idra assembly location, placing each in the seat of their former reincarnations as students of Shimon bar Yochai.

Criticism [ edit ] This article is of a series on Criticism of religion By religion Baháˈí Faith Buddhism Christianity Catholic Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Protestantism Seventh-day Adventist Unification movement Unification Church in Japan Westboro Baptist Church Hinduism Swaminarayan sect Islam Islamism Twelver Shia Islam Wahhabism Jainism Judaism Monotheism New religious movement Neopaganism Scientology Sikhism Yazdânism Zoroastrianism By religious figure Aisha Charles Taze Russell Ellen White Jesus Moses Muhammad Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Saul By text Bible Quran Hadith Mormon sacred texts Book of Mormon Talmud Religious violence Buddhism Christianity Mormonism Judaism Islam Terrorism Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Persecution Christian thought on persecution and tolerance War In Islam In Judaism Sectarian violence By country India Anti-Christian violence In Odisha Nigeria Pakistan Bibliographies Christianity Islam Judaism Mormonism Scientology Related topics Abuse Apostasy In Islam In Christianity Criticism of atheism Criticism of monotheism Sexuality Slavery Superstitions Muslim Jewish v t e Distinction between Jews and non-Jews [ edit ] One point of view is represented by the Hasidic work Tanya (1797), in order to argue that Jews have a different character of soul: while a non-Jew, according to the author Shneur Zalman of Liadi (1745–1812), can achieve a high level of spirituality, similar to an angel, his soul is still fundamentally different in character, from a Jewish one.

[ 90 ] A similar view is found in Kuzari , an early medieval philosophical book by Yehuda Halevi (1075–1141).

[ 91 ] Another rabbi, Abraham Yehudah Khein (1878–1957), believed that spiritually elevated Gentiles have essentially Jewish souls, "who just lack the formal conversion to Judaism", and that unspiritual Jews are "Jewish merely by their birth documents".

[ 92 ] David Halperin argues that the collapse of Kabbalah's influence among Western European Jews over the course of the 17th and 18th century was a result of the cognitive dissonance they experienced between the negative perception of Gentiles found in some exponents of Kabbalah, and their own positive dealings with non-Jews, which were rapidly expanding and improving during this period due to the influence of the Enlightenment .

[ 93 ] Pinchas Elijah Hurwitz , a Lithuanian-Galician Kabbalist of the 18th century and a moderate proponent of the Haskalah, called for brotherly love and solidarity between all nations, and believed that Kabbalah can empower everyone, Jews and Gentiles alike, with prophetic abilities.

[ 94 ] The works of Abraham Cohen de Herrera (1570–1635) are full of references to Gentile mystical philosophers. Such approach was particularly common among the Renaissance and post-Renaissance Italian Jews . Late medieval and Renaissance Italian Kabbalists, such as Yohanan Alemanno , David Messer Leon and Abraham Yagel , adhered to humanistic ideals and incorporated teachings of various Christian and pagan mystics.

[ citation needed ] A prime representative of this humanist stream in Kabbalah was Elijah Benamozegh , who explicitly praised Christianity, Islam, Zoroastrianism, Hinduism, as well as a whole range of ancient pagan mystical systems. He believed that Kabbalah can reconcile the differences between the world's religions, which represent different facets and stages of the universal human spirituality. In his writings, Benamozegh interprets the New Testament , Hadith , Vedas , Avesta and pagan mysteries according to the Kabbalistic theosophy.

[ 95 ] E. R. Wolfson provides numerous examples from the 17th to the 20th centuries, which would challenge the view of Halperin as well as the notion that "modern Judaism" has rejected or dismissed this "outdated aspect" of the religion and, he argues, there are still Kabbalists today who harbor this view. He argues that, while it is accurate to say that many Jews do and would find this distinction offensive, it is inaccurate to say that the idea has been totally rejected in all circles. As Wolfson has argued, it is an ethical demand on the part of scholars to continue to be vigilant with regard to this matter and in this way the tradition can be refined from within.

[ 96 ] Medieval views [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Golden age of Spanish Judaism on the Knesset Menorah , Maimonides holding Aristotle 's work Kabbalah mysticism on the Knesset Menorah , which shared some similarities of theory with Jewish Neoplatonists The idea that there are ten divine sephirot could evolve over time into the idea that "God is One being, yet in that One being there are Ten" which opens up a debate about what the "correct beliefs" in God should be, according to Judaism. The early Kabbalists debated the relationship of the Sephirot to God, adopting a range of essentialist versus instrumental views.

[ 30 ] Modern Kabbalah, based on the 16th century systemisations of Cordovero and Isaac Luria , takes an intermediate position: the instrumental vessels of the sephirot are created, but their inner light is from the undifferentiated Ohr Ein Sof essence.

[ citation needed ] Maimonides (12th century), celebrated by followers for his Jewish rationalism , rejected many of the pre-Kabbalistic Hekalot texts, particularly Shi'ur Qomah whose starkly anthropomorphic vision of God he considered heretical.

[ 97 ] Maimonides, a centrally important medieval sage of Judaism, lived at the time of the first emergence of Kabbalah. Modern scholarship views the systemisation and publication of their historic oral doctrine by Kabbalists, as a move to rebut the threat on Judaic observance by the populance misreading Maimonides' ideal of philosophical contemplation over ritual performance in his philosophical Guide for the Perplexed . They objected to Maimonides equating the Talmudic Maaseh Breishit and Maaseh Merkavah secrets of the Torah with Aristotelean physics and metaphysics in that work and in his legal Mishneh Torah , teaching that their own Theosophy, centred on an esoteric metaphysics of traditional Jewish practice, is the Torah's true inner meaning.

[ citation needed ] The Kabbalist medieval rabbinic sage Nachmanides (13th century), classic debater against Maimonidean rationalism, provides background to many kabbalistic ideas. An entire book entitled Gevuras Aryeh was authored by Yaakov Yehuda Aryeh Leib Frenkel and originally published in 1915, specifically to explain and elaborate on the kabbalistic concepts addressed by Nachmanides in his classic commentary to the Five books of Moses .

[ citation needed ] Abraham Maimonides (in the spirit of his father Maimonides, Saadiah Gaon , and other predecessors) explains at length in his Milḥamot HaShem that God is in no way literally within time or space nor physically outside time or space, since time and space simply do not apply to his being whatsoever, emphasizing the Monotheist Oneness of Divine transcendence unlike any worldly conception. Kabbalah's Panentheism expressed by Moses Cordovero and Hasidic thought , agrees that God's essence transcends all expression, but holds in contrast that existence is a manifestation of God's Being, descending immanently through spiritual and physical condensations of the divine light. By incorporating the pluralist many within God, God's Oneness is deepened to exclude the true existence of anything but God. In Hasidic Panentheism , the world is acosmic from the Divine view, yet real from its own perspective.

[ citation needed ] Around the 1230s, Rabbi Meir ben Simon of Narbonne wrote an epistle (included in his Milḥemet Mitzvah ) against his contemporaries, the early Kabbalists, characterizing them as blasphemers who even approach heresy. He particularly singled out the Sefer Bahir, rejecting the attribution of its authorship to the tanna R. Neḥunya ben ha-Kanah and describing some of its content as truly heretical.

[ 30 ] Kabbalistic prayer book from Italy , 1803.

Jewish Museum of Switzerland , Basel Leon of Modena , a 17th-century Venetian critic of Kabbalah, wrote that if we were to accept the Kabbalah, then the Christian trinity would be compatible with Judaism, as the Trinity seems to resemble the kabbalistic doctrine of the sephirot . This was in response to the belief that some European Jews of the period addressed individual sephirot in their prayers, although the practice was apparently uncommon. Apologists explained that Jews may have been praying for and not necessarily to the aspects of Godliness represented by the sephirot . In contrast to Christianity, Kabbalists declare that one prays only "to Him ( God's Essence , male solely by metaphor in Hebrew's gendered grammar), not to his attributes (sephirot or any other Divine manifestations or forms of incarnation)". Kabbalists directed their prayers to God's essence through the channels of particular sephirot using kavanot Divine names intentions. To pray to a manifestation of God introduces false division among the sephirot, disrupting their absolute unity, dependence and dissolving into the transcendent Ein Sof ; the sephirot descend throughout Creation, only appearing from man's perception of God, where God manifests by any variety of numbers.

[ citation needed ] Yaakov Emden (1697–1776), himself an Orthodox Kabbalist who venerated the Zohar , [ 98 ] concerned to battle Sabbatean misuse of Kabbalah, wrote the Mitpaḥath Sfarim ( Veil of the Books ), an astute critique of the Zohar in which he concludes that certain parts of the Zohar contain heretical teaching and therefore could not have been written by Shimon bar Yochai.

[ 98 ] Vilna Gaon (1720–1797) held the Zohar and Luria in deep reverence, critically emending classic Judaic texts from historically accumulated errors by his acute acumen and scholarly belief in the perfect unity of Kabbalah revelation and Rabbinic Judaism. Though a Lurianic Kabbalist, his commentaries sometimes chose Zoharic interpretation over Luria when he felt the matter lent itself to a more exoteric view. Although proficient in mathematics and sciences and recommending their necessity for understanding Talmud , he had no use for canonical medieval Jewish philosophy , declaring that Maimonides had been "misled by the accursed philosophy" in denying belief in the external occult matters of demons, incantations and amulets.

[ 99 ] Views of Kabbalists regarding Jewish philosophy varied from those who appreciated Maimonidean and other classic medieval philosophical works, integrating them with Kabbalah and seeing profound human philosophical and Divine kabbalistic wisdoms as compatible, to those who polemicised against religious philosophy during times when it became overly rationalist and dogmatic. A dictum commonly cited by Kabbalists, "Kabbalah begins where Philosophy ends", can be read as either appreciation or polemic. Moses of Burgos (late 13th century) declared, "these philosophers whose wisdom you are praising end where we begin".

[ 100 ] Moses Cordovero appreciated the influence of Maimonides in his quasi-rational systemisation.

[ 101 ] From its inception, the Theosophical Kabbalah became permeated by terminology adapted from philosophy and given new mystical meanings, such as its early integration with the Neoplatonism of Ibn Gabirol and use of Aristotelian terms of Form over Matter.

[ citation needed ] Orthodox Judaism [ edit ] Tikkun for reading through the night of Shavuot , a popular Jewish custom from the Safed Kabbalists Pinchas Giller and Adin Steinsaltz write that Kabbalah is best described as the inner part of traditional Jewish religion , the official metaphysics of Judaism, that was essential to normative Judaism until fairly recently.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] With the decline of Jewish life in medieval Spain , it displaced rationalist Jewish philosophy until the modern rise of Haskalah enlightenment, receiving a revival in our postmodern age. While Judaism always maintained a minority tradition of religious rationalist criticism of Kabbalah, Gershom Scholem writes that Lurianic Kabbalah was the last theology that was near predominant in Jewish life. While Lurianism represented the elite of esoteric Kabbalism, its mythic-messianic divine drama and personalisation of reincarnation captured the popular imagination in Jewish folklore and in the Sabbatean and Hasidic social movements.

[ 104 ] Giller notes that the former Zoharic - Cordoverian classic Kabbalah represented a common exoteric popular view of Kabbalah, as depicted in early modern Musar literature .

[ 105 ] In contemporary Orthodox Judaism there is dispute as to the status of the Zohar's and Isaac Luria's (the Arizal ) Kabbalistic teachings. While a portion of Modern Orthodox , followers of the Dor De'ah movement, and many students of the Rambam reject Arizal's Kabbalistic teachings, as well as deny that the Zohar is authoritative or from Shimon bar Yohai , all three of these groups accept the existence and validity of the Talmudic Maaseh Breishit and Maaseh Merkavah mysticism. Their disagreement concerns whether the Kabbalistic teachings promulgated today are accurate representations of those esoteric teachings to which the Talmud refers. The mainstream Haredi ( Hasidic , Lithuanian , Oriental ) and Religious Zionist Jewish movements revere Luria and the Kabbalah, but one can find both rabbis who sympathize with such a view, while disagreeing with it, [ 106 ] as well as rabbis who consider such a view heresy. The Haredi Eliyahu Dessler and Gedaliah Nadel maintained that it is acceptable to believe that the Zohar was not written by Shimon bar Yochai and that it had a late authorship.

[ 107 ] Yechiel Yaakov Weinberg mentioned the possibility of Christian influence in the Kabbalah with the "Kabbalistic vision of the Messiah as the redeemer of all mankind" being "the Jewish counterpart to Christ." [ 108 ] Modern Orthodox Judaism , representing an inclination to rationalism, embrace of academic scholarship, and the individual's autonomy to define Judaism, embodies a diversity of views regarding Kabbalah from a Neo-Hasidic spirituality to Maimonist anti-Kabbalism. In a book to help define central theological issues in Modern Orthodoxy, Michael J. Harris writes that the relationship between Modern Orthodoxy and mysticism has been under-discussed. He sees a deficiency of spirituality in Modern Orthodoxy, as well as the dangers in a fundamentalist adoption of Kabbalah. He suggests the development of neo-Kabbalistic adaptions of Jewish mysticism compatible with rationalism, offering a variety of precedent models from past thinkers ranging from the mystical inclusivism of Abraham Isaac Kook to a compartmentalisation between Halakha and mysticism.

[ 109 ] Yiḥyeh Qafeḥ , a 20th-century Yemenite Jewish leader and Chief Rabbi of Yemen, spearheaded the Dor De'ah ("generation of knowledge") movement [ 110 ] to counteract the influence of the Zohar and modern Kabbalah.

[ 111 ] He authored critiques of mysticism in general and Lurianic Kabbalah in particular; his magnum opus was Milḥamoth ha-Shem ( Wars of Hashem ) [ 112 ] against what he perceived as neo-platonic and gnostic influences on Judaism with the publication and distribution of the Zohar since the 13th Century. Rabbi Yiḥyah founded yeshivot , rabbinical schools, and synagogues that featured a rationalist approach to Judaism based on the Talmud and works of Saadia Gaon and Maimonides (Rambam). In recent years, rationalists holding similar views as those of the Dor De'ah movement have described themselves as "talmide ha-Rambam" (disciples of Maimonides) rather than as being aligned with Dor De'ah, and are more theologically aligned with the rationalism of Modern Orthodox Judaism than with Orthodox Ḥasidic or Ḥaredi communities.

[ 113 ] Yeshayahu Leibowitz (1903–1994), an ultra-rationalist Modern Orthodox philosopher, referred to Kabbalah "a collection of "pagan superstitions" and "idol worship" in remarks given in 1990.

[ 114 ] Conservative, Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A version of Lekhah Dodi song to welcome the Shabbat , a cross denomination Jewish custom from Kabbalah Kabbalah tended to be rejected by most Jews in the Conservative and Reform movements, though its influences were not eliminated. While it was generally not studied as a discipline, the Kabbalistic Kabbalat Shabbat service remained part of liberal liturgy, as did the Yedid Nefesh prayer. Nevertheless, in the 1960s, Saul Lieberman of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America is reputed to have introduced a lecture by Scholem on Kabbalah with a statement that Kabbalah itself was "nonsense", but the academic study of Kabbalah was "scholarship". This view became popular among many Jews, who viewed the subject as worthy of study, but who did not accept Kabbalah as teaching literal truths.

[ citation needed ] According to Bradley Shavit Artson (Dean of the Conservative Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies ): Many western Jews insisted that their future and their freedom required shedding what they perceived as parochial orientalism. They fashioned a Judaism that was decorous and strictly rational (according to 19th-century European standards), denigrating Kabbalah as backward, superstitious, and marginal.

[ 115 ] However, in the late 20th century and early 21st century there has been a revival in interest in Kabbalah in all branches of liberal Judaism. The Kabbalistic 12th-century prayer Anim Zemirot was restored to the new Conservative Sim Shalom siddur , as was the B'rikh Shmeh passage from the Zohar, and the mystical Ushpizin service welcoming to the Sukkah the spirits of Jewish forebears.

Anim Zemirot and the 16th-century mystical poem Lekhah Dodi reappeared in the Reform Siddur Gates of Prayer in 1975. All rabbinical seminaries now teach several courses in Kabbalah—in Conservative Judaism , both the Jewish Theological Seminary of America and the Ziegler School of Rabbinic Studies of the American Jewish University in Los Angeles have full-time instructors in Kabbalah and Hasidut , Eitan Fishbane and Pinchas Giller, respectively. In Reform Judaism, Sharon Koren teaches at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion . Reform rabbis like Herbert Weiner and Lawrence Kushner have renewed interest in Kabbalah among Reform Jews. At the Reconstructionist Rabbinical College , Joel Hecker is the full-time instructor teaching courses in Kabbalah and Hasidut.

[ citation needed ] According to Artson: Ours is an age hungry for meaning, for a sense of belonging, for holiness. In that search, we have returned to the very Kabbalah our predecessors scorned. The stone that the builders rejected has become the head cornerstone (Psalm 118:22)... Kabbalah was the last universal theology adopted by the entire Jewish people, hence faithfulness to our commitment to positive-historical Judaism mandates a reverent receptivity to Kabbalah.

[ 116 ] The Reconstructionist movement, under the leadership of Arthur Green in the 1980s and 1990s, and with the influence of Zalman Schachter Shalomi, brought a strong openness to Kabbalah and hasidic elements that then came to play prominent roles in the Kol ha-Neshamah siddur series.

[ citation needed ] Antinomian Kabbalah [ edit ] Antinomian strands of Kabbalah reject or invert normal religious principles as a way of attempting purification. In these frameworks, transgression or sin itself is viewed as a spiritual necessity, capable of unleashing hidden divine sparks trapped in impure realms. The most prominent antinomian movements within Judaism were the Sabbateans and the Frankists .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Followers of Sabbatai Zevi believed that the coming of the messiah rendered Jewish commandments obsolete, with some sects engaging in ritualistic violations of the Law.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] Many of his adherents continued to view his actions as part of a hidden divine plan. In the 18th century, Jacob Frank pushed this theology further, advocating explicitly for "redemption through sin," such as ritualized orgies and incest .

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Eventually, the Frankists were encouraged to mass convert into Catholicism .

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] These movements were widely condemned as heretical but demonstrate the extent to which mystical ideas could support radical or subversive, reinterpretations of Jewish life.

[ 120 ] Contemporary study [ edit ] This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Teaching of classic esoteric kabbalah texts and practice remained traditional until recent times, passed on in Judaism from master to disciple, or studied by leading rabbinic scholars. This changed in the 20th century, through conscious reform and the secular openness of knowledge. In contemporary times kabbalah is studied in four very different, though sometimes overlapping, ways.

The traditional method, employed among Jews since the 16th century, continues in learned study circles. Its prerequisite is to either be born Jewish or be a convert and to join a group of kabbalists under the tutelage of a rabbi, since the 18th century more likely a Hasidic one, though others exist among Sephardi-Mizrachi, and Lithuanian rabbinic scholars. Beyond elite, historical esoteric kabbalah, the public-communally studied texts of Hasidic thought explain kabbalistic concepts for wide spiritual application, through their own concern with popular psychological perception of Divine Panentheism.

[ 55 ] A second, new universalist form, is the method of modern-style Jewish organisations and writers, who seek to disseminate kabbalah to every man, woman and child regardless of race or class, especially since the Western interest in mysticism from the 1960s. These derive from various cross-denominational Jewish interests in kabbalah, and range from considered theology to popularised forms that often adopt New Age terminology and beliefs for wider communication. These groups highlight or interpret kabbalah through non-particularist, universalist aspects.

[ 126 ] A third way is non-Jewish organisations, mystery schools, initiation bodies, fraternities and secret societies , the most popular of which are Freemasonry , Rosicrucianism and the Golden Dawn , although hundreds of similar societies claim a kabbalistic lineage. These derive from syncretic combinations of Jewish kabbalah with Christian, occultist or contemporary New Age spirituality. As a separate spiritual tradition in Western esotericism since the Renaissance, with different aims from its Jewish origin, the non-Jewish traditions differ significantly and do not give an accurate representation of the Jewish spiritual understanding (or vice versa).

[ 127 ] Fourthly, since the mid-20th century, historical-critical scholarly investigation of all eras of Jewish mysticism has flourished into an established department of university Jewish studies . Where the first academic historians of Judaism in the 19th century opposed and marginalised kabbalah, Gershom Scholem and his successors repositioned the historiography of Jewish mysticism as a central, vital component of Judaic renewal through history. Cross-disciplinary academic revisions of Scholem's and others' theories are regularly published for a wide readership.

[ 128 ] Universalist Jewish organisations [ edit ] In recent decades, Kabbalah has seen a resurgence of interest, with several modern groups and individuals exploring its profound teachings. These contemporary interpretations of Kabbalah offer a fresh perspective on this ancient mystical tradition, often bridging the gap between traditional wisdom and modern thought. Some of these interpretations emphasize universalist and philosophical approaches, seeking to enrich secular disciplines through the lens of Kabbalistic insights. Others have gained attention for their unique blends of spirituality and popular culture, attracting followers from diverse backgrounds. These modern expressions of Kabbalah showcase its enduring appeal and relevance in today's world.

[ citation needed ] Bnei Baruch is a group of Kabbalah students, based in Israel. Study materials are available in over 25 languages for free online or at printing cost. Michael Laitman established Bnei Baruch in 1991, following the passing of his teacher, Ashlag's son Rav Baruch Ashlag . Laitman named his group Bnei Baruch (sons of Baruch) to commemorate the memory of his mentor. The teaching strongly suggests restricting one's studies to 'authentic sources', kabbalists of the direct lineage of master to disciple.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] The Kabbalah Centre was founded in the United States in 1965 as The National Research Institute of Kabbalah by Philip Berg and Rav Yehuda Tzvi Brandwein, disciple of Yehuda Ashlag's. Later Philip Berg and his wife re-established the organisation as the worldwide Kabbalah Centre.

[ 131 ] [ failed verification ] The organization's leaders "vehemently reject" Orthodox Jewish identity.

[ 132 ] The Kabbalah Society , run by Warren Kenton , an organisation based instead on pre-Lurianic Medieval Kabbalah presented in universalist style. In contrast, traditional kabbalists read earlier kabbalah through later Lurianism and the systemisations of 16th-century Safed.

[ citation needed ] The New Kabbalah , website and books by Sanford L. Drob, is a scholarly intellectual investigation of the Lurianic symbolism in the perspective of modern and postmodern intellectual thought. It seeks a "new kabbalah" rooted in the historical tradition through its academic study, but universalised through dialogue with modern philosophy and psychology. This approach seeks to enrich the secular disciplines, while uncovering intellectual insights formerly implicit in kabbalah's essential myth: [ 133 ] By being equipped with the nonlinear concepts of dialectical, psychoanalytic, and deconstructive thought we can begin to make sense of the kabbalistic symbols in our own time. So equipped, we are today probably in a better position to understand the philosophical aspects of the kabbalah than were the kabbalists themselves.

[ 134 ] The Kabbalah of Information is described in the 2018 book From Infinity to Man: The Fundamental Ideas of Kabbalah Within the Framework of Information Theory and Quantum Physics written by Ukrainian-born professor and businessman Eduard Shyfrin . The main tenet of the teaching is "In the beginning He created information", rephrasing the famous saying of Nahmanides, "In the beginning He created primordial matter and He didn't create anything else, just shaped it and formed it." [ 135 ] Hasidic [ edit ] Since the 18th century, Jewish mystical development has continued in Hasidic Judaism, turning kabbalah into a social revival with texts that internalise mystical thought. Among different schools, Chabad-Lubavitch and Breslav with related organisations, give outward looking spiritual resources and textual learning for secular Jews. The Intellectual Hasidism of Chabad most emphasises the spread and understanding of kabbalah through its explanation in Hasidic thought, articulating the Divine meaning within kabbalah through human rational analogies, uniting the spiritual and material, esoteric and exoteric in their Divine source: Hasidic thought instructs in the predominance of spiritual form over physical matter, the advantage of matter when it is purified, and the advantage of form when integrated with matter. The two are to be unified so one cannot detect where either begins or ends, for "the Divine beginning is implanted in the end and the end in the beginning" (Sefer Yetzira 1:7). The One God created both for one purpose – to reveal the holy light of His hidden power. Only both united complete the perfection desired by the Creator.

[ 136 ] Neo-Hasidic [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Kabbalah" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) From the early 20th century, Neo-Hasidism expressed a modernist or non-Orthodox Jewish interest in Jewish mysticism, becoming influential among Modern Orthodox , Conservative , Reform and Reconstructionalist Jewish denominations from the 1960s, and organised through the Jewish Renewal and Chavurah movements. The writings and teachings of Zalman Schachter-Shalomi , Arthur Green , Lawrence Kushner , Herbert Weiner and others, has sought a critically selective, non-fundamentalist neo- Kabbalistic and Hasidic study and mystical spirituality among modernist Jews. The contemporary proliferation of scholarship by Jewish mysticism academia has contributed to critical adaptions of Jewish mysticism. Arthur Green's translations from the religious writings of Hillel Zeitlin conceive the latter to be a precursor of contemporary Neo-Hasidism. Reform rabbi Herbert Weiner's Nine and a Half Mystics: The Kabbala Today (1969), a travelogue among Kabbalists and Hasidim, brought perceptive insights into Jewish mysticism to many Reform Jews. Leading Reform philosopher Eugene Borowitz described the Orthodox Hasidic Adin Steinsaltz ( The Thirteen Petalled Rose ) and Aryeh Kaplan as major presenters of Kabbalistic spirituality for modernists today.

[ 137 ] Rav Kook [ edit ] The writings of Abraham Isaac Kook (1864–1935), first chief rabbi of Mandate Palestine and visionary, incorporate kabbalistic themes through his own poetic language and concern with human and divine unity. His influence is in the Religious Zionist community, who follow his aim that the legal and imaginative aspects of Judaism should interfuse: Due to the alienation from the "secret of God" [i.e. Kabbalah], the higher qualities of the depths of Godly life are reduced to trivia that do not penetrate the depth of the soul. When this happens, the most mighty force is missing from the soul of nation and individual, and Exile finds favor essentially... We should not negate any conception based on rectitude and awe of Heaven of any form—only the aspect of such an approach that desires to negate the mysteries and their great influence on the spirit of the nation. This is a tragedy that we must combat with counsel and understanding, with holiness and courage.

[ 138 ] Cathar and Mandaean parallels [ edit ] Main article: Mandaeism In several important areas of his history of the Kabbalah, Gershom Scholem investigates and considers the evidence of an interactivity of influence between the medieval Kabbalists of Provence and the Cathar heresy which was also prevalent in the region at the same time that the earliest works of medieval Kabbalah were written.

[ 139 ] In Jewish Influence on Christian Reform Movements , Louis I. Newman concluded, "Point by point, parallels can be found between Catharist views and the Kabbalah, and it may well be that at times there was an exchange of opinions between Jewish and Gentile mystics." [ 140 ] Earlier in the same book, Newman observed: …that the powerful Jewish culture in Languedoc, which had acquired sufficient strength to assume an aggressive, propagandist policy, created a milieu wherefrom movements of religious independence arose readily and spontaneously. Contact and association between Christian princes and their Jewish officials and friends stimulated the state of mind which facilitated the banishment of orthodoxy, the clearing away of the debris of Catholic theology. Unwilling to receive Jewish thought, the princes and laity turned towards Catharism, then being preached in their domains.

[ 140 ] Nathaniel Deutsch writes: Initially, these interactions [between Mandaeans and Jewish mystics in Babylonia from Late Antiquity to the medieval period] resulted in shared magical and angelological traditions. During this phase the parallels which exist between Mandaeism and Hekhalot mysticism would have developed. At some point, both Mandaeans and Jews living in Babylonia began to develop similar cosmogonic and theosophic traditions involving an analogous set of terms, concepts, and images. At present it is impossible to say whether these parallels resulted primarily from Jewish influence on Mandaeans, Mandaean influence on Jews, or from cross fertilization. Whatever their original source, these traditions eventually made their way into the priestly – that is, esoteric – Mandaean texts ... and into the Kabbalah.

[ 141 ] : 222 R.J. Zwi Werblowsky suggests Mandaeism has more commonality with Kabbalah than with Merkabah mysticism such as cosmogony and sexual imagery.

The Thousand and Twelve Questions , Scroll of Exalted Kingship , and Alma Rišaia Rba link the alphabet with the creation of the world, a concept found in Sefer Yetzirah and the Bahir .

[ 141 ] : 217 Mandaean names for uthras (angels or guardians) have been found in Jewish magical texts.

Abatur appears to be inscribed inside a Jewish magic bowl in a corrupted form as "Abiṭur".

Ptahil is found in Sefer HaRazim listed among other angels who stand on the ninth step of the second firmament.

[ 142 ] : 210–211 See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal List of Jewish Kabbalists Aggadah – Non-legalistic exegetical texts in the classical rabbinic literature Ayin and Yesh – "Nothingness" in Kabbalah and Hasidic philosophy English Qaballa – English Qaballa system of James Lees Gnosticism – Early Christian and Jewish religious systems Ka-Bala – Talking 1967 board game Notarikon – Kabbalistic method of deriving a word Temurah – Method in Kabbalah Notes [ edit ] ^ Originally a Mishnaic Hebrew term for Nakh , the term was commonly used to mean 'received tradition' or 'chain of tradition' by the Geonic period.

^ First published in 1941, Major Trends remains a historical standard on the subject.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "קַבָּלָה" .

/www.morfix.co.il . Melingo Ltd.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2016 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h Ginzberg, Louis ; Kohler, Kaufmann (1906).

"Cabala" .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

Kopelman Foundation .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 October 2018 .

^ a b c Dennis, Geoffrey W. (18 June 2014).

"What is Kabbalah?" .

ReformJudaism.org .

Union for Reform Judaism .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2015 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

Historians of Judaism identify many schools of Jewish esotericism across time, each with its own unique interests and beliefs. Technically, the term "Kabbalah" applies only to writings that emerged in medieval Spain and southern France beginning in the 13th century.

[...] Although until today Kabbalah has been the practice of select Jewish "circles," most of what we know about it comes from the many literary works that have been recognized as "mystical" or "esoteric." From these mystical works, scholars have identified many distinctive mystical schools, including the Hechalot mystics , the German Pietists , the Zoharic Kabbalah , the ecstatic school of Abraham Abulafia , the teachings of Isaac Luria , and Chasidism . These schools can be categorized further based on individual masters and their disciples.

^ "Imbued with Holiness" Archived 2010-10-12 at the Wayback Machine – The relationship of the esoteric to the exoteric in the fourfold Pardes interpretation of Torah and existence. From www.kabbalaonline.org ^ See works by Eleazar of Worms (eg. his gloss on Sefer Raziel ), Judah of Regensburg et. al. Especially important in the development of Notarikon. For Trachtenberg, the Kabbalah’s medieval European phase really begins here (implying the Bahir is reproduced in Provence from elsewhere), but most follow Scholem and other scholars on this question locating the Bahir in Provence as the root of this phase.

^ Ginsburg, Christian David (1865).

The Kabbalah: Its Doctrines, Development, and Literature. An Essay, Etc .

^ Huss, Boaz ; Pasi, Marco; Stuckrad, Kocku von , eds. (2010).

"Introduction" .

Kabbalah and Modernity: Interpretations, Transformations, Adaptations .

Leiden : Brill Publishers . pp.

1– 12.

ISBN 978-90-04-18284-4 .

^ Magid, Shaul (Summer 2014).

"Gershom Scholem" . In Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Center for the Study of Language and Information .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2023 . Retrieved 23 October 2018 .

^ a b Scholem (1995) .

^ Scholem (1960) ; Scholem (1995) .

^ Shabbat 104a ^ Scholem (1941) .

^ Green, Arthur (2011).

Ehyeh: A Kabbalah for Tomorrow . Jewish Lights.

ISBN 978-1580232135 .

^ Scholem (1977) , pp. 28–30.

^ Scholem (1941) , ch. 2, pp. 40-52.

^ Scholem (1941) , ch. 2, pp. 40-79.

^ Scholem (1962) , ch.1, pp.12-18.

^ Scholem (1941) , pp. 74–75, 157, 156–204.

^ Scholem (1941) , pp. 244–286.

^ Scholem (1941) , pp. 325–350.

^ Dennis, Geoffrey W. (18 June 2014).

"What is Kabbalah?" .

ReformJudaism.org . Union for Reform Judaism.

Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ Shnei Luchot HaBrit , R. Isaiah Horowitz, Toldot Adam , "Beit Ha-Chokhma", 14.

^ Broydé, Isaac ; Jacobs, Joseph (1906).

"Zohar" .

Jewish Encyclopedia .

Kopelman Foundation .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2018 .

^ "PESHAṬ - JewishEncyclopedia.com" .

www.jewishencyclopedia.com .

Archived from the original on 2023-08-26 . Retrieved 2019-03-18 .

^ "The Written Law – Torah" .

Jewish Virtual Library .

Archived from the original on 2022-05-21 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ Dan (2007) , chapters on "The Emergence of Medieval Kabbalah" and "Doctrines of Medieval Kabbalah".

^ Idel (1995) , p. 31.

^ Idel (1988b) .

^ Ginsburgh (2006) , p. 31.

^ a b c Dan & Kiener (1986) .

^ Megillah 14a, Shir HaShirim Rabbah 4:22, Ruth Rabbah 1:2.

^ Kaplan (2011) , pp. 44–48.

^ Yehuda Ashlag; Preface to the Wisdom of Truth p.12 section 30 and p.105 bottom section of the left column as preface to the "Talmud Eser HaSfirot" ^ See Shem Mashmaon by Shimon Agasi. It is a commentary on Otzrot Haim by Haim Vital. In the introduction he lists five major schools of thought as to how to understand the Haim Vital's understanding of the concept of Tzimtzum .

^ See Yechveh Daat Vol 3, section 47 by Ovadiah Yosef ^ See Ktavim Hadashim published by Yaakov Hillel of Ahavat Shalom for a sampling of works by Haim Vital attributed to Isaac Luria that deal with other works.

^ Wagner, Matthew.

"Kabbala goes to yeshiva – Magazine – Jerusalem Post" .

The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com . Jpost.com . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ Dan (2007) , ch. 5 & 9.

^ Scholem (1962) .

^ Jacobs (1995) , Entry: Kabbalah.

^ Dan (2007) , pp.

1–11 .

^ a b c d e f Scholem (1974) , p. 6.

^ a b "Ein-Sof" .

Jewish Virtual Library . American–Israeli Cooperative Enterprise (AICE). 2018.

Archived from the original on 2017-02-02 . Retrieved 2018-10-23 .

EIN-SOF (Heb. אֵין סוֹף; "The Infinite," lit. that which is boundless), name given in Kabbalah to God transcendent, in His pure essence: God in Himself, apart from His relationship to the created world. Since every name which was given to God referred to one of the characteristics or attributes by which He revealed Himself to His creatures, or which they ascribed to Him, there is no name or epithet for God from the point of view of His own being. Consequently, when the kabbalists wanted to be precise in their language they abstained from using names like Elohim , the Tetragrammaton , "the Holy One, blessed be He," and others. These names are all found either in the Written or the Oral Law . The Torah, however, refers only to God's manifestations and not to God's own being which is above and beyond His relationship to the created world. Therefore, neither in the Bible , nor in rabbinic tradition was there a term which could fulfill the need of the kabbalists in their speculations on the nature of God. "Know that Ein-Sof is not alluded to either in the Pentateuch, the Prophets, or the Hagiographa, nor in the writings of the rabbis. But the mystics had a vague tradition about it" ( Sefer Ma'arekhet ha-Elohut ). The term Ein-Sof is found in kabbalistic literature after 1200.

^ "אינסוף" .

Morfix, מורפיקס . Melingo Ltd.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2019 . Retrieved 19 November 2014 .

^ Zohar I, 15a English translation from Jewish Mysticism – An Anthology , Dan Cohn-Sherbok, Oneworld pub, p.120-121 ^ As Zohar I, 15a continues: "Zohar-Radiance, Concealed of the Concealed, struck its aura. The aura touched and did not touch this point." ^ Ginsburgh (2006) , p. 6.

^ See Otzrot Haim: Sha'ar TNT"A for a short explanation. The vast majority of the Lurianic system deals only with the complexities found in the world of Atzilut as is explained in the introductions to both Otzrot Haim and Eitz Haim.

^ The Song of the Soul , Yechiel Bar-Lev, p.73 ^ Laenen (2001) , p. 164.

^ "Kabbalah: New Kabbalah" .

Archived from the original on 2020-01-29 . Retrieved 2020-02-07 .

^ Wineberg (1998) , chs. 20–21.

^ "Beginner Level Kabbalah: What is Practical Kabbalah?" . Inner.org. 2014-02-24.

Archived from the original on 2015-09-28 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ Cantoni, Piero (2006).

"Demonology and Praxis of Exorcism and of the Liberation Prayers", in Fides Catholica 1" . Archived from the original on 2011-11-05.

^ a b Scholem (1974) .

^ The Tree of Life – Kuntres Eitz HaChayim , A classic chassidic treatise on the mystic core of spiritual vitality.

Sholom Dovber Schneersohn , translated by Eliyahu Touger, Sichos in English ^ Tanya chapter 29: "In truth there is no substance whatever in the sitra achra, wherefore it is compared to darkness which has no substance whatever and, consequently is banished in the presence of light.....although it possesses abundant vitality, nevertheless has no vitality of its own, G‑d forbid, but derives it from the realm of holiness.... Therefore it is completely nullified in the presence of holiness, as darkness is nullified before physical light, except that in regard to the holiness of the divine soul in man, the Holy One blessed be He, has given the animal soul permission and ability to raise itself in order that man should be challenged to overcome it and to humble it by his abhorring in himself that which is despicable. And "Through the impulse from below comes an impulse from Above", fulfilling "Thence will I bring thee down, saith the Lord", depriving it of its dominion and power and withdrawing from it the strength and authority which had been given it to rise up against the light of the holiness of the divine soul" ^ "Tanya chapter 26" .

Archived from the original on 2020-08-02 . Retrieved 2020-03-08 .

^ Dan (2007) , chapter on "Christian Kabbalah".

^ Otzar Eden Ganuz, Oxford Ms. 1580, fols. 163b-164a; see also Hayei Haolam Haba, Oxford 1582, fol. 12a.

^ Kaplan (1990) ; Kaplan (1995) .

^ "What Judaism Says About Reincarnation" .

Archived from the original on 2023-04-17 . Retrieved 2018-02-01 .

^ Dan (2007) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Scholem, Gershom; Pleasance, Simon (1972-09-01).

"The Name of God and the Linguistic Theory of the Kabbala" .

Diogenes .

20 (79): 59– 80.

doi : 10.1177/039219217202007903 .

ISSN 0392-1921 .

^ Scholem (1941) , pp. 210.

^ a b Moshe Cordovero, Or Ha-Hammah on Zohar III, 106a ^ "Bereshit Rabbah 1:10-1:11 et. al" .

www.sefaria.org . Retrieved 2025-04-15 .

^ Scholem (1941) , pp. 158, 208–209.

^ a b c Drob (2009) .

^ Wolfson (1994) , Chapter 6 Visionary Gnosis and the Role of the Imagination in Theosophic Kabbalah.

^ Scholem (1995) , First lecture: General Characteristics of Jewish Mysticism, discusses the difference between symbolism used by Kabbalah, and allegory used by philosophy. Allegory dispenses with the analogue once grasped. Symbolism, akin to mystical experience, retains the symbol as the best way to express an inexpressible truth beyond itself.

^ "Kabbalah: The New Kabbalah" Archived 2012-07-17 at the Wayback Machine .

Symbols of the Kabbalah: Philosophical and Psychological Perspectives , Jason Aronson 2000, the first comprehensive interpretation of the entirety of the theosophical Kabbalah from a contemporary philosophical and psychological point of view, and the first effort to articulate a comprehensive modern kabbalistic theology ^ Moshe Halbertal . "Nahmanides. Law and Mysticism" New Haven & London, Yale University Press 2020 (p. 62) ^ Sirach iii. 22; compare Talmud, Hagigah , 13a; Midrash Genesis Rabbah , viii.

^ "Overview of Chassidut (Chassidus) |" . Inner.org. 2014-02-12.

Archived from the original on 2009-02-02 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ The Founder of Hasidism, the Baal Shem Tov , cautioned against the layman learning Kabbalah without its Hasidic explanation. He saw this as the cause of the contemporary mystical heresies of Sabbatai Zevi and Jacob Frank . Cited in The Great Maggid by Jacob Immanuel Schochet , quoting Derech Mitzvosecha by Menachem Mendel Schneersohn ^ Alter, Robert (1989-09-01).

"Jewish Mysticism in Dispute" .

Commentary Magazine . Retrieved 2025-06-25 .

^ a b Important revisionism includes: Idel (1988) . An overview of contemporary scholarship: Greenspahn (2011) .

^ [1] Archived September 21, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Daniel Matt" .

www.srhe.ucsb.edu . Archived from the original on 2012-08-28.

^ Idel (1995) , p. 28.

^ a b Gershom Scholem (1933). "Revelation & Tradition as Religious Categories in Judaism".

The Messianic Idea in Judaism and other Essays on Jewish Spirituality, Gershom Scholem (1995) . pp.

282– 304.

^ Gershom Scholem (1961). "General Characteristics of Jewish Mysticism".

Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, Gershom Scholem (1961) . pp.

1– 31.

^ a b Scholem, Gershom.

On the Kabbalah and Its Symbolism Gershom Scholem . p. 20.

^ See, e.g., Joseph Dan's discussion in Dan (1999) .

^ Ginsburgh (2006) , p. 17.

^ Te: Tractate Chagigah, 11-15; mentioned also by Jerome and Origen.

^ “ An Interview with John Strugnell ".

The BAS Library .

^ Green (2004) , Chapter 17 The Question of Authorship.

^ סידור הרב, שער אכילת מצה ^ "Sefer Kuzari" .

www.sefaria.org .

Archived from the original on 2018-02-10 . Retrieved 2018-02-09 .

^ ר' אברהם חן, ביהדות התורה ^ Halperin (2012) .

^ Love of one's Neighbour in Pinhas Hurwitz's Sefer ha-Berit, Resianne Fontaine, Studies in Hebrew Language and Jewish Culture, Presented to Albert van der Heide on the Occasion of his Sixty-Fifth Birthday, p.244-268.

^ Israel and Humanity, Elijah Benamozegh, Paulist Press, 1995 ^ Wolfson (2006) , ch. 1.

^ Maimonides' responsa siman ( 117 (Blau) Archived 2021-04-20 at the Wayback Machine / 373 (Freimann) Archived 2021-04-20 at the Wayback Machine ), translated by Yosef Qafih and reprinted in his Collected Papers , Volume 1, footnote 1 on pages 475–476; see also pages 477–478 where a booklet found in Maimonides' Genizah with the text of Shi'ur Qomah appears with an annotation, possibly by Maimonides, cursing believers of Shi'ur Qomah (Hebrew: ארור המאמינו) and praying that God be elevated exceedingly beyond that which the heretics say (Judeo-Arabic: תע' ת'ם תע' עמא יקולון אלכאפרון; Hebrew: יתעלה לעילא לעילא ממה שאומרים הכופרים).

^ a b Jacobs (1995) , entry: Emden, Jacob.

^ Jacobs (1995) , entry: Elijah, Gaon of Vilna.

^ Scholem (1995) , p. 24.

^ Jacobs (1995) , entry: Cordovero, Moses – especially in Cordovero's view that the truth of Kabbalistic symbols, once grasped, must then be rejected for falsely literal anthropomorphism .

^ Giller (2011) , pp. 1–7.

^ Nine and a Half Mystics : The Kabbala Today , Herbert Weiner , Simon and Schuster new edition 1992/1997, Afterword: Mysticism in the Jewish Tradition by Adin Steinsaltz .

On the Road with Rabbi Steinsaltz , Arthur Kurzweil , Jossey-Bass 2006, Chapter: "Kabbalah is the Official Theology of the Jewish People" ^ Scholem (1941) took a historical view of popular Jewish imagination, interacting with national traumas to internalise and develop new Kabbalistic theologies ^ Giller (2011) , Chapter 3 Kabbalistic Metaphysics versus Chapter 4 Lurianic Kabbalah.

^ e.g., Ovadia Yosef , who ruled that it is "impossible" to consider followers of the Dor De'ah movement as heretics: לגבי הדרדעים "אי אפשר לדונם ככופרים" (מעין אומר סימן צג עמ' עדר) available at hydepark.hevre.co.il ^ An Analysis of the Authenticity of the Zohar (2005), p. 39, with "Rav E" and "Rav G" later identified by the author as Eliyahu Dessler and Gedaliah Nadel , respectively ( Marc Shapiro in Milin Havivin Volume 5 [2011], Is there an obligation to believe that Rebbe Shimon bar Yochai wrote the Zohar ?, p. יב [PDF page 133]): "I approached Rav A [Aryeh Carmell] with some of the questions on the Zohar, and he responded to me—'and what about nikud? Nikud is also mentioned in the Zohar despite the fact that it [is] from Geonic times!' he said. I later found this comment in the Mitpachas Seforim. I would just add that not only is nikud mentioned, but only the Tiberian Nikkud—the norm in Europe of the middle ages—is mentioned and not the Yerushalmi nikud or the Babylonian one — which was used then in the Middle East, and is still used by Yemenites today. Also the Taamay Hamikrah – the trop – are referred to in the Zohar—only by their Sefardi Names. Rav A told me a remarkable piece of testimony: 'My rebbe (this is how he generally refers to Rav E [Elijah Dessler]) accepted the possibility that the Zohar was written sometime in the 13th century.

' " "Rav G [Gedaliah Nadel] told me that he was still unsure as to the origin and status of the Zohar, but told me it was my absolute right to draw any conclusions I saw fit regarding both the Zohar and the Ari." ^ "Scholars and Friends: Rabbi Jehiel Jacob Weinberg and Professor Samuel Atlas" in The Torah U-Madda Journal , Volume 7 (1997), p. 120 n. 5. Hebrew original quoted in Milin Havivin Volume 5 [2011], Is there an obligation to believe that Rebbe Shimon bar Yochai wrote the Zohar ?, p. י Archived 2021-09-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Faith Without Fear: Unresolved Issues in Modern Orthodoxy , Michael J. Harris, Vallentine Mitchell 2015, Chapter 3 Modern Orthodoxy and Jewish Mysticism ^ Encyclopedia of Yemenite Sages (Heb. אנציקלופדיה לחכמי תימן), ed. Moshe Gavra, vol. 1, Benei Barak 2001, p. 545, s.v. קאפח, יחיא בן שלמה (Hebrew) שהקים את תנועת... דור דעה (he established the Dor Deah movement).

^ Gamliel, Amram (1 January 1984). "A Spark of Enlightenment Among the Jews of Yemen".

Hebrew Studies .

25 : 82– 89.

JSTOR 27908885 .

^ "Milhamot Hashem" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-08-18 . Retrieved 2021-08-18 .

^ "halacha – Is one allowed to become a Talmid HaRambam?" . Mi Yodeya. 2015.

Archived from the original on 2015-10-16 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ Mallin, Shlomo.

"Idol Worship is Still Within Us- Yesayahu Leibowitz" . Scribd.

Archived from the original on 2015-10-16 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ "From the Periphery to the Center: Kabbalah & Conservative Judaism | Spirituality and Theology:God, Torah Revelatio | Judaism @ AJU AJULA American Jewish University formerly University of Judaism" . Archived from the original on 2010-04-23 . Retrieved 2009-01-13 .

^ Artson, Bradley Shavit Archived 2011-07-29 at the Wayback Machine .

From the Periphery to the Centre: Kabbalah and the Conservative Movement , United Synagogue Review, Spring 2005, Vol. 57 No. 2 ^ "SHABBETHAI ẒEBI B. MORDECAI" .

jewishencyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ "The Holiness of Sin" .

Commentary Magazine . 1971-01-01 . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ "Messianic Deviations: The Sabbatean and Frankist Movements in Jewish History" .

researchgate.net . 2024-08-06. Archived from the original on 2024-08-06 . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ a b "Sabbatai Zevi: the Messianic Imposter" .

chabad.org . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ Gershom Scholem (1995).

The Messianic Idea in Judaism and other Essays on Jewish Spirituality, Gershom Scholem (1995) .

^ ushi (2018-08-23).

"Sacred Orgies: the Extremist Sabbatean Sect of Jacob Frank" .

Museum of the Jewish People . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ "Jakub Frank - samozwańczy Mesjasz" .

Ciekawe.onet.pl . 2016-03-04. Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ "Jacob Frank and the Heresy We Forgot" .

The Forward . 2011-06-01 . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ "Jacob Frank" .

www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 2025-04-20 .

^ Kaplan (1995) .

^ Dan (2007) , chapters on "Christian Kabbalah" and the "Contemporary Era".

^ Idel (1988) ; Wolfson (1994) .

^ "On Authentic Sources" . Laitman.com. 2008-07-08.

Archived from the original on 2014-01-02 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ "The Teaching of the Kabbalah and Its Essence | Yehuda Leib HaLevi Ashlag (Baal HaSulam) | Kabbalah Library – Bnei Baruch Kabbalah Education & Research Institute" . Kabbalah.info.

Archived from the original on 2020-04-24 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ "The Kabbalah Centre – learn transform connect" .

kabbalah.com .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2020 . Retrieved 5 October 2015 .

^ Myers, Jody. (2014). "Kabbalah Centre". In Lewis, James R.

; Petersen, Jesper Aa. (eds.).

Controversial New Religions (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

101– 113.

ISBN 978-0-19-515682-9 .

^ "Kabbalah" . New Kabbalah.

Archived from the original on 2015-10-21 . Retrieved 2015-09-27 .

^ Drob (1999) , p. xvi-xvii. Comparisons of the Lurianic scheme to Hegel, Freud and Jung are treated in respective chapters of Drob (2000) . The modern disciplines are explored as particular intellectual/emotional perspectives into the inclusive supra-rational Lurianic symbolism, from which both emerge enriched.

^ "Kabbalah Book review: The fundamental ideas of Kabbalah" .

The Jerusalem Post | Jpost.com .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-20 . Retrieved 2022-02-20 .

^ HaYom Yom , Kehot publications, p. 110 ^ Choices in Modern Jewish Thought: A Partisan Guide , Eugene Borowitz, Behrman House. After surveying the 6 systemised Jewish philosophical positions of modernity and other theologies, 2nd edition 1995 includes chapters on "The Turn to Mysticism", post-modernism, and Jewish feminist theology ^ Avraham Yitzchak HaCohen Kook ( Orot 2 ) ^ Scholem (1962) , pp. 14–20, 148–155, 197.

^ a b Newman, Louis (1925).

Jewish Influence on Christian Reform Movements (PDF) . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 176.

^ a b Deutsch, Nathaniel (1999–2000).

"The Date Palm and the Wellspring:Mandaeism and Jewish Mysticism" (PDF) .

ARAM .

11 (2): 209– 223.

doi : 10.2143/ARAM.11.2.504462 .

Archived from the original on 2022-06-26 . Retrieved 2022-05-06 .

^ Vinklat, Marek (January 2012).

"Jewish Elements in the Mandaic Written Magic" .

Biernot, D. – Blažek, J. – Veverková, K. (Eds.), "Šalom: Pocta Bedřichu Noskovi K Sedmdesátým Narozeninám" (Deus et Gentes, Vol. 37), Chomutov: L. Marek, 2012. Isbn 978-80-87127-56-8 .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 February 2022 .

Works cited [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Singer, Isidore ; et al., eds. (1901–1906). " Kabbalah ".

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

Dan, Joseph (1999).

The "Unique Cherub" Circle: A School of Mystics and Esoterics in Medieval Germany . Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3-16-146798-1 .

Dan, Joseph; Kiener, R. (1986).

The Early Kabbalah . Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press .

Dan, Joseph (2007).

Kabbalah: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-530034-5 .

Drob, Sanford (1999).

Symbols of the Kabbalah: Philosophical and Psychological Perspectives . Jason Aronson.

ISBN 978-1-4617-3415-4 .

Drob, Sanford (2000).

Kabbalistic Metaphors: Jewish Mystical Themes in Ancient and Modern Thought . J. Aronson.

ISBN 978-0-7657-6125-5 .

Drob, Sanford L. (2009).

Kabbalah and Postmodernism: A Dialogue . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-1-4331-0304-9 .

Giller, Pinchas (2011).

Kabbalah: A Guide for the Perplexed . Continuum.

[ ISBN missing ] Ginsburgh, Yitzchak (2006).

What You Need to Know about Kabbalah . Gal Einai.

ISBN 965-7146-119 .

Green, Arthur (2004).

A Guide to the Zohar . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-4908-4 .

Green, Arthur (2011).

Ehyeh: A Kabbalah for Tomorrow . Jewish Lights.

ISBN 978-1580232135 .

Greenspahn, Frederick E., ed. (2011).

Jewish Mysticism and Kabbalah: New Insights and Scholarship . Jewish Studies in the Twenty-First Century. NYU Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Halperin, David J. (2012). "Sabbatai Zevi, Metatron, and Mehmed: Myth and History in Seventeenth-Century Judaism". In Breslauer, S. Daniel (ed.).

The Seductiveness of Jewish Myth: Challenge Or Response?

. State University of New York Press. pp.

271– 308.

ISBN 978-0-7914-9744-9 .

Idel, Moshe (1988).

Kabbalah: New Perspectives . New Haven and London: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-04699-1 .

Idel, Moshe (1988b).

The Mystical Experience in Abraham Abulafia . New York: SUNY Press .

Idel, Moshe (1995).

Hasidism: Between Ecstasy and Magic . New York: SUNY Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Jacobs, Louis (1995).

The Jewish Religion: A Companion . Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Kaplan, Aryeh (1990).

Inner Space: Introduction to Kabbalah, Meditation and Prophecy . Moznaim Publishing.

Kaplan, Aryeh (1995).

Meditation and Kabbalah . Jason Aronson.

ISBN 978-1-56821-381-1 .

Kaplan, Aryeh (2011).

Jewish Meditation: A Practical Guide . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-76111-8 .

Laenen, J. H. (2001).

Jewish Mysticism: An Introduction . Presbyterian Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-664-22457-8 .

Scholem, Gershom (1941).

Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism . Schocken.

Scholem, Gershom (1995).

Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism . New York: Schocken Books.

ISBN 978-0-8052-1042-2 .

Scholem, Gershom (1960).

Jewish Gnosticism, Merkabah Mysticism and Talmudic Tradition: Based on the Israel Goldstein Lectures . New York: Jewish Theological Seminary of America.

Scholem, Gershom (1962).

The Origins of the Kabbalah . Schocken.

ISBN 978-0-691-02047-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Scholem, Gershom (1974).

Kabbalah . Quadrangle/New York Times Book Company.

ISBN 978-0-8129-0352-2 .

Scholem, Gershom (1977). Manheim, Ralph (ed.).

On the Kabbalah and its Symbolism . New York: Schocken Books.

ISBN 978-0-8052-0235-9 .

Wineberg, Yosef (1998).

Lessons in Tanya: The Tanya of R. Shneur Zalman of Liadi . Merkos L'Inyonei Chinuch.

5 volume set.

Wolfson, Elliot (1994).

Through a Speculum That Shines: Vision and Imagination in Medieval Jewish Mysticism . Princeton: Princeton University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] Wolfson, Elliot (2006).

Venturing Beyond: Law and Morality in Kabbalistic Mysticism . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] Further reading [ edit ] Dan, Joseph (1980). "Samael, Lilith, and the Concept of Evil in Early Kabbalah".

AJS Review .

5 : 17– 40.

doi : 10.1017/S0364009400000052 .

Dan, Joseph (2002).

The Heart and the Fountain: An Anthology of Jewish Mystical Experiences . New York: Oxford University Press .

Green, Arthur (2003).

EHYEH: A Kabbalah for Tomorrow . Woodstock: Jewish Lights Publishing .

Hecker, Joel (2005).

Mystical Bodies, Mystical Meals: Eating and Embodiment in Medieval Kabbalah . Detroit: Wayne State University Press .

Idel, Moshe (1985). Blumenthal, D. (ed.).

Kabbalistic Prayer and Color, Approaches to Judaism in Medieval Times . Chicago: Scholar's Press.

Idel, Moshe (1990).

The Golem: Jewish Magical and Mystical Traditions on the Artificial Anthropoid . New York: SUNY Press.

Idel, Moshe (1993). "Magic and Kabbalah in the 'Book of the Responding Entity' ".

The Solomon Goldman Lectures VI . Chicago: Spertus College of Judaica Press.

Idel, Moshe (2009).

Old Worlds, New Mirrors: On Jewish Mysticism and Twentieth-Century Thought . University of Pennsylvania Press.

Kaplan, Aryeh (1988).

Meditation and the Bible . S. Weiser.

ISBN 978-0-87728-617-2 .

Samuel, Gabriella (2007).

Kabbalah Handbook: A Concise Encyclopedia of Terms and Concepts in Jewish Mysticism . Penguin Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-1-101-21846-4 .

OCLC 488308797 .

Vital, Chaim (1999).

Etz Hayim: The Tree of Life . Translated by Eliahu Klein. Jason Aronson.

Wolfson, Elliot (2005).

Language, Eros Being: Kabbalistic Hermeneutics and Poetic Imagination . New York: Fordham University Press .

Wolfson, Elliot (2006).

Alef, Mem, Tau: Kabbalistic Musings on Time, Truth, and Death . Berkeley: University of California Press .

Wolfson, Elliot (2007).

Luminal Darkness: Imaginal Gleanings From Zoharic Literature . London: Onworld Publications.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kabbalah .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Kabbalah .

Jewish Encyclopedia: Cabala Judaism 101: Kabbalah and Jewish Mysticism King David Kabbalah on Mount Zion, Jerusalem Learn Kabbalah: Lurianic Kabbalah Chabad.org's "What is Kabbalah?" v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kabbalah&oldid=1306591591 " Categories : Kabbalah Esotericism Jewish culture Jewish mysticism Jewish theology Language and mysticism Panentheism Theurgy Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Pages with Hebrew IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2025 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2025 Articles with unsourced quotes Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from October 2017 Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 errors: ISBN date Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 16:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kabbalah 83 languages Add topic

