Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Omniscience and free will 2 Free will argument for the nonexistence of God 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Argument from free will 18 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Contention that omniscience is incompatible with free will Part of a series on Atheism Concepts Implicit and explicit atheism Naturalism Negative and positive atheism History History of atheism Atheism during the Age of Enlightenment New Atheism Society Atheist feminism Criticism of religion Demographics of atheism Discrimination against atheists Secular ethics Secularism Separation of church and state State atheism Atheism and religion Arguments Arguments for atheism Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil God challenge Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelation Nonbelief Occam's razor Omnipotence paradox Parody religion Poor design Problem of evil Problem of Hell Russell's teapot Theological noncognitivism People Lists of atheists Julian Baggini Mikhail Bakunin Mario Bunge Albert Camus Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Denis Diderot Ludwig Feuerbach A. C. Grayling Sam Harris Christopher Hitchens Baron d'Holbach Lawrence Krauss Michael Lou Martin Karl Marx Jean Meslier Friedrich Nietzsche Michel Onfray Bertrand Russell Peter Singer Victor J. Stenger Books Atheism: The Case Against God Breaking the Spell De rerum natura The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great The System of Nature Related stances Irreligion Agnosticism Freethought Secular humanism Atheism and religion Criticism of atheism LaVeyan Satanism Secular paganism Secular Buddhism Outline Category Philosophy portal WikiProject v t e Part of a series on the Philosophy of religion Religious concepts Afterlife Apophatism Cataphatism Eschatology Enlightenment Intelligent design Liberation Miracle Mysticism Religious belief Reincarnation Religious faith Scripture (religious text) Soul Spirit Theological veto God Conceptions Anthropopathism Brahman Demiurge Divinely simple Form of the Good Holy Spirit Maltheist Occasionalism Pandeist Personal Process-theological Summum bonum Supreme Being Unmoved mover Existence Arguments for Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Arguments against 747 gambit Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistency Nonbelief Noncognitivism Omnipotence paradox Poor design Russell's teapot By religion Abrahamic Baháʼí Christianity Islam Judaism Mormonism Mandaeism Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Wicca Theories of religion Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism atheist Christian Feminist Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Christian religious secular Inclusivism Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism humanistic metaphysical religious New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process Secular Shrine Theory Shendao shejiao Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Al-Ghazali Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 19th-century Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir Usman dan Fodio Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal Contemporary George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Sergei Bulgakov René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Pavel Florensky Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J. L. Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I. Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew Kurt Gödel Graham Oppy J. L. Schellenberg Paul Draper William L. Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Cornel West Loyal Rue Herman Philipse Kai Nielsen Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Yujin Nagasawa Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Ethics in religion Exegesis Faith and rationality History of religions Natural theology Religion and science Religious philosophy Theology v t e The argument from free will , also called the paradox of free will or theological fatalism , contends that omniscience and free will are incompatible and that any conception of God that incorporates both properties is therefore inconceivable.

[ citation needed ] See the various controversies over claims of God's omniscience, in particular the critical notion of foreknowledge .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These arguments are deeply concerned with the implications of predestination .

Omniscience and free will [ edit ] If God made the game, its rules, and the players, then how can any player be free?

Some arguments against the existence of God focus on the supposed incoherence of humankind possessing free will and God's omniscience . These arguments are deeply concerned with the implications of predestination .

Noted Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides described the conflict between divine omnipotence and his creation's person's free will, in traditional terms of good and evil actions, as follows: … "Does God know or does He not know that a certain individual will be good or bad? If thou sayest 'He knows', then it necessarily follows that the man is compelled to act as God knew beforehand how he would act, otherwise, God's knowledge would be imperfect.…" [ 3 ] A "standard Anglican" theologian gave a similar description of Christian revelation: … Scripture hold before us two great counter-truths – first, God's absolute sovereignty (cp Rome. 9, 20ff.), and secondly, man's responsibility. Our intellects cannot reconcile them.

[ 4 ] A logical formulation of this argument might go as follows: [ 1 ] God knows choice "C" that a human would claim to "make freely".

It is now necessary that C.

If it is now necessary that C, then C cannot be otherwise (this is the definition of “necessary”). That is, there are no actual "possibilities" due to predestination.

If you cannot do otherwise when you act, you do not act freely (Principle of Alternate Possibilities) Therefore, when you do an act, you will not do it freely.

Norman Swartz , however, contends that the above arguments commit the modal fallacy . In particular, he asserts that these arguments assume that if C is true, it becomes necessary for C to be true, which is incorrect as C is contingent (see modal logic ). Otherwise, one can argue that the future is set already regardless of his actions.

[ 2 ] Other means of reconciling God's omniscience with human free will have been proposed. Some have attempted to redefine or reconceptualize free will: God can know in advance what I will do, because free will is to be understood only as freedom from coercion , and anything further is an illusion. This is the move made by compatibilistic philosophies.

The sovereignty (autonomy) of God, existing within a free agent, provides strong inner compulsions toward a course of action (calling), and the power of choice (election). The actions of a human are thus determined by a human acting on relatively strong or weak urges (both from God and the environment around them) and their own relative power to choose.

[ 5 ] A proposition first offered by Boethius [ 6 ] and later by Thomas Aquinas [ note 1 ] and C. S. Lewis , suggests that God's perception of time is different, and that this is relevant to our understanding of our own free will. In his book Mere Christianity , Lewis argues that God is actually outside time and therefore does not "foresee" events, but rather simply observes them all at once. He explains: But suppose God is outside and above the Time-line. In that case, what we call "tomorrow" is visible to Him in just the same way as what we call "today". All the days are "Now" for Him. He does not remember you doing things yesterday, He simply sees you doing them: because, though you have lost yesterday, He has not. He does not "foresee" you doing things tomorrow, He simply sees you doing them: because, though tomorrow is not yet there for you, it is for Him. You never supposed that your actions at this moment were any less free because God knows what you are doing. Well, He knows your tomorrow's actions in just the same way – because He is already in tomorrow and can simply watch you. In a sense, He does not know your action till you have done it: but then the moment at which you have done it is already "Now" for Him.

[ 7 ] A common objection is to argue that Molinism , or the belief that God can know counterfactually the actions of his creations, is true. This has been used as an argument by Alvin Plantinga and William Lane Craig , amongst others.

Free will argument for the nonexistence of God [ edit ] Dan Barker suggests that this can lead to a "Free will Argument for the Nonexistence of God" [ 8 ] on the grounds that God's omniscience is incompatible with God having free will and that if God does not have free will, God is not a personal being .

Theists generally agree that God is a personal being and that God is omniscient , [ note 2 ] but there is some disagreement about whether "omniscient" means: "knows everything that God chooses to know and that is logically possible to know"; or instead the slightly stronger: "knows everything that is logically possible to know" [ note 3 ] These two terms are known as inherent and total omniscience, respectively.

See also [ edit ] Book of Life – Book used by God in Abrahamic religions Determinism List of paradoxes Molinism Notes [ edit ] ^ See also Divine Providence versus the concept of Fate ^ see e.g.

Richard Swinburne Does God Exist?

of The Catechism of the Catholic Church ^ see e.g.

John Polkinghorne References [ edit ] ^ a b Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Foreknowledge and Free Will ^ a b Swartz, Norman.

"Foreknowledge and Free Will" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 26 August 2017 .

^ The Eight Chapters of Maimonides on Ethics (Semonah Perakhim) , edited, annotated, and translated with an Introduction by Joseph I. Gorfinkle, pp. 99–100. (New York: AMS Press), 1966.

^ Watt, William M. (April 1946).

"Free Will and Predestination in Early Islam" .

The Muslim World .

36 (2): 124.

doi : 10.1111/j.1478-1913.1946.tb02093.x .

hdl : 1842/34371 . Retrieved 19 June 2022 .

^ The Philosopher's Handbook , Stanley Rosen, ed., Random House Reference, New York, 2000.

^ Consolatio Philosophiae , Boethius, book 5:4 ^ C. S. Lewis Mere Christianity Touchstone: New York, 1980 p. 149 ^ Barker, Dan (August 1997).

" The Free will Argument for the Nonexistence of God " .

Freedom From Religion Foundation . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas.

Summa Contra Gentiles Thomas Aquinas.

Summa Theologica I, Q. XIV, esp. Art. 13: "Whether the Knowledge of God is of Future Contingent Things?".

Boethius.

The Consolation of Philosophy . Many editions.

Hasker, William.

God, Time, and Foreknowledge". Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1998.

Molina, Luis de.

On Divine Foreknowledge , trans. Alfred J. Freddoso. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1988.

Plantinga, Alvin. "On Ockham's Way Out".

Faith and Philosophy 3 (3): 235–269.

Ockham, William.

Predestination, God's Foreknowledge, and Future Contingents ,  trans. M.M. Adams and N. Kretzmann. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1983.

Zagzebski, Linda. "The Dilemma of Freedom an Foreknowledge". New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.

Luther, Martin: De servo arbitrio , in English: On the Bondage of the Will . In Latin and German 1525, in modern English: J.I. Packer and O. R. Johnston, trans. Old Tappan, New Jersey: Fleming H. Revell Co., 1957.

External links [ edit ] Foreknowledge and Free Will article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Omniscience and Divine Foreknowledge article in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Paradox of Free will – An online  discussion Thomas Aquinas. Summa Theologica I, Q. XIV, Art. 13.

v t e Paradoxes Philosophical Analysis Buridan's bridge Dream argument Epicurean Fiction Fitch's knowability Free will Goodman's Hedonism Liberal Meno's Mere addition Moore's Newcomb's Nihilism Omnipotence Preface Rule-following Sorites Theseus' ship White horse Zeno's Logical Barber Berry Bhartrhari's Burali-Forti Court Crocodile Curry's Epimenides Free choice paradox Grelling–Nelson Kleene–Rosser Liar Card No-no Pinocchio Quine's Yablo's Opposite Day Paradoxes of set theory Richard's Russell's Socratic Hilbert's Hotel Temperature paradox Barbershop Catch-22 Chicken or the egg Drinker Entailment Lottery Plato's beard Raven Ross's Unexpected hanging " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles " Heat death paradox Olbers's paradox Economic Allais Antitrust Arrow information Bertrand Braess' Competition Income and fertility Downs–Thomson Easterlin Edgeworth Ellsberg European Gibson's Giffen good Icarus Jevons Leontief Lerner Lucas Mandeville's Mayfield's Metzler Plenty Productivity Prosperity Scitovsky Service recovery St. Petersburg Thrift Toil Tullock Value Decision theory Abilene Apportionment Alabama New states Population Arrow's Buridan's ass Chainstore Condorcet's Decision-making Downs Ellsberg Fenno's Fredkin's Green Hedgehog's Inventor's Kavka's toxin puzzle Morton's fork Navigation Newcomb's Parrondo's Preparedness Prevention Prisoner's dilemma Tolerance Willpower List Category v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Argument_from_free_will&oldid=1233308668 " Categories : Arguments against the existence of God Free will Philosophical paradoxes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 This page was last edited on 8 July 2024, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Argument from free will 18 languages Add topic

