Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and related words 2 Philosophical history Toggle Philosophical history subsection 2.1 Classical philosophy 2.2 Christian and Islamic philosophy 2.3 Subject-centred reason in early modern philosophy 2.4 Substantive and formal reason 2.5 The critique of reason 3 Reason compared to related concepts Toggle Reason compared to related concepts subsection 3.1 Reason compared to logic 3.2 Reason compared to cause-and-effect thinking, and symbolic thinking 3.3 Reason, imagination, mimesis, and memory 3.4 Logical reasoning methods and argumentation 3.4.1 Deductive reasoning 3.4.2 Inductive reasoning 3.4.3 Analogical reasoning 3.4.4 Abductive reasoning 3.4.5 Fallacious reasoning 3.5 Unreasonable decisions and actions 4 Traditional problems raised concerning reason Toggle Traditional problems raised concerning reason subsection 4.1 Reason versus truth, and "first principles" 4.2 Reason versus emotion or passion 4.3 Reason versus faith or tradition 5 Reason in particular fields of study Toggle Reason in particular fields of study subsection 5.1 Psychology and cognitive science 5.1.1 Behavioral experiments on human reasoning 5.1.2 Developmental studies of children's reasoning 5.1.3 Neuroscience of reasoning 5.2 Computer science 5.2.1 Automated reasoning 5.2.2 Meta-reasoning 5.3 Evolution of reason 5.4 Reason in political philosophy and ethics 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Reason 92 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български Bosanski Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Bajau Sama Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capacity for consciously making sense of things This article is about the human faculty of reason and rationality. For other uses, see Reason (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Reason is the capacity of consciously applying logic by drawing valid conclusions from new or existing information , with the aim of seeking the truth .

[ 1 ] It is associated with such characteristically human activities as philosophy , religion , science , language , mathematics , and art , and is normally considered to be a distinguishing ability possessed by humans .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Reason is sometimes referred to as rationality .

[ 4 ] Reasoning involves using more-or-less rational processes of thinking and cognition to extrapolate from one's existing knowledge to generate new knowledge, and involves the use of one's intellect . The field of logic studies the ways in which humans can use formal reasoning to produce logically valid arguments and true conclusions.

[ 5 ] Reasoning may be subdivided into forms of logical reasoning , such as deductive reasoning , inductive reasoning , and abductive reasoning .

Aristotle drew a distinction between logical discursive reasoning (reason proper), and intuitive reasoning , [ 6 ] : VI.7 in which the reasoning process through intuition—however valid—may tend toward the personal and the subjectively opaque. In some social and political settings logical and intuitive modes of reasoning may clash, while in other contexts intuition and formal reason are seen as complementary rather than adversarial. For example, in mathematics , intuition is often necessary for the creative processes involved with arriving at a formal proof , arguably the most difficult of formal reasoning tasks.

Reasoning, like habit or intuition , is one of the ways by which thinking moves from one idea to a related idea. For example, reasoning is the means by which rational individuals understand the significance of sensory information from their environments, or conceptualize abstract dichotomies such as cause and effect , truth and falsehood , or good and evil . Reasoning, as a part of executive decision making , is also closely identified with the ability to self-consciously change, in terms of goals , beliefs , attitudes , traditions , and institutions , and therefore with the capacity for freedom and self-determination .

[ 7 ] Psychologists and cognitive scientists have attempted to study and explain how people reason , e.g. which cognitive and neural processes are engaged, and how cultural factors affect the inferences that people draw. The field of automated reasoning studies how reasoning may or may not be modeled computationally.

Animal psychology considers the question of whether animals other than humans can reason.

Etymology and related words [ edit ] In the English language and other modern European languages , "reason", and related words, represent words which have always been used to translate Latin and classical Greek terms in their philosophical sense.

The original Greek term was "λόγος" logos , the root of the modern English word " logic " but also a word that could mean for example "speech" or "explanation" or an "account" (of money handled).

[ 8 ] As a philosophical term logos was translated in its non-linguistic senses in Latin as ratio . This was originally not just a translation used for philosophy, but was also commonly a translation for logos in the sense of an account of money.

[ 9 ] French raison is derived directly from Latin, and this is the direct source of the English word "reason".

[ 10 ] The earliest major philosophers to publish in English, such as Francis Bacon , Thomas Hobbes , and John Locke also routinely wrote in Latin and French, and compared their terms to Greek, treating the words " logos ", " ratio ", " raison " and "reason" as interchangeable. The meaning of the word "reason" in senses such as "human reason" also overlaps to a large extent with " rationality " and the adjective of "reason" in philosophical contexts is normally " rational ", rather than "reasoned" or "reasonable".

[ 11 ] Some philosophers, Hobbes for example, also used the word ratiocination as a synonym for "reasoning".

In contrast to the use of "reason" as an abstract noun , a reason is a consideration that either explains or justifies events, phenomena, or behavior .

[ 10 ] Reasons justify decisions, reasons support explanations of natural phenomena, and reasons can be given to explain the actions (conduct) of individuals.

The words are connected in this way: using reason, or reasoning, means providing good reasons. For example, when evaluating a moral decision, "morality is, at the very least, the effort to guide one's conduct by reason —that is, doing what there are the best reasons for doing—while giving equal [and impartial] weight to the interests of all those affected by what one does." [ 12 ] Philosophical history [ edit ] Francisco de Goya , The Sleep of Reason Produces Monsters ( El sueño de la razón produce monstruos ), c.

1797 The proposal that reason gives humanity a special position in nature has been argued [ citation needed ] to be a defining characteristic of western philosophy and later western science , starting with classical Greece. Philosophy can be described as a way of life based upon reason, while reason has been among the major subjects of philosophical discussion since ancient times. Reason is often said to be reflexive , or "self-correcting", and the critique of reason has been a persistent theme in philosophy.

[ 13 ] Classical philosophy [ edit ] For many classical philosophers , nature was understood teleologically , meaning that every type of thing had a definitive purpose that fit within a natural order that was itself understood to have aims. Perhaps starting with Pythagoras or Heraclitus , the cosmos was even said to have reason.

[ 14 ] Reason, by this account, is not just a characteristic that people happen to have. Reason was considered of higher stature than other characteristics of human nature, because it is something people share with nature itself, linking an apparently immortal part of the human mind with the divine order of the cosmos. Within the human mind or soul ( psyche ), reason was described by Plato as being the natural monarch which should rule over the other parts, such as spiritedness ( thumos ) and the passions.

Aristotle , Plato's student, defined human beings as rational animals , emphasizing reason as a characteristic of human nature . He described the highest human happiness or well being ( eudaimonia ) as a life which is lived consistently, excellently, and completely in accordance with reason.

[ 6 ] : I The conclusions to be drawn from the discussions of Aristotle and Plato on this matter are amongst the most debated in the history of philosophy.

[ 15 ] But teleological accounts such as Aristotle's were highly influential for those who attempt to explain reason in a way that is consistent with monotheism and the immortality and divinity of the human soul. For example, in the neoplatonist account of Plotinus , the cosmos has one soul, which is the seat of all reason, and the souls of all people are part of this soul. Reason is for Plotinus both the provider of form to material things, and the light which brings people's souls back into line with their source.

[ 16 ] Christian and Islamic philosophy [ edit ] The classical view of reason was adopted by the early Church.

[ 17 ] The greatest among the early Church Fathers and Doctors of the Church such as Augustine of Hippo , Basil of Caesarea , and Gregory of Nyssa were as much Neoplatonic philosophers as they were Christian theologians, and they adopted the Neoplatonic view of human reason and its implications for our relationship to creation, to ourselves, and to God.

The Neoplatonic conception of the rational aspect of the human soul was widely adopted by medieval Islamic philosophers and continues to hold significance in Iranian philosophy .

[ 15 ] As European intellectual life reemerged from the Dark Ages , the Christian Patristic tradition and the influence of esteemed Islamic scholars like Averroes and Avicenna contributed to the development of the Scholastic view of reason, which laid the foundation for our modern understanding of this concept.

[ 18 ] Among the Scholastics who relied on the classical concept of reason for the development of their doctrines, none were more influential than Saint Thomas Aquinas , who put this concept at the heart of his Natural Law . In this doctrine, Thomas concludes that because humans have reason and because reason is a spark of the divine, every single human life is invaluable, all humans are equal, and every human is born with an intrinsic and permanent set of basic rights.

[ 19 ] On this foundation, the idea of human rights would later be constructed by Spanish theologians at the School of Salamanca .

Other Scholastics, such as Roger Bacon and Albertus Magnus , following the example of Islamic scholars such as Alhazen , emphasised reason an intrinsic human ability to decode the created order and the structures that underlie our experienced physical reality. This interpretation of reason was instrumental to the development of the scientific method in the early Universities of the high Middle Ages.

[ 20 ] Subject-centred reason in early modern philosophy [ edit ] The early modern era was marked by a number of significant changes in the understanding of reason, starting in Europe . One of the most important of these changes involved a change in the metaphysical understanding of human beings. Scientists and philosophers began to question the teleological understanding of the world.

[ 21 ] Nature was no longer assumed to be human-like, with its own aims or reason, and human nature was no longer assumed to work according to anything other than the same " laws of nature " which affect inanimate things. This new understanding eventually displaced the previous world view that derived from a spiritual understanding of the universe.

René Descartes Accordingly, in the 17th century, René Descartes explicitly rejected the traditional notion of humans as "rational animals", suggesting instead that they are nothing more than "thinking things" along the lines of other "things" in nature. Any grounds of knowledge outside that understanding was, therefore, subject to doubt.

In his search for a foundation of all possible knowledge, Descartes decided to throw into doubt all knowledge— except that of the mind itself in the process of thinking: At this time I admit nothing that is not necessarily true. I am therefore precisely nothing but a thinking thing; that is a mind, or intellect, or understanding, or reason—words of whose meanings I was previously ignorant.

[ 22 ] This eventually became known as epistemological or "subject-centred" reason, because it is based on the knowing subject , who perceives the rest of the world and itself as a set of objects to be studied, and successfully mastered, by applying the knowledge accumulated through such study. Breaking with tradition and with many thinkers after him, Descartes explicitly did not divide the incorporeal soul into parts, such as reason and intellect, describing them instead as one indivisible incorporeal entity.

A contemporary of Descartes, Thomas Hobbes described reason as a broader version of "addition and subtraction" which is not limited to numbers.

[ 23 ] This understanding of reason is sometimes termed "calculative" reason. Similar to Descartes, Hobbes asserted that "No discourse whatsoever, can end in absolute knowledge of fact, past, or to come" but that "sense and memory" is absolute knowledge.

[ 24 ] In the late 17th century through the 18th century, John Locke and David Hume developed Descartes's line of thought still further. Hume took it in an especially skeptical direction, proposing that there could be no possibility of deducing relationships of cause and effect, and therefore no knowledge is based on reasoning alone, even if it seems otherwise.

[ 25 ] Hume famously remarked that, "We speak not strictly and philosophically when we talk of the combat of passion and of reason. Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend to any other office than to serve and obey them." [ 26 ] Hume also took his definition of reason to unorthodox extremes by arguing, unlike his predecessors, that human reason is not qualitatively different from either simply conceiving individual ideas, or from judgments associating two ideas, [ 27 ] and that "reason is nothing but a wonderful and unintelligible instinct in our souls, which carries us along a certain train of ideas, and endows them with particular qualities, according to their particular situations and relations." [ 28 ] It followed from this that animals have reason, only much less complex than human reason.

In the 18th century, Immanuel Kant attempted to show that Hume was wrong by demonstrating that a " transcendental " self, or "I", was a necessary condition of all experience. Therefore, suggested Kant, on the basis of such a self, it is in fact possible to reason both about the conditions and limits of human knowledge. And so long as these limits are respected, reason can be the vehicle of morality, justice, aesthetics, theories of knowledge ( epistemology ), and understanding.

[ citation needed ] [ 29 ] Substantive and formal reason [ edit ] In the formulation of Kant, who wrote some of the most influential modern treatises on the subject, the great achievement of reason ( German : Vernunft ) is that it is able to exercise a kind of universal law-making. Kant was able therefore to reformulate the basis of moral-practical, theoretical, and aesthetic reasoning on "universal" laws.

Here, practical reasoning is the self-legislating or self-governing formulation of universal norms , and theoretical reasoning is the way humans posit universal laws of nature .

[ 30 ] Under practical reason, the moral autonomy or freedom of people depends on their ability, by the proper exercise of that reason, to behave according to laws that are given to them. This contrasted with earlier forms of morality, which depended on religious understanding and interpretation, or on nature , for their substance.

[ 31 ] According to Kant, in a free society each individual must be able to pursue their goals however they see fit, as long as their actions conform to principles given by reason. He formulated such a principle, called the " categorical imperative ", which would justify an action only if it could be universalized: Act only according to that maxim whereby you can, at the same time, will that it should become a universal law.

[ 32 ] In contrast to Hume, Kant insisted that reason itself (German Vernunft ) could be used to find solutions to metaphysical problems, especially the discovery of the foundations of morality. Kant claimed that these solutions could be found with his " transcendental logic ", which unlike normal logic is not just an instrument that can be used indifferently, as it was for Aristotle, but a theoretical science in its own right and the basis of all the others.

[ 33 ] According to Jürgen Habermas , the "substantive unity" of reason has dissolved in modern times, such that it can no longer answer the question "How should I live?" Instead, the unity of reason has to be strictly formal, or "procedural". He thus described reason as a group of three autonomous spheres (on the model of Kant's three critiques): Cognitive–instrumental reason the kind of reason employed by the sciences; used to observe events, to predict and control outcomes, and to intervene in the world on the basis of its hypotheses Moral–practical reason what we use to deliberate and discuss issues in the moral and political realm, according to universalizable procedures (similar to Kant's categorical imperative) Aesthetic reason typically found in works of art and literature, and encompasses the novel ways of seeing the world and interpreting things that those practices embody For Habermas, these three spheres are the domain of experts, and therefore need to be mediated with the " lifeworld " by philosophers. In drawing such a picture of reason, Habermas hoped to demonstrate that the substantive unity of reason, which in pre-modern societies had been able to answer questions about the good life, could be made up for by the unity of reason's formalizable procedures.

[ 34 ] The critique of reason [ edit ] Hamann , Herder , Kant , Hegel , Kierkegaard , Nietzsche , Heidegger , Foucault , Rorty , and many other philosophers have contributed to a debate about what reason means, or ought to mean. Some, like Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Rorty, are skeptical about subject-centred, universal, or instrumental reason, and even skeptical toward reason as a whole. Others, including Hegel, believe that it has obscured the importance of intersubjectivity , or "spirit" in human life, and they attempt to reconstruct a model of what reason should be.

Some thinkers, e.g. Foucault, believe there are other forms of reason, neglected but essential to modern life, and to our understanding of what it means to live a life according to reason.

[ 13 ] Others suggest that there is not just one reason or rationality, but multiple possible systems of reason or rationality which may conflict (in which case there is no super-rational system one can appeal to in order to resolve the conflict).

[ 35 ] In the last several decades, a number of proposals have been made to "re-orient" this critique of reason, or to recognize the "other voices" or "new departments" of reason: For example, in opposition to subject-centred reason, Habermas has proposed a model of communicative reason that sees it as an essentially cooperative activity, based on the fact of linguistic intersubjectivity .

[ 36 ] Nikolas Kompridis proposed a widely encompassing view of reason as "that ensemble of practices that contributes to the opening and preserving of openness" in human affairs, and a focus on reason's possibilities for social change.

[ 37 ] The philosopher Charles Taylor , influenced by the 20th century German philosopher Martin Heidegger , proposed that reason ought to include the faculty of disclosure , which is tied to the way we make sense of things in everyday life, as a new "department" of reason.

[ 38 ] In the essay "What is Enlightenment?", Michel Foucault proposed a critique based on Kant's distinction between "private" and "public" uses of reason: [ 39 ] Private reason the reason that is used when an individual is "a cog in a machine" or when one "has a role to play in society and jobs to do: to be a soldier, to have taxes to pay, to be in charge of a parish, to be a civil servant" Public reason the reason used "when one is reasoning as a reasonable being (and not as a cog in a machine), when one is reasoning as a member of reasonable humanity"; in these circumstances, "the use of reason must be free and public" Reason compared to related concepts [ edit ] Reason compared to logic [ edit ] See also: Logic The terms logic or logical are sometimes used as if they were identical with reason or rational , or sometimes logic is seen as the most pure or the defining form of reason: "Logic is about reasoning—about going from premises to a conclusion. ... When you do logic, you try to clarify reasoning and separate good from bad reasoning." [ 40 ] In modern economics , rational choice is assumed to equate to logically consistent choice.

[ 41 ] However, reason and logic can be thought of as distinct—although logic is one important aspect of reason. Author Douglas Hofstadter , in Gödel, Escher, Bach , characterizes the distinction in this way: Logic is done inside a system while reason is done outside the system by such methods as skipping steps, working backward, drawing diagrams, looking at examples, or seeing what happens if you change the rules of the system.

[ 42 ] Psychologists Mark H. Bickard and Robert L. Campbell argue that "rationality cannot be simply assimilated to logicality"; they note that "human knowledge of logic and logical systems has developed" over time through reasoning, and logical systems "can't construct new logical systems more powerful than themselves", so reasoning and rationality must involve more than a system of logic.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Psychologist David Moshman, citing Bickhard and Campbell, argues for a " metacognitive conception of rationality" in which a person's development of reason "involves increasing consciousness and control of logical and other inferences".

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Reason is a type of thought , and logic involves the attempt to describe a system of formal rules or norms of appropriate reasoning.

[ 44 ] The oldest surviving Western writings to explicitly consider and systematically codify the rules by which reason operates, are the works of the Greek philosopher Aristotle , especially Prior Analytics and Posterior Analytics .

[ 46 ] Although the Ancient Greeks had no separate word for logic as distinct from language and reason, Aristotle's newly coined word " syllogism " ( syllogismos ) identified logic clearly for the first time as a distinct field of study.

[ 47 ] When Aristotle referred to "the logical" ( hē logikē ), he was referring more broadly to rational thought.

[ 48 ] Reason compared to cause-and-effect thinking, and symbolic thinking [ edit ] Main articles: Causality and Symbols As pointed out by philosophers such as Hobbes, Locke, and Hume, some animals are also clearly capable of a type of " associative thinking ", even to the extent of associating causes and effects. A dog once kicked, can learn how to recognize the warning signs and avoid being kicked in the future, but this does not mean the dog has reason in any strict sense of the word. It also does not mean that humans acting on the basis of experience or habit are using their reason.

[ 28 ] Human reason requires more than being able to associate two ideas—even if those two ideas might be described by a reasoning human as a cause and an effect—perceptions of smoke, for example, and memories of fire. For reason to be involved, the association of smoke and the fire would have to be thought through in a way that can be explained, for example as cause and effect. In the explanation of Locke , for example, reason requires the mental use of a third idea in order to make this comparison by use of syllogism .

[ 49 ] More generally, according to Charles Sanders Peirce , reason in the strict sense requires the ability to create and manipulate a system of symbols , as well as indices and icons , the symbols having only a nominal, though habitual, connection to either (for example) smoke or fire.

[ 50 ] One example of such a system of symbols and signs is language .

The connection of reason to symbolic thinking has been expressed in different ways by philosophers.

Thomas Hobbes described the creation of "Markes, or Notes of remembrance" as speech .

[ 51 ] He used the word speech as an English version of the Greek word logos so that speech did not need to be communicated.

[ 52 ] When communicated, such speech becomes language, and the marks or notes or remembrance are called " Signes " by Hobbes. Going further back, although Aristotle is a source of the idea that only humans have reason ( logos ), he does mention that animals with imagination, for whom sense perceptions can persist, come closest to having something like reasoning and nous , and even uses the word " logos " in one place to describe the distinctions which animals can perceive in such cases.

[ 53 ] Reason, imagination, mimesis, and memory [ edit ] Main articles: Imagination , Mimesis , Memory , and Recollection Reason and imagination rely on similar mental processes .

[ 54 ] Imagination is not only found in humans. Aristotle asserted that phantasia (imagination: that which can hold images or phantasmata ) and phronein (a type of thinking that can judge and understand in some sense) also exist in some animals.

[ 55 ] According to him, both are related to the primary perceptive ability of animals, which gathers the perceptions of different senses and defines the order of the things that are perceived without distinguishing universals, and without deliberation or logos . But this is not yet reason, because human imagination is different.

Terrence Deacon and Merlin Donald , writing about the origin of language , connect reason not only to language , but also mimesis .

[ 56 ] They describe the ability to create language as part of an internal modeling of reality , and specific to humankind. Other results are consciousness , and imagination or fantasy . Modern proponents of a genetic predisposition to language itself include Noam Chomsky and Steven Pinker .

If reason is symbolic thinking, and peculiarly human, then this implies that humans have a special ability to maintain a clear consciousness of the distinctness of "icons" or images and the real things they represent. Merlin Donald writes: [ 57 ] : 172 A dog might perceive the "meaning" of a fight that was realistically play-acted by humans, but it could not reconstruct the message or distinguish the representation from its referent (a real fight).... Trained apes are able to make this distinction; young children make this distinction early—hence, their effortless distinction between play-acting an event and the event itself In classical descriptions, an equivalent description of this mental faculty is eikasia , in the philosophy of Plato.

[ 58 ] : Ch.5 This is the ability to perceive whether a perception is an image of something else, related somehow but not the same, and therefore allows humans to perceive that a dream or memory or a reflection in a mirror is not reality as such. What Klein refers to as dianoetic eikasia is the eikasia concerned specifically with thinking and mental images, such as those mental symbols, icons, signes , and marks discussed above as definitive of reason. Explaining reason from this direction: human thinking is special in that we often understand visible things as if they were themselves images of our intelligible "objects of thought" as "foundations" ( hypothēses in Ancient Greek). This thinking ( dianoia ) is "...an activity which consists in making the vast and diffuse jungle of the visible world depend on a plurality of more 'precise' noēta ".

[ 58 ] : 122 Both Merlin Donald and the Socratic authors such as Plato and Aristotle emphasize the importance of mimēsis , often translated as imitation or representation . Donald writes: [ 57 ] : 169 Imitation is found especially in monkeys and apes [...but...] Mimesis is fundamentally different from imitation and mimicry in that it involves the invention of intentional representations.... Mimesis is not absolutely tied to external communication.

Mimēsis is a concept, now popular again in academic discussion, that was particularly prevalent in Plato's works. In Aristotle, it is discussed mainly in the Poetics . In Michael Davis's account of the theory of man in that work: [ 59 ] It is the distinctive feature of human action, that whenever we choose what we do, we imagine an action for ourselves as though we were inspecting it from the outside. Intentions are nothing more than imagined actions, internalizings of the external. All action is therefore imitation of action; it is poetic...

[ 60 ] Donald, like Plato (and Aristotle, especially in On Memory and Recollection ), emphasizes the peculiarity in humans of voluntary initiation of a search through one's mental world. The ancient Greek anamnēsis , normally translated as "recollection" was opposed to mneme or "memory". Memory, shared with some animals, [ 61 ] requires a consciousness not only of what happened in the past, but also that something happened in the past, which is in other words a kind of eikasia [ 58 ] : 109 "...but nothing except man is able to recollect." [ 62 ] Recollection is a deliberate effort to search for and recapture something once known. Klein writes that, "To become aware of our having forgotten something means to begin recollecting." [ 58 ] : 112 Donald calls the same thing autocueing , which he explains as follows: [ 57 ] : 173 [ 63 ] "Mimetic acts are reproducible on the basis of internal, self-generated cues. This permits voluntary recall of mimetic representations, without the aid of external cues—probably the earliest form of representational thinking ." In a celebrated paper, the fantasy author and philologist J.R.R. Tolkien wrote in his essay "On Fairy Stories" that the terms "fantasy" and "enchantment" are connected to not only "the satisfaction of certain primordial human desires" but also "the origin of language and of the mind".

[ This quote needs a citation ] Logical reasoning methods and argumentation [ edit ] Main article: Logical reasoning A subdivision of philosophy and a variety of reasoning is logic . The traditional main division made in philosophy is between deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning .

Formal logic has been described as the science of deduction .

[ 64 ] The study of inductive reasoning is generally carried out within the field known as informal logic or critical thinking .

Deductive reasoning [ edit ] Main article: Deductive reasoning Deduction is a form of reasoning in which a conclusion follows necessarily from the stated premises. A deduction is also the name for the conclusion reached by a deductive reasoning process. A classic example of deductive reasoning is evident in syllogisms like the following: Premise 1 All humans are mortal.

Premise 2 Socrates is a human.

Conclusion Socrates is mortal.

The reasoning in this argument is deductively valid because there is no way in which both premises could be true and the conclusion be false.

Inductive reasoning [ edit ] Main article: Inductive reasoning Induction is a form of inference that produces properties or relations about unobserved objects or types based on previous observations or experiences , or that formulates general statements or laws based on limited observations of recurring phenomenal patterns.

Inductive reasoning contrasts with deductive reasoning in that, even in the strongest cases of inductive reasoning, the truth of the premises does not guarantee the truth of the conclusion. Instead, the conclusion of an inductive argument follows with some degree of probability . For this reason also, the conclusion of an inductive argument contains more information than is already contained in the premises. Thus, this method of reasoning is ampliative.

A classic example of inductive reasoning comes from the empiricist David Hume : Premise The sun has risen in the east every morning up until now.

Conclusion The sun will also rise in the east tomorrow.

Analogical reasoning [ edit ] Main article: Analogical reasoning Analogical reasoning is a form of inductive reasoning from a particular to a particular. It is often used in case-based reasoning , especially legal reasoning.

[ 65 ] An example follows: Premise 1 Socrates is human and mortal.

Premise 2 Plato is human.

Conclusion Plato is mortal.

Analogical reasoning is a weaker form of inductive reasoning from a single example, because inductive reasoning typically uses a large number of examples to reason from the particular to the general.

[ 66 ] Analogical reasoning often leads to wrong conclusions. For example: Premise 1 Socrates is human and male.

Premise 2 Ada Lovelace is human.

Conclusion Ada Lovelace is male.

Abductive reasoning [ edit ] Main article: Abductive reasoning Abductive reasoning, or argument to the best explanation, is a form of reasoning that does not fit in either the deductive or inductive categories, since it starts with incomplete set of observations and proceeds with likely possible explanations. The conclusion in an abductive argument does not follow with certainty from its premises and concerns something unobserved. What distinguishes abduction from the other forms of reasoning is an attempt to favour one conclusion above others, by subjective judgement or by attempting to falsify alternative explanations or by demonstrating the likelihood of the favoured conclusion, given a set of more or less disputable assumptions. For example, when a patient displays certain symptoms, there might be various possible causes, but one of these is preferred above others as being more probable.

Fallacious reasoning [ edit ] Main articles: Fallacy , Formal fallacy , and Informal fallacy Flawed reasoning in arguments is known as fallacious reasoning . Bad reasoning within arguments can result from either a formal fallacy or an informal fallacy .

Formal fallacies occur when there is a problem with the form, or structure, of the argument. The word "formal" refers to this link to the form of the argument. An argument that contains a formal fallacy will always be invalid.

An informal fallacy is an error in reasoning that occurs due to a problem with the content , rather than the form or structure, of the argument.

Unreasonable decisions and actions [ edit ] In law relating to the actions of an employer or a public body , a decision or action which falls outside the range of actions or decision available when acting in good faith can be described as "unreasonable". Use of the term is considered in the English law cases of Short v Poole Corporation (1926), Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd v Wednesbury Corporation (1947) and Braganza v BP Shipping Limited (2015).

[ 67 ] Traditional problems raised concerning reason [ edit ] Philosophy is often characterized as a pursuit of rational understanding, entailing a more rigorous and dedicated application of human reasoning than commonly employed. Philosophers have long debated two fundamental questions regarding reason, essentially examining reasoning itself as a human endeavor, or philosophizing about philosophizing. The first question delves into whether we can place our trust in reason's ability to attain knowledge and truth more effectively than alternative methods. The second question explores whether a life guided by reason, a life that aims to be guided by reason, can be expected to lead to greater happiness compared to other approaches to life.

Reason versus truth, and "first principles" [ edit ] See also: Truth , First principle , and Nous Since classical antiquity a question has remained constant in philosophical debate (sometimes seen as a conflict between Platonism and Aristotelianism ) concerning the role of reason in confirming truth . People use logic, deduction , and induction to reach conclusions they think are true. Conclusions reached in this way are considered, according to Aristotle, more certain than sense perceptions on their own.

[ 68 ] On the other hand, if such reasoned conclusions are only built originally upon a foundation of sense perceptions, then our most logical conclusions can never be said to be certain because they are built upon the very same fallible perceptions they seek to better.

[ 69 ] This leads to the question of what types of first principles , or starting points of reasoning, are available for someone seeking to come to true conclusions. In Greek, " first principles " are archai , "starting points", [ 70 ] and the faculty used to perceive them is sometimes referred to in Aristotle [ 71 ] and Plato [ 72 ] as nous which was close in meaning to awareness or consciousness .

[ 73 ] Empiricism (sometimes associated with Aristotle [ 74 ] but more correctly associated with British philosophers such as John Locke and David Hume , as well as their ancient equivalents such as Democritus ) asserts that sensory impressions are the only available starting points for reasoning and attempting to attain truth. This approach always leads to the controversial conclusion that absolute knowledge is not attainable.

Idealism , (associated with Plato and his school), claims that there is a "higher" reality, within which certain people can directly discover truth without needing to rely only upon the senses, and that this higher reality is therefore the primary source of truth.

Philosophers such as Plato , Aristotle , Al-Farabi , Avicenna , Averroes , Maimonides , Aquinas , and Hegel argued that reason must be fixed and discoverable—perhaps by dialectic, analysis, or study. Religious philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas and Étienne Gilson attempted to show that reason and revelation are compatible. According to Hegel, "...the only thought which Philosophy brings with it to the contemplation of History , is the simple conception of reason; that reason is the Sovereign of the World; that the history of the world, therefore, presents us with a rational process." [ 75 ] Since the 17th century rationalists , reason has often been taken to be a subjective faculty , or rather the unaided ability ( pure reason ) to form concepts. For Descartes , Spinoza , and Leibniz , this was associated with mathematics .

Kant attempted to show that pure reason could form concepts ( time and space ) that are the conditions of experience. Kant made his argument in opposition to Hume, who denied that reason had any role to play in experience.

Reason versus emotion or passion [ edit ] See also: Emotion and Passion (emotion) After Plato and Aristotle, western literature often treated reason as being the faculty that trained the passions and appetites.

[ citation needed ] Stoic philosophy , by contrast, claimed most emotions were merely false judgements.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] According to the Stoics the only good is virtue, and the only evil is vice, therefore emotions that judged things other than vice to be bad (such as fear or distress), or things other than virtue to be good (such as greed) were simply false judgements and should be discarded (though positive emotions based on true judgements, such as kindness, were acceptable).

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] After the critiques of reason in the early Enlightenment the appetites were rarely discussed or were conflated with the passions.

[ citation needed ] Some Enlightenment camps took after the Stoics to say reason should oppose passion rather than order it, while others like the Romantics believed that passion displaces reason, as in the maxim "follow your heart".

[ citation needed ] Reason has been seen as cold, an "enemy of mystery and ambiguity", [ 79 ] a slave, or judge, of the passions, notably in the work of David Hume . More recently, Freud wrote, “It seems as though the activity of the other agencies of the mind is able only to modify the pleasure principle but not to nullify it; and it remains a question of the greatest theoretical importance, and one that has not yet been answered, when and how it is ever possible for the pleasure principle to be overcome.” [ 80 ] Reasoning that claims the object of a desire is demanded by logic alone is called rationalization .

[ citation needed ] Rousseau first proposed, in his second Discourse , that reason and political life is not natural and is possibly harmful to mankind.

[ 81 ] He asked what really can be said about what is natural to mankind. What, other than reason and civil society, "best suits his constitution"? Rousseau saw "two principles prior to reason" in human nature. First we hold an intense interest in our own well-being. Secondly we object to the suffering or death of any sentient being, especially one like ourselves.

[ 82 ] These two passions lead us to desire more than we could achieve. We become dependent upon each other, and on relationships of authority and obedience. This effectively puts the human race into slavery. Rousseau says that he almost dares to assert that nature does not destine men to be healthy. According to Richard Velkley , "Rousseau outlines certain programs of rational self-correction, most notably the political legislation of the Contrat Social and the moral education in Émile . All the same, Rousseau understands such corrections to be only ameliorations of an essentially unsatisfactory condition, that of socially and intellectually corrupted humanity." [ This quote needs a citation ] This quandary presented by Rousseau led to Kant 's new way of justifying reason as freedom to create good and evil. These therefore are not to be blamed on nature or God. In various ways, German Idealism after Kant, and major later figures such Nietzsche , Bergson , Husserl , Scheler , and Heidegger , remain preoccupied with problems coming from the metaphysical demands or urges of reason.

[ 83 ] Rousseau and these later writers also exerted a large influence on art and politics. Many writers (such as Nikos Kazantzakis ) extol passion and disparage reason. In politics modern nationalism comes from Rousseau's argument that rationalist cosmopolitanism brings man ever further from his natural state.

[ 84 ] In Descartes' Error , Antonio Damasio presents the " Somatic Marker Hypothesis " which states that emotions guide behavior and decision-making. Damasio argues that these somatic markers (known collectively as "gut feelings") are "intuitive signals" that direct our decision making processes in a certain way that cannot be solved with rationality alone. Damasio further argues that rationality requires emotional input in order to function.

Reason versus faith or tradition [ edit ] Main articles: Faith , Religion , and Tradition There are many religious traditions, some of which are explicitly fideist and others of which claim varying degrees of rationalism . Secular critics sometimes accuse all religious adherents of irrationality; they claim such adherents are guilty of ignoring, suppressing, or forbidding some kinds of reasoning concerning some subjects (such as religious dogmas, moral taboos, etc.).

[ 85 ] Though theologies and religions such as classical monotheism typically do not admit to being irrational , there is often a perceived conflict or tension between faith and tradition on the one hand, and reason on the other, as potentially competing sources of wisdom , law , and truth .

[ 73 ] [ 86 ] Religious adherents sometimes respond by arguing that faith and reason can be reconciled, or have different non-overlapping domains, or that critics engage in a similar kind of irrationalism: Reconciliation Philosopher Alvin Plantinga argues that there is no real conflict between reason and classical theism because classical theism explains (among other things) why the universe is intelligible and why reason can successfully grasp it.

[ 87 ] Non-overlapping magisteria Evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould argues that there need not be conflict between reason and religious belief because they are each authoritative in their own domain (or "magisterium").

[ 88 ] If so, reason can work on those problems over which it has authority while other sources of knowledge or opinion can have authority on the big questions.

[ 89 ] Tu quoque Philosophers Alasdair MacIntyre and Charles Taylor argue that those critics of traditional religion who are adherents of secular liberalism are also sometimes guilty of ignoring, suppressing, and forbidding some kinds of reasoning about subjects.

[ 90 ] Similarly, philosophers of science such as Paul Feyarabend argue that scientists sometimes ignore or suppress evidence contrary to the dominant paradigm .

Unification Theologian Joseph Ratzinger, later Benedict XVI , asserted that "Christianity has understood itself as the religion of the Logos, as the religion according to reason," referring to John 1 Ἐν ἀρχῇ ἦν ὁ λόγος , usually translated as "In the beginning was the Word (Logos)." Thus, he said that the Christian faith is "open to all that is truly rational", and that the rationality of Western Enlightenment "is of Christian origin".

[ 91 ] Some commentators have claimed that Western civilization can be almost defined by its serious testing of the limits of tension between "unaided" reason and faith in " revealed " truths—figuratively summarized as Athens and Jerusalem , respectively.

[ 92 ] Leo Strauss spoke of a "Greater West " that included all areas under the influence of the tension between Greek rationalism and Abrahamic revelation, including the Muslim lands. He was particularly influenced by the Muslim philosopher Al-Farabi . To consider to what extent Eastern philosophy might have partaken of these important tensions, Strauss thought it best to consider whether dharma or tao may be equivalent to Nature ( physis in Greek). According to Strauss the beginning of philosophy involved the "discovery or invention of nature" and the "pre-philosophical equivalent of nature" was supplied by "such notions as 'custom' or 'ways ' ", which appear to be really universal in all times and places. The philosophical concept of nature or natures as a way of understanding archai (first principles of knowledge) brought about a peculiar tension between reasoning on the one hand, and tradition or faith on the other.

[ 73 ] Reason in particular fields of study [ edit ] Psychology and cognitive science [ edit ] See also: Psychology of reasoning Scientific research into reasoning is carried out within the fields of psychology and cognitive science . Psychologists attempt to determine whether or not people are capable of rational thought in a number of different circumstances.

Assessing how well someone engages in reasoning is the project of determining the extent to which the person is rational or acts rationally. It is a key research question in the psychology of reasoning and cognitive science of reasoning.

Rationality is often divided into its respective theoretical and practical counterparts .

Behavioral experiments on human reasoning [ edit ] Experimental cognitive psychologists research reasoning behaviour. Such research may focus, for example, on how people perform on tests of reasoning such as intelligence or IQ tests, or on how well people's reasoning matches ideals set by logic (see, for example, the Wason test ).

[ 93 ] Experiments examine how people make inferences from conditionals like if A then B and how they make inferences about alternatives like A or else B .

[ 94 ] They test whether people can make valid deductions about spatial and temporal relations like A is to the left of B or A happens after B , and about quantified assertions like all the A are B .

[ 95 ] Experiments investigate how people make inferences about factual situations, hypothetical possibilities, probabilities, and counterfactual situations.

[ 96 ] Developmental studies of children's reasoning [ edit ] Developmental psychologists investigate the development of reasoning from birth to adulthood. Piaget's theory of cognitive development was the first complete theory of reasoning development. Subsequently, several alternative theories were proposed, including the neo-Piagetian theories of cognitive development .

[ 97 ] Neuroscience of reasoning [ edit ] The biological functioning of the brain is studied by neurophysiologists , cognitive neuroscientists , and neuropsychologists . This includes research into the structure and function of normally functioning brains, as well as of damaged or otherwise unusual brains. In addition to carrying out research into reasoning, some psychologists—for example clinical psychologists and psychotherapists —work to alter people's reasoning habits when those habits are unhelpful.

[ 98 ] Computer science [ edit ] Automated reasoning [ edit ] Main articles: Automated reasoning and Computational logic See also: Reasoning system , Case-based reasoning , Semantic reasoner , and Knowledge reasoning In artificial intelligence and computer science , scientists study and use automated reasoning for diverse applications including automated theorem proving the formal semantics of programming languages , and formal specification in software engineering .

Meta-reasoning [ edit ] See also: Metacognition Meta-reasoning is reasoning about reasoning. In computer science, a system performs meta-reasoning when reasoning about its operation.

[ 99 ] This requires a programming language capable of reflection , the ability to observe and modify its own structure and behaviour.

Evolution of reason [ edit ] Dan Sperber believes that reasoning in groups is more effective and promotes their evolutionary fitness.

A species could benefit greatly from better abilities to reason about, predict, and understand the world. French social and cognitive scientists Dan Sperber and Hugo Mercier argue that, aside from these benefits, other forces could have been driving the evolution of reason. They point out that reasoning is very difficult for humans to do effectively, and that it is hard for individuals to doubt their own beliefs ( confirmation bias ). Reasoning is most effective when done as a collective—as demonstrated by the success of projects like science . They suggest that there are pressures not just individual, but group selection at play. Any group that managed to find ways of reasoning effectively would reap benefits for all its members, increasing their fitness . This could also help explain why humans, according to Sperber, are not optimized to reason effectively alone. Sperber's & Mercier's argumentative theory of reasoning claims that reason may have more to do with winning arguments than searching for the truth.

[ 100 ] Reason in political philosophy and ethics [ edit ] Main articles: Political Philosophy , Ethics , and The Good Aristotle famously described reason (with language) as a part of human nature , because of which it is best for humans to live "politically" meaning in communities of about the size and type of a small city state ( polis in Greek). For example: It is clear, then, that a human being is more of a political [ politikon = of the polis ] animal [ zōion ] than is any bee or than any of those animals that live in herds. For nature, as we say, makes nothing in vain, and humans are the only animals who possess reasoned speech [ logos ]. Voice, of course, serves to indicate what is painful and pleasant; that is why it is also found in other animals, because their nature has reached the point where they can perceive what is painful and pleasant and express these to each other. But speech [ logos ] serves to make plain what is advantageous and harmful and so also what is just and unjust. For it is a peculiarity of humans, in contrast to the other animals, to have perception of good and bad, just and unjust, and the like; and the community in these things makes a household or city [ polis ].... By nature, then, the drive for such a community exists in everyone, but the first to set one up is responsible for things of very great goodness. For as humans are the best of all animals when perfected, so they are the worst when divorced from law and right. The reason is that injustice is most difficult to deal with when furnished with weapons, and the weapons a human being has are meant by nature to go along with prudence and virtue, but it is only too possible to turn them to contrary uses. Consequently, if a human being lacks virtue, he is the most unholy and savage thing, and when it comes to sex and food, the worst. But justice is something political [to do with the polis ], for right is the arrangement of the political community, and right is discrimination of what is just.

[ 101 ] : I.2, 1253a If human nature is fixed in this way, we can define what type of community is always best for people. This argument has remained a central argument in all political, ethical, and moral thinking since then, and has become especially controversial since firstly Rousseau 's Second Discourse, and secondly, the Theory of Evolution . Already in Aristotle there was an awareness that the polis had not always existed and had to be invented or developed by humans themselves. The household came first, and the first villages and cities were just extensions of that, with the first cities being run as if they were still families with Kings acting like fathers.

[ 101 ] : I.2, 1252b15 Friendship seems to prevail in man and woman according to nature [ kata phusin ]; for people are by nature [ tēi phusei ] pairing more than political [ politikon ], in as much as the household [ oikos ] is prior and more necessary than the polis and making children is more common [ koinoteron ] with the animals. In the other animals, community [ koinōnia ] goes no further than this, but people live together [ sumoikousin ] not only for the sake of making children, but also for the things for life; for from the start the functions [ erga ] are divided, and are different for man and woman. Thus they supply each other, putting their own into the common [ eis to koinon ]. It is for these reasons that both utility and pleasure seem to be found in this kind of friendship.

[ 6 ] : VIII.12 Rousseau in his Second Discourse finally took the shocking step of claiming that this traditional account has things in reverse: with reason, language, and rationally organized communities all having developed over a long period of time merely as a result of the fact that some habits of cooperation were found to solve certain types of problems, and that once such cooperation became more important, it forced people to develop increasingly complex cooperation—often only to defend themselves from each other.

In other words, according to Rousseau, reason, language, and rational community did not arise because of any conscious decision or plan by humans or gods, nor because of any pre-existing human nature. As a result, he claimed, living together in rationally organized communities like modern humans is a development with many negative aspects compared to the original state of man as an ape. If anything is specifically human in this theory, it is the flexibility and adaptability of humans. This view of the animal origins of distinctive human characteristics later received support from Charles Darwin 's Theory of Evolution .

The two competing theories concerning the origins of reason are relevant to political and ethical thought because, according to the Aristotelian theory, a best way of living together exists independently of historical circumstances. According to Rousseau, we should even doubt that reason, language, and politics are a good thing, as opposed to being simply the best option given the particular course of events that led to today. Rousseau's theory, that human nature is malleable rather than fixed, is often taken to imply (for example by Karl Marx ) a wider range of possible ways of living together than traditionally known.

However, while Rousseau's initial impact encouraged bloody revolutions against traditional politics, including both the French Revolution and the Russian Revolution , his own conclusions about the best forms of community seem to have been remarkably classical, in favor of city-states such as Geneva , and rural living .

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Psychology portal Argument – Attempt to persuade or to determine the truth of a conclusion Argumentation theory – Academic field of logic and rhetoric Common sense – Sound practical judgement in everyday matters Confirmation bias – Bias confirming existing attitudes Conformity – Matching opinions and behaviors to group norms Critical thinking – Analysis of facts to form a judgment Logic and rationality – Fundamental concepts in philosophy Outline of thought – Topic tree that identifies many types of thoughts/thinking, types of reasoning, aspects of thought, related fields, and more Outline of human intelligence – Topic tree presenting the traits, capacities, models, and research fields of human intelligence, and more Transduction (psychology) References [ edit ] ^ Proudfoot, Michael (2010).

The Routledge dictionary of philosophy . A. R. Lacey (4th ed.). London: Routledge. p. 341.

ISBN 978-0203428467 .

OCLC 503050369 .

Reason: A general faculty common to all or nearly all humans... this faculty has seemed to be of two sorts, a faculty of intuition by which one 'sees' truths or abstract things ('essences' or universals, etc.), and a faculty of reasoning, i.e. passing from premises to a conclusion (discursive reason). The verb 'reason' is confined to this latter sense, which is now anyway the commonest for the noun too Rescher, Nicholas (2005).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Ted Honderich (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 791.

ISBN 978-0191532658 .

OCLC 62563098 .

reason. The general human 'faculty' or capacity for truth-seeking and problem solving ^ Mercier, Hugo; Sperber, Dan (2017).

The Enigma of Reason . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press . p.

2 .

ISBN 978-0674368309 .

OCLC 959650235 .

Enhanced with reason, cognition can secure better knowledge in all domains and adjust action to novel and ambitious goals, or so the story goes.... Understanding why only a few species have echolocation is easy. Understanding why only humans have reason is much more challenging.

Compare: MacIntyre, Alasdair (1999).

Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues . The Paul Carus Lectures. Vol. 20.

Open Court Publishing .

ISBN 978-0812693973 .

OCLC 40632451 . Retrieved 2014-12-01 .

[T]he exercise of independent practical reasoning is one essential constituent to full human flourishing. It is not—as I have already insisted—that one cannot flourish at all, if unable to reason. Nonetheless not to be able to reason soundly at the level of practice is a grave disability.

^ Swindal, James.

"Faith: Historical Perspectives" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Duquesne University . Retrieved December 18, 2023 .

^ Amoretti, Maria Cristina; Vassallo, Nicla , eds. (2013).

Reason and Rationality . Philosophische Analyse / Philosophical Analysis. Vol. 48. Berlin: De Gruyter .

doi : 10.1515/9783110325867 .

ISBN 978-3868381634 .

OCLC 807032616 .

Audi, Robert (2001).

The Architecture of Reason: The Structure and Substance of Rationality . Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195158427.001.0001 .

ISBN 0195141121 .

OCLC 44046914 .

Eze, Emmanuel Chukwudi (2008).

On Reason: Rationality in a World of Cultural Conflict and Racism . Durham, NC: Duke University Press .

doi : 10.1215/9780822388777 .

ISBN 978-0822341789 .

OCLC 180989486 .

Rescher, Nicholas (1988).

Rationality: A Philosophical Inquiry into the Nature and the Rationale of Reason . Clarendon Library of Logic and Philosophy. Oxford; New York: Clarendon Press ; Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0198244355 .

OCLC 17954516 .

^ Hintikka, J.

"Philosophy of logic" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc . Retrieved 12 November 2013 .

^ a b c Aristotle .

Nicomachean Ethics .

^ Foucault, Michel (2003). "What is Enlightenment?". In Rabinow, Paul; Rose, Nikolas (eds.).

The Essential Foucault . New York: The New Press. pp.

43– 57.

Kompridis, Nikolas (2000). "So We Need Something Else for Reason to Mean".

International Journal of Philosophical Studies .

8 (3). Informa UK Limited: 271– 295.

doi : 10.1080/096725500750039282 .

ISSN 0967-2559 .

S2CID 171038942 .

Kompridis, Nikolas (2006). "The Idea of a New Beginning: A Romantic Source of Normativity and Freedom".

Philosophical Romanticism . New York: Routledge. pp.

32– 59.

^ Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940).

"logos" .

A Greek–English Lexicon . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

"Word History: logic" .

Merriam Webster Dictionary . 14 September 2023.

^ Lewis, Charlton; Short, Charles, "ratio" , A Latin Dictionary ^ a b "reason" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . 10 September 2023.

^ "rational" .

Merriam Webster Dictionary . 13 September 2023.

"reasonable" .

Merriam Webster Dictionary . 12 September 2023.

^ Rachels, James (2002).

The Elements of Moral Philosophy (4th ed.). McGraw Hill.

[ page needed ] ^ a b Habermas, Jürgen (1990).

The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

^ Kirk; Raven; Schofield (1983).

The Presocratic Philosophers (second ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp. 204 & 235.

^ a b Davidson, Herbert (1992).

Alfarabi, Avicenna, and Averroes, on Intellect . Oxford University Press. p. 3.

^ Moore, Edward, "Plotinus" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Turner, William (1911), "Plato and Platonism" , Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 12, New York: Robert Appleton Company ^ Rahilly, Alfred (1911), "Reason" , Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 12, New York: Robert Appleton Company ^ Fox, James (1910), "Natural Law" , Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 9, New York: Robert Appleton Company ^ De Cruz, Helen (2022), "Religion and Science" , Stanford Encyclopaedia of Philosophy , Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University ^ Dreyfus, Hubert.

"Telepistemology: Descartes' Last Stand" . socrates.berkeley.edu. Archived from the original on 2011-05-21 . Retrieved February 23, 2011 .

^ Descartes, René (1641). "Concerning the Nature of the Human Mind".

Meditations on First Philosophy .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1839) [1655], "Of Philosophy", in Molesworth, William (ed.), Elements of Philosophy I: De Corpore , London: J. Bohn, p. 5, We must not therefore think that computation, that is, ratiocination, has place only in numbers, as if man were distinguished from other living creatures (which is said to have been the opinion of Pythagoras ) by nothing but the faculty of numbering; for magnitude, body, motion, time, degrees of quality, action, conception, proportion, speech and names (in which all the kinds of philosophy consist) are capable of addition and substraction  [ sic ]. Now such things as we add or substract, that is, which we put into an account, we are said to consider , in Greek λογίζεσθαι [ logizesthai ], in which language also συλλογίζεσθι [ syllogizesthai ] signifies to compute , reason , or reckon .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1651), "Of the ends, or resolutions of discourse" , Leviathan Hobbes, Thomas (1651), "Of the several subjects of knowledge" , Leviathan ^ Locke, John (1689).

"Of Identity and Diversity" .

An Essay concerning Human Understanding . Vol. II.

Hume, David (1740).

"Of Personal Identity" .

A Treatise of Human Nature . Vol. I.4.

^ Hume, David (1740), "Of the influencing motives of the will" , A Treatise of Human Nature , vol. II.3 ^ Hume, David (1740), "Of the Nature of the Idea Or Belief" , A Treatise of Human Nature , vol. I.3, footnote 1 ^ a b Hume, David (1740), "Of the reason of animals" , A Treatise of Human Nature , vol. I.3 ^ "The critique of pure reason" .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1781).

Critique of Pure Reason .

Kant, Immanuel (1788).

Critique of Practical Reason .

^ Sandel, Michael (2009).

Justice: What's the Right Thing to Do?

. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

^ Kant, Immanuel (1993) [1785].

Grounding for the Metaphysics of Morals . Translated by Ellington, James W. (3rd ed.). Hackett. p.

30 .

ISBN 978-0872201668 .

^ Velkley, Richard (2002). "On Kant's Socratism".

Being After Rousseau . University of Chicago Press.

Kant, Immanuel (1781).

Critique of Pure Reason . Preface.

^ Habermas, Jürgen (1995).

Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

^ Nozick, Robert (1993).

The Nature of Rationality .

[ page needed ] MacIntyre, Alasdair (1988).

Whose Justice? Which Rationality?

.

^ Habermas, Jürgen (1984).

The Theory of Communicative Action: Reason and the Rationalization of Society . Translated by McCarthy, Thomas. Boston: Beacon Press.

^ Kompridis, Nikolas (2006).

Critique and Disclosure: Critical Theory between Past and Future . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Kompridis, Nikolas (2000). "So We Need Something Else for Reason to Mean".

International Journal of Philosophical Studies .

8 (3): 271– 295.

doi : 10.1080/096725500750039282 .

S2CID 171038942 .

^ Taylor, Charles (1997).

Philosophical Arguments . Harvard University Press. pp. 12, 15.

ISBN 978-0674664777 .

^ Foucault, Michel (2003). "What is Enlightenment?".

The Essential Foucault . New York: The New Press. pp.

43– 57.

^ Gensler, Harry J. (2010).

Introduction to Logic (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge . p. 1.

doi : 10.4324/9780203855003 .

ISBN 978-0415996501 .

OCLC 432990013 .

^ Gächter, Simon (2013). "Rationality, social preferences, and strategic decision-making from a behavioral economics perspective". In Wittek, Rafael; Snijders, T. A. B.; Nee, Victor (eds.).

The Handbook of Rational Choice Social Research . Stanford, CA: Stanford Social Sciences, an imprint of Stanford University Press . pp. 33–71 (33).

doi : 10.1515/9780804785501-004 .

ISBN 978-0804784184 .

OCLC 807769289 .

S2CID 242795845 .

The central assumption of the rational choice approach is that decision-makers have logically consistent goals (whatever they are), and, given these goals, choose the best available option.

^ Hofstadter, Douglas R.

(1999) [1979].

Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid (20th anniversary ed.). New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 0394756827 .

OCLC 40724766 .

^ Bickhard, Mark H.; Campbell, Robert L. (July 1996). "Developmental aspects of expertise: rationality and generalization".

Journal of Experimental & Theoretical Artificial Intelligence .

8 ( 3– 4): 399– 417.

doi : 10.1080/095281396147393 .

^ a b c Moshman, David (May 2004).

"From inference to reasoning: the construction of rationality" .

Thinking & Reasoning .

10 (2): 221– 239.

doi : 10.1080/13546780442000024 .

S2CID 43330718 .

^ Ricco, Robert B. (2015). "The development of reasoning". In Lerner, Richard M.

(ed.).

Handbook of Child Psychology and Developmental Science . Vol. 2. Cognitive Processes (7th ed.). Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons . pp. 519–570 (534).

doi : 10.1002/9781118963418.childpsy213 .

ISBN 978-1118136850 .

OCLC 888024689 .

Moshman's... theory of the development of deductive reasoning considers changes in metacognition to be the essential story behind the development of deductive (and inductive) reasoning. In his view, reasoning involves explicit conceptual knowledge regarding inference (metalogical knowledge) and metacognitive awareness of, and control over, inference.

^ Smith, Robin. “Aristotle’s Logic and Its Influence.” In The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle, edited by Jonathan Barnes, 72–92. Cambridge University Press, 1995.

https://doi.org/10.1017/CCOL0521451621.006 ^ Smith, Robin (2017), "Aristotle's Logic" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2022-06-08 ^ See this Perseus search, and compare English translations.

and see LSJ dictionary entry for λογικός , section II.2.b.

^ Locke, John (1689).

"Of Reason" .

An Essay concerning Human Understanding . Vol. IV.

^ Deacon, Terrence (1998).

The Symbolic Species: The Co-Evolution of Language and the Brain . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0393317544 .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1651).

"Of speech" .

Leviathan .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1651).

"Of speech" .

Leviathan .

The Greeks have but one word, logos , for both speech and reason; not that they thought there was no speech without reason, but no reasoning without speech ^ Aristotle.

Posterior Analytics . II.19.

^ Byrne, Ruth M.J.

(2005).

The Rational Imagination: How People Create Counterfactual Alternatives to Reality . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

^ Aristotle.

De Anima . III.1–3.

^ Mimesis in modern academic writing, starting with Erich Auerbach , is a technical word, which is not necessarily exactly the same in meaning as the original Greek.

^ a b c Donald, Merlin.

Origins of the Modern Mind .

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c d Klein, Jacob.

A Commentary on the Meno .

^ Davis, Michael; Benardete, Seth. "Introduction".

Poetics of Aristotle . pp. xvii, xxviii.

^ Davis uses "poetic" in an unusual sense, questioning the contrast in Aristotle between action ( praxis , the praktikē ) and making ( poēsis , the poētikē ): "Human [peculiarly human] action is imitation of action because thinking is always rethinking. Aristotle can define human beings as at once rational animals, political animals, and imitative animals because in the end the three are the same." ^ Aristotle.

On Memory . 450a 15–16.

^ Aristotle.

History of Animals . I.1.488b.25–26.

^ Donald, Merlin.

A Mind So Rare . pp.

140– 141.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Jeffrey, Richard (1991).

Formal logic: its scope and limits (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. p. 1.

^ Walton, Douglas N.

(2014).

"Argumentation Schemes for Argument from Analogy" . In Ribeiro, Henrique Jales (ed.).

Systematic Approaches to Argument by Analogy . Argumentation library. Vol. 25. Cham; New York: Springer Verlag . pp.

23– 40.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-06334-8_2 .

ISBN 978-3319063331 .

OCLC 884441074 .

^ Henderson, Leah (2022).

"The Problem of Induction" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ "Braganza v BP Shipping Ltd [2015] UKSC 17 (18 March 2015)}" . Retrieved 28 May 2024 .

^ Aristotle.

Metaphysics (in Ancient Greek).

981b .

τὴν ὀνομαζομένην σοφίαν περὶ τὰ πρῶτα αἴτια καὶ τὰς ἀρχὰς ὑπολαμβάνουσι πάντες: ὥστε, καθάπερ εἴρηται πρότερον, ὁ μὲν ἔμπειρος τῶν ὁποιανοῦν ἐχόντων αἴσθησιν εἶναι δοκεῖ σοφώτερος, ὁ δὲ τεχνίτης τῶν ἐμπείρων, χειροτέχνου δὲ ἀρχιτέκτων, αἱ δὲ θεωρητικαὶ τῶν ποιητικῶν μᾶλλον.

[...what is called Wisdom is concerned with the primary causes and principles, so that, as has been already stated, the man of experience is held to be wiser than the mere possessors of any power of sensation, the artist than the man of experience, the master craftsman than the artisan; and the speculative sciences to be more learned than the productive.] ^ Aristotle.

Metaphysics (in Ancient Greek).

1009b .

ποῖα οὖν τούτων ἀληθῆ ἢ ψευδῆ, ἄδηλον: οὐθὲν γὰρ μᾶλλον τάδε ἢ τάδε ἀληθῆ, ἀλλ᾽ ὁμοίως. διὸ Δημόκριτός γέ φησιν ἤτοι οὐθὲν εἶναι ἀληθὲς ἢ ἡμῖν γ᾽ ἄδηλον.

[Thus it is uncertain which of these impressions are true or false; for one kind is no more true than another, but equally so. And hence Democritus says that either there is no truth or we cannot discover it.] ^ Aristotle.

Metaphysics (in Ancient Greek).

983a .

ἐπεὶ δὲ φανερὸν ὅτι τῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς αἰτίων δεῖ λαβεῖν ἐπιστήμην (τότε γὰρ εἰδέναι φαμὲν ἕκαστον, ὅταν τὴν πρώτην αἰτίαν οἰώμεθα γνωρίζειν ) [It is clear that we must obtain knowledge of the primary causes, because it is when we think that we understand its primary cause that we claim to know each particular thing.] ^ Aristotle.

Nicomachean Ethics (in Ancient Greek).

1139b .

ἀμφοτέρων δὴ τῶν νοητικῶν μορίων ἀλήθεια τὸ ἔργον. καθ᾽ ἃς οὖν μάλιστα ἕξεις ἀληθεύσει ἑκάτερον, αὗται ἀρεταὶ ἀμφοῖν [The attainment of truth is then the function of both the intellectual parts of the soul. Therefore their respective virtues are those dispositions that will best qualify them to attain truth.] ^ Plato.

Republic (in Ancient Greek).

490b .

μιγεὶς τῷ ὄντι ὄντως, γεννήσας νοῦν καὶ ἀλήθειαν, γνοίη [Consorting with reality really, he would beget intelligence and truth, attain to knowledge] ^ a b c Strauss, Leo (1989) [1975]. "Progress or Return". In Gilden, Hilail (ed.).

An Introduction to Political Philosophy: Ten Essays by Leo Strauss . Detroit: Wayne State University Press.

This quest for the beginnings proceeds through sense perception, reasoning, and what they call noesis , which is literally translated by 'understanding' or 'intellect,' and which we can perhaps translate a little bit more cautiously by 'awareness,' an awareness of the mind's eye as distinguished from sensible awareness.

^ However, the empiricism of Aristotle must certainly be doubted. For example in Metaphysics 1009b, cited above, he criticizes people who think knowledge might not be possible because, "They say that the impression given through sense-perception is necessarily true; for it is on these grounds that both Empedocles and Democritus and practically all the rest have become obsessed by such opinions as these." ^ Hegel, G.W.F. (1956) [1837].

The Philosophy of History . Dover Publications Inc. p. 9.

ISBN 0486201120 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Sharples, R. W. (2005).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Ted Honderich (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 896.

ISBN 978-0191532658 .

OCLC 62563098 .

Moral virtue is the only good an wickedness the only evil... Emotions are interpreted in intellectual terms; those such as distress, pity (which is a species of distress), and fear which reflect false judgements about what is evil, are to be avoided (as also are those which reflect false judgement about what is good, such as love of honours or riches)... They did however allow the wise man such 'good feelings' as 'watchfulness' or kindness the difference being that these are based on sound (Stoic) reasoning concerning what matters and what does not.

^ a b Rufus, Musonius (2000).

Concise Routledge encyclopedia of philosophy . Routledge. London: Routledge. p. 863.

ISBN 0203169948 .

OCLC 49569365 .

Vice is founded on 'passions': these are at root false value judgements, in which we lose rational control by overvaluing things which are in fact indifferent. Virtue, a set of sciences governing moral choice, is the one thing of intrinsic worth and therefore genuinely 'good'.

^ Baltzly, Dirk (2018), "Stoicism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-03-27 ^ Radford, Benjamin ; Frazier, Kendrick (January 2017). "The Edge of Reason: A Rational Skeptic in an Irrational World".

Skeptical Inquirer .

41 (1): 60.

^ Freud, Sigmund (1959).

An Outline of Psycho-Analysis . London: Hogarth Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Velkley, Richard (2002), "Speech. Imagination, Origins: Rousseau and the Political Animal", Being after Rousseau: Philosophy and Culture in Question , University of Chicago Press ^ Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1997) [1755], "Preface", in Gourevitch (ed.), Discourse on the Origin and Foundations of Inequality Among Men or Second Discourse , Cambridge University Press ^ Velkley, Richard (2002), "Freedom, Teleology, and Justification of Reason", Being after Rousseau: Philosophy and Culture in Question , University of Chicago Press ^ Plattner, Marc (1997), "Rousseau and the Origins of Nationalism", The Legacy of Rousseau , University of Chicago Press ^ Dawkins, Richard (2008).

The God Delusion (Reprint ed.). Mariner Books.

ISBN 978-0618918249 .

Scientists... see the fight for evolution as only one battle in a larger war: a looming war between supernaturalism on the one side and rationality on the other.

^ Locke, John (1689).

"Of Faith and Reason, and their distinct provinces" .

An Essay concerning Human Understanding . Vol. IV.

^ Plantinga, Alvin (2011).

Where the Conflict Really Lies: Science, Religion, and Naturalism (1 ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199812097 .

Natural Signs and Knowledge of God: A New Look at Theistic Arguments (Reprint ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2012.

ISBN 978-0199661077 .

^ Stephen Jay Gould (1997).

"Nonoverlapping Magisteria" .

www.stephenjaygould.org . Archived from the original on 2016-04-25 . Retrieved 2016-04-06 .

To say it for all my colleagues and for the umpteenth millionth time (from college bull sessions to learned treatises): science simply cannot (by its legitimate methods) adjudicate the issue of God's possible superintendence of nature. We neither affirm nor deny it; we simply can't comment on it as scientists.

Dawkins, Richard (2008).

"4" .

The God Delusion (Reprint ed.). Mariner Books.

ISBN 978-0618918249 .

This sounds terrific, right up until you give it a moment's thought. You then realize that the presence of a creative deity in the universe is clearly a scientific hypothesis. Indeed, it is hard to imagine a more momentous hypothesis in all of science. A universe with a god would be a completely different kind of universe from one without, and it would be a scientific difference. God could clinch the matter in his favour at any moment by staging a spectacular demonstration of his powers, one that would satisfy the exacting standards of science. Even the infamous Templeton Foundation recognized that God is a scientific hypothesis—by funding double-blind trials to test whether remote prayer would speed the recovery of heart patients. It didn't, of course, although a control group who knew they had been prayed for tended to get worse (how about a class action suit against the Templeton Foundation?) Despite such well-financed efforts, no evidence for God's existence has yet appeared.

^ Seachris, Joshua W. (April 2009).

"The Meaning of Life as Narrative: A New Proposal for Interpreting Philosophy's 'Primary' Question" .

Philo .

12 (1): 5– 23.

doi : 10.5840/philo20091211 . Retrieved 2016-04-06 .

^ Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition (60067th ed.). University of Notre Dame Press. 1991.

ISBN 978-0268018771 .

Taylor, Charles (2007).

A Secular Age (1st ed.). The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674026766 .

^ Ratzinger, Joseph (2005).

"Cardinal Ratzinger on Europe's Crisis of Culture" .

^ Reynolds, John Mark (2009).

When Athens Met Jerusalem: An Introduction to Classical and Christian Thought . Downers Grove, Ill.: IVP Academic.

ISBN 978-0830829231 .

Pelikan, Jaroslav (2001). "Athens and/or Jerusalem".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

950 (1): 17.

Bibcode : 2001NYASA.950...17P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2001.tb02124.x .

S2CID 21347905 .

^ Manktelow, K.I. (1999).

Reasoning and Thinking (Cognitive Psychology: Modular Course) . Hove, Sussex: Psychology Press.

^ Johnson-Laird, P.N.; Byrne, R.M.J. (1991).

Deduction . Hillsdale: Erlbaum.

^ Johnson-Laird, P.N. (2006).

How we reason . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Byrne, R.M.J. (2005).

The Rational Imagination: How People Create Counterfactual Alternatives to Reality . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

^ Demetriou, A. (1998). "Cognitive development". In Demetriou, A.; Doise, W.; van Lieshout, K.F.M. (eds.).

Life-span developmental psychology . London: Wiley. pp.

179– 269.

^ Goel, Vinod; Navarrete, Gorka; Noveck, Ira A.; Prado, Jérôme (2017).

"Editorial: The Reasoning Brain: The Interplay between Cognitive Neuroscience and Theories of Reasoning" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

10 : 673.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2016.00673 .

PMC 5214378 .

PMID 28105010 .

^ Costantini, Stefania (2002), "Meta-reasoning: A Survey", Computational Logic: Logic Programming and Beyond , Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2408/2002, pp.

253– 288, doi : 10.1007/3-540-45632-5_11 , ISBN 978-3540439608 ^ Mercier, Hugo; Sperber, Dan (2011).

"Why Do Humans Reason? Arguments for an Argumentative Theory" .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

34 (2): 57– 74.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X10000968 .

PMID 21447233 .

S2CID 5669039 .

Mercier, Hugo; Sperber, Dan (2017).

The Enigma of Reason . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674368309 .

^ a b Aristotle .

Politics . Translated by Simpson, Peter.

Further reading [ edit ] Look up reason in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Reason .

Reason at PhilPapers Beer, Francis A., "Words of Reason", Political Communication 11 (Summer, 1994): 185–201.

Gilovich, Thomas (1991), How We Know What Isn't So: The Fallibility of Human Reason in Everyday Life , New York: The Free Press , ISBN 978-0029117057 Sciortino, Luca, "History of Rationalities: Ways of Thinking from Vico to Hacking and Beyond", Palgrave McMillan, Cham 2023 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24004-1 .

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Human intelligence topics Types Collective Emotional Intellectual Linguistic Multiple Social Spatial ( visuospatial ) Abilities , traits, and constructs Cognition Cognitive liberty Communication Creativity Fluid and crystallized intelligence g factor Intellect Intelligence quotient Knowledge Learning Memory Problem solving Reasoning Skill Thought ( abstraction ) Understanding Visual processing Models and theories Cattell–Horn–Carroll theory Fluid and crystallized intelligence Multiple-intelligences theory PASS theory Three-stratum theory Triarchic theory Areas of research Evolution of human intelligence Heritability of IQ Psychometrics Intelligence and environment / fertility / height / health / longevity / neuroscience / personality / race / sex Outline of human intelligence / thought v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes v t e Philosophical logic Critical thinking and informal logic Analysis Ambiguity Argument Belief Bias Credibility Dialectic Antithesis , Socratic method , Unity of opposites Evidence Explanation Explanatory power Fact Fallacy List of fallacies Hypothesis Inquiry Opinion Parsimony (Occam's razor) Premise Propaganda Prudence Razor Reasoning Relevance Rhetoric Rigor Theory Vagueness Theories of deduction Constructivism Dialetheism Fictionalism Finitism Formalism Intuitionism Logical atomism Logicism Nominalism Platonic realism Pragmatism Realism Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐9c8rl
Cached time: 20250814215246
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.681 seconds
Real time usage: 1.880 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16774/1000000
Revision size: 98698/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 507567/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13575/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 476486/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.065/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24387893/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1599.021      1 -total
 50.54%  808.085      1 Template:Reflist
 29.72%  475.203     76 Template:Cite_book
 19.55%  312.677     17 Template:Multiref2
  6.33%  101.231     23 Template:Lang
  6.32%  101.027     20 Template:Citation
  4.66%   74.555      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar
  4.58%   73.228      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.54%   72.600     11 Template:Fix
  4.22%   67.399      9 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42446:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215246 and revision id 1296821321. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reason&oldid=1296821321 " Categories : Reasoning Concepts in epistemology Concepts in logic Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in the philosophy of science Critical thinking Knowledge Sources of knowledge Metaphysics of mind Ontology Philosophical logic Philosophy of logic Problem solving skills Rationalism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1: long volume value Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing explicitly cited Early Modern English-language text Articles with unsourced quotes Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 14:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reason 92 languages Add topic

