Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Legacy 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Esther Vanhomrigh 3 languages Brezhoneg Español Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish poet Esther Vanhomrigh Esther Vanhomrigh or Van Homrigh (known by the pseudonym Vanessa ; c. 1688 – 2 June 1723), an Irish woman of Dutch descent, was a longtime lover and correspondent of Jonathan Swift . Swift's letters to her were published after her death. Her fictional name " Vanessa " was created by Swift by taking Van from her surname, Vanhomrigh, and adding Esse , a pet form of her first name, Esther.

She was fictionalized as "Vanessa" in Swift's poem Cadenus and Vanessa (1713). In the poem, he wrote: Each girl, when pleased with what is taught, Will have the teacher in her thought.

Life [ edit ] Esther was the daughter of Bartholomew Van Homrigh , a merchant of Amsterdam and afterwards of Dublin , who was appointed commissary of the stores by King William upon his expedition into Ireland: he was Lord Mayor of Dublin 1697–8. Her mother, also named Esther, was the daughter of John Stone, an Irish commissioner of revenue. She grew up at Celbridge Abbey in County Kildare .

[ citation needed ] Her father died in 1703, and his widow moved her family to London in 1707. Esther became acquainted with Swift in December of that year while the family was en route for London, at Dunstable , and it was here that their intense 17-year relationship began.

[ 1 ] She was 22 years younger than Swift, and it was obvious from the beginning that he admired Esther for her rugged qualities; he did not admire very delicate women. Esther was said "not to be a beauty",  although it is difficult to be sure about this since no contemporary portrait of her exists (the famous 1868 Millais portrait is a work of artistic imagination). Swift later served as her tutor .

[ 2 ] After her mother died in 1714, Esther followed Swift to Ireland, and returned to Celbridge Abbey, but she was desperately miserable there.

[ citation needed ] Their relationship was fraught.

[ 3 ] It was broken up after 17 years by Swift's relationship with another woman, Esther Johnson , whom he called "Stella", in 1723. Swift had known Stella since about 1690, when she was a little girl in the household of his employer Sir William Temple ; their relationship was intense and it is possible that they had secretly married in 1716. Esther is thought to have asked Swift not to see Stella again, and he apparently refused, thus putting an end to their relationship.

[ citation needed ] Esther never recovered from his rejection and died on 2 June 1723, probably from tuberculosis contracted from nursing her sister Mary, who had died of the same disease in 1720, as had their mother before her; some accused Swift of inadvertently causing her death.

[ 4 ] Her father had left her well provided for, but she was burdened by debts accumulated by her mother and her spendthrift brother Bartholomew. In her will, she named the barrister Robert Marshall and George Berkeley , the celebrated philosopher and future Bishop of Cloyne , executors and joint residuary legatees of her estate, although she knew neither man well.

[ 5 ] Due to the debts, a protracted lawsuit ensued and a large part of the estate was lost in legal costs. It was widely reported that she had made it a condition of the inheritance that her executors publish all her correspondence with Swift, but in fact, no such stipulation seems to have been made.

[ citation needed ] Swift, whose letters to her were published after her death, is not mentioned in her will, perhaps a final retaliation against a man whose neglect made her "live a life like a languishing death".

[ 6 ] Legacy [ edit ] Vanessa by John Everett Millais , 1868. This is not a portrait, but is a work of artistic imagination A ward in St Patrick's University Hospital is named “Vanessa” in her honour.

[ citation needed ] Pre-Raphaelite artist John Everett Millais painted a fancy portrait of her in 1868, over 100 years after her death: Vanessa . The painting depicts Esther holding a letter, presumably written to or from Swift. The portrait is an imagined likeness: no contemporary portrait of Esther is known to survive and there are only a few rather vague descriptions of her appearance.

[ citation needed ] Margaret Louisa Woods wrote a novel inspired by her life titled Esther Vanhomrigh (1891).

[ citation needed ] Elizabeth Myers , wife of Littleton C. Powys , who was a brother of John Cowper Powys , wrote a novel titled The Basilisk of St. James , (London, 1945, Chapman and Hall ), which has as its protagonist Jonathan Swift . Central to the plot is the personal conflict that arose from Swift's relationships with both Esther Vanhomrigh (Vanessa) and Esther Johnson , nicknamed Stella by Swift.

[ citation needed ] In the 1994 film Words Upon the Window Pane , based on the play by William Butler Yeats , she is played by Orla Brady : the plot turns on a seance in Dublin in the 1920s where the ghosts of Swift, Stella, and Vanessa appear to resume their 200-year-old quarrel.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Sir Walter Scott .

Life of Swift , published in Complete Works . New York, 1833. Vol. 6, p. 321.

^ Scott, p. 321.

^ Stephen, Leslie (1898).

"Swift, Jonathan" . In Lee, Sidney (ed.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 55. London: Smith, Elder & Co. p. 215.

^ Stephen, p. 216.

^ Scott, p. 326.

^ November/December 1720, Correspondence of Jonathan Swift, 2.524.

Sources [ edit ] Evelyn Hardy, The Conjured Spirit, Swift: A Study in the Relationship of Swift, Stella, and Vanessa , 1949 Sir Walter Scott , Life of Jonathan Swift , 1829 External links [ edit ] Works by or about Esther Vanhomrigh at Wikisource v t e Jonathan Swift Sermons Sermons of Jonathan Swift Satires Meditation Upon a Broomstick (1701) A Tale of a Tub (1704) The Battle of the Books (1704) Gulliver's Travels (1726–1727, 1735) A Modest Proposal (1729) Essays Thoughts on Various Subjects, Moral and Diverting (1706) An Argument Against Abolishing Christianity (1708) The Conduct of the Allies (1711) Drapier's Letters (1724/25) Directions to Servants (published 1745) Miscellany Isaac Bickerstaff writings (1708) The Examiner newspaper (1710–1714) " Cadenus and Vanessa " (1713 poem) " The Lady's Dressing Room " (1732 poem) A Complete Collection of Genteel and Ingenious Conversation (1738) A Journal to Stella (published posthumously – 1766) Related Esther Johnson Esther Vanhomrigh Scriblerus Club Swift crater The House That Swift Built (1982 film) " The Reasons that Induced Dr. S. to Write a Poem Call'd the Lady's Dressing Room " (1734 poem) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel People Ireland Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Esther_Vanhomrigh&oldid=1283291435 " Categories : 1680s births 1723 deaths 18th-century deaths from tuberculosis 18th-century British letter writers Women letter writers English people of Dutch descent Irish people of Dutch descent 17th-century Irish women writers 17th-century Irish non-fiction writers 18th-century Irish women writers Jonathan Swift Tuberculosis deaths in Ireland Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 This page was last edited on 31 March 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Esther Vanhomrigh 3 languages Add topic

