Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gauge bosons in the Standard Model Toggle Gauge bosons in the Standard Model subsection 1.1 Multiplicity of gauge bosons 1.2 Massive gauge bosons 2 Beyond the Standard Model Toggle Beyond the Standard Model subsection 2.1 Grand unification theories 2.2 Gravitons 2.3 W′ and Z′ bosons 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gauge boson 57 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Limburgs Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Elementary particles that are force carriers The Standard Model of elementary particles, with the gauge bosons in the fourth column in red In particle physics , a gauge boson is a bosonic elementary particle that acts as the force carrier for elementary fermions .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Elementary particles whose interactions are described by a gauge theory interact with each other by the exchange of gauge bosons, usually as virtual particles .

Photons , W and Z bosons , and gluons are gauge bosons. All known gauge bosons have a spin of 1 and therefore are vector bosons . For comparison, the Higgs boson has spin zero and the hypothetical graviton has a spin of 2.

Gauge bosons are different from the other kinds of bosons: first, fundamental scalar bosons (the Higgs boson); second, mesons , which are composite bosons, made of quarks ; third, larger composite, non-force-carrying bosons, such as certain atoms .

Gauge bosons in the Standard Model [ edit ] The Standard Model of particle physics recognizes four kinds of gauge bosons: photons , which carry the electromagnetic interaction ; W and Z bosons, which carry the weak interaction ; and gluons , which carry the strong interaction .

[ 3 ] Isolated gluons do not occur because they are colour-charged and subject to colour confinement .

Multiplicity of gauge bosons [ edit ] In a quantized gauge theory , gauge bosons are quanta of the gauge fields . Consequently, there are as many gauge bosons as there are generators of the gauge field. In quantum electrodynamics , the gauge group is U(1) ; in this simple case, there is only one gauge boson, the photon. In quantum chromodynamics , the more complicated group SU(3) has eight generators, corresponding to the eight gluons. The three W and Z bosons correspond (roughly) to the three generators of SU(2) in electroweak theory .

Massive gauge bosons [ edit ] Gauge invariance requires that gauge bosons are described mathematically by field equations for massless particles. Otherwise, the mass terms add non-zero additional terms to the Lagrangian under gauge transformations, violating gauge symmetry. Therefore, at a naïve theoretical level, all gauge bosons are required to be massless, and the forces that they describe are required to be long-ranged. The conflict between this idea and experimental evidence that the weak and strong interactions have a very short range requires further theoretical insight.

According to the Standard Model, the W and Z bosons gain mass via the Higgs mechanism . In the Higgs mechanism, the four gauge bosons (of SU(2)×U(1) symmetry) of the unified electroweak interaction couple to a Higgs field . This field undergoes spontaneous symmetry breaking due to the shape of its interaction potential. As a result, the universe is permeated by a non-zero Higgs vacuum expectation value (VEV). This VEV couples to three of the electroweak gauge bosons (W + , W − and Z), giving them mass; the remaining gauge boson remains massless (the photon). This theory also predicts the existence of a scalar Higgs boson , which has been observed in experiments at the LHC .

[ 4 ] Beyond the Standard Model [ edit ] Grand unification theories [ edit ] The Georgi–Glashow model predicts additional gauge bosons named X and Y bosons. The hypothetical X and Y bosons mediate interactions between quarks and leptons , hence violating conservation of baryon number and causing proton decay . Such bosons would be even more massive than W and Z bosons due to symmetry breaking . Analysis of data collected from such sources as the Super-Kamiokande neutrino detector has yielded no evidence of X and Y bosons.

[ 5 ] Gravitons [ edit ] The fourth fundamental interaction, gravity , may also be carried by a boson, called the graviton. In the absence of experimental evidence and a mathematically coherent theory of quantum gravity , it is unknown whether this would be a gauge boson or not. The role of gauge invariance in general relativity is played by a similar [ clarification needed ] symmetry: diffeomorphism invariance .

W′ and Z′ bosons [ edit ] Main article: W′ and Z′ bosons W′ and Z′ bosons refer to hypothetical new gauge bosons (named in analogy with the Standard Model W and Z bosons).

See also [ edit ] 1964 PRL symmetry breaking papers Boson Glueball Quantum chromodynamics Quantum electrodynamics References [ edit ] ^ Gribbin, John ; Gribbin, Mary; Gribbin, Jonathan (2000).

Q is for quantum: an encyclopedia of particle physics . New York, New York: Free Press .

ISBN 978-0-684-85578-3 .

^ Clark, John Owen Edward, ed. (2004).

The essential dictionary of science . New York: Barnes & Noble Books .

ISBN 978-0-7607-4616-5 .

^ Veltman, Martinus J. G.

(2003).

Facts and mysteries in elementary particle physics . River Edge, New Jersey: World Scientific .

ISBN 978-981-238-148-4 .

^ "CERN and the Higgs boson" .

CERN . October 2013.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2016 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ Matsumoto, R. (October 2022).

"Search for proton decay via $p \rightarrow \mu^+ K^0$ in 0.37 megaton-years exposure of Super-Kamiokande" .

Physical Review D .

106 (7). Super-Kamiokande Collaboration. American Physical Society: 072003.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.106.072003 .

hdl : 11577/3482321 .

External links [ edit ] Explanation of gauge boson and gauge fields by Christopher T. Hill v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal v t e Standard Model Background Particle physics Fermions Gauge boson Higgs boson Quantum field theory Gauge theory Strong interaction Color charge Quantum chromodynamics Quark model Electroweak interaction Weak interaction Quantum electrodynamics Fermi's interaction Weak hypercharge Weak isospin Constituents CKM matrix Spontaneous symmetry breaking Higgs mechanism Mathematical formulation of the Standard Model Beyond the Standard Model Evidence Hierarchy problem Dark matter Cosmological constant problem Strong CP problem Neutrino oscillation Theories Technicolor Kaluza–Klein theory Grand Unified Theory Theory of everything Supersymmetry MSSM NMSSM Split supersymmetry Supergravity Quantum gravity String theory Superstring theory Loop quantum gravity Causal dynamical triangulation Canonical quantum gravity Superfluid vacuum theory Twistor theory Experiments Gran Sasso INO LHC SNO Super-K Tevatron Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gauge_boson&oldid=1296078135 " Categories : Bosons Gauge bosons Particle physics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2016 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gauge boson 57 languages Add topic

