Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms 2 Diagnosis Toggle Diagnosis subsection 2.1 Subgroups 3 Treatment 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified 19 languages العربية Català Dansk Eesti Español Français Frysk 한국어 Hrvatski עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Personality disorder not otherwise specified or Persistent depressive disorder .

Medical condition Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), (including atypical autism) Specialty Clinical psychology , psychiatry , pediatrics , occupational medicine Usual onset from birth Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified ( PDD-NOS ) [ 1 ] is a historic psychiatric diagnosis first defined in 1980 that has since been incorporated into autism spectrum disorder in the DSM-5 (2013).

According to the earlier DSM-IV , PDD-NOS referred to "mild or severe pervasive deficits in the development of reciprocal social interaction and/or verbal and nonverbal communication skills, or when stereotyped behavior, interests, and/or activities are present, but the criteria are not met for a specific PDD" or for several other disorders.

[ 2 ] PDD-NOS was one of four disorders collapsed into the diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder in the DSM-5 , [ 3 ] and also was one of the five disorders classified as a pervasive developmental disorder (PDD) in the DSM-IV .

[ 4 ] The ICD-10 equivalents also became part of its definition of autism spectrum disorder, as of the ICD-11 .

PDD-NOS included atypical autism , a diagnosis defined in the ICD-10 for the case that the criteria for autistic disorder were not met because of late age of onset, or atypical symptomatology, or both of these.

[ 5 ] Even though PDD-NOS was considered milder than typical autism , this was not always true. While some characteristics may be milder, others may be more severe.

[ 6 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] It is common for individuals with PDD-NOS to have more intact social skills and a lower level of intellectual deficit than individuals with other PDDs.

[ 4 ] Characteristics of many individuals with PDD-NOS are: Communication difficulties (e.g., using and understanding language) [ 7 ] Difficulty with social behavior Uneven skill development (strengths in some areas and delays in others) Unusual play with toys and other objects Repetitive body movements or behavior patterns Preoccupation with fantasies that interfere and that are not normal to have at a certain age depending on social, cultural and religious norms.

Unconventional perception of the world Diagnosis [ edit ] PDD-NOS is not a current part of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders typology (as of the DSM-5 ), which is the most common diagnostic typology used in the United States. In the still used (though deprecated) ICD-10 , it is considered "atypical autism" and "pervasive developmental disorder, unspecified".

[ 8 ] The diagnosis of a pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified was given to individuals with difficulties in the areas of social interaction, communication, and/or stereotypic behavior patterns or interests, but who did not meet the full DSM-IV criteria for autism or another PDD. This does not necessarily mean that PDD-NOS is a milder disability than the other PDDs. It could simply mean that individuals who receive this diagnosis do not meet the diagnostic criteria of the other PDDs, but that there is still a pervasive developmental disorder that affects the individual in the areas of communication, socialization, and behavior.

[ 4 ] As for the other pervasive developmental disorders, the diagnosis of PDD-NOS required the involvement of a team of specialists. The individual needs to undergo a full diagnostic evaluation, including a thorough medical, social, adaptive, motor skills and communication history.

[ 4 ] Other parts of an assessment can be behavioral rating scales, direct behavioral observations, psychological assessment, educational assessment, communication assessment, and occupational assessment.

[ 9 ] Description of PDD-NOS merely as a "subthreshold" category without a more specific case definition poses methodological problems for research regarding the relatively heterogeneous group of people who receive this diagnosis. While it is true that children diagnosed with PDD-NOS, as a whole, show fewer intellectual deficits and are higher-functioning than autistic children, many others who fit the criteria for PDD-NOS have some autistic features but also have intellectual deficits that are so severe that it is difficult or impossible to tell whether some of the deficits come from the autism or from the severe to profound degree of intellectual disability itself. Furthermore, some others who fit the criteria for PDD-NOS come to professional attention at a later age, compared to those diagnosed with autism.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Subgroups [ edit ] In 2004, Walker et al. found that persons with PDD-NOS belonged to one of three very different subgroups: [ 12 ] A high-functioning group (around 25 percent) whose symptoms more or less overlap with that of what was Asperger syndrome , while also not meeting the then current criteria for autism spectrum disorder , but who completely differ from those with Asperger syndrome in terms of having a lag in language development and/or mild cognitive impairment.

[ 12 ] (The criteria for Asperger syndrome excludes a speech delay or a cognitive delay in early life.

[ 13 ] ) Another group (around 25 percent) whose symptoms more closely resemble those of autism, but do not fully meet all its diagnostic signs and symptoms. This is because either the symptoms were recognized at a later age or because they were too young or have cognitive deficits that are too severe to properly identify all the symptoms of autism that they may have.

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] The biggest group (around 50 percent) consists of those who met all the diagnostic criteria for autistic disorder but whose stereotypical and repetitive behaviors were noticeably mild.

[ 12 ] Treatment [ edit ] There is no known cure for PDD-NOS, but there are interventions that can have a positive influence.

Some of the more common therapies and services include: [ 4 ] Visual and environmental supports, visual schedules Social stories and comic strip conversations Speech therapy Physical and occupational therapy [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders : DSM-IV-TR (4th, text revision ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association. 2000. pp. 14, 84.

ISBN 0-89042-024-6 .

^ "First signs" .

firstsigns.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Autism spectrum disorder fact sheet" (PDF) .

DSM5.org . American Psychiatric Publishing. 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 6, 2013 . Retrieved October 13, 2013 .

^ a b c d e f "Autism spectrum fact sheet from Illinois" (PDF) .

pbisillinois.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ Gray, Kylie M. (2013). "Atypical Autism". In Volkmar, Fred R.

(ed.).

Encyclopedia of Autism Spectrum Disorders . Springer reference. New York: Springer. pp.

304– 309.

ISBN 978-1-4419-1698-3 .

^ "PDD-NOS Signs, Symptoms and Treatment" . National Autism Resources.

^ Robison, John Elder (2019). "Autism prevalence and outcomes in older adults".

Autism Research .

12 (3): 370– 374.

doi : 10.1002/aur.2080 .

ISSN 1939-3806 .

PMID 30803153 .

S2CID 73503042 .

^ Smith, Isaac C.; Reichow, Brian; Volkmar, Fred R. (2015). "The Effects of DSM-5 Criteria on Number of Individuals Diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review".

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

45 (8): 2541– 2552.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-015-2423-8 .

ISSN 0162-3257 .

PMID 25796195 .

S2CID 24217012 .

^ "briefing paper of the National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities" (PDF) .

nichcy.org . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "Autism and Neurodevelopment" .

Child Study Center: Research . Yale School of Medicine . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "ICD-10, Mental and behavioural disorders (F00-F99)" . Archived from the original on March 8, 2017.

^ a b c d Walker DR, Thompson A, Zwaigenbaum L, Goldberg J, Bryson SE, Mahoney WJ, Strawbridge CP, Szatmari P (Feb 2004). "Specifying PDD-NOS: a comparison of PDD-NOS, Asperger syndrome, and autism".

J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry .

43 (2): 172– 80.

doi : 10.1097/00004583-200402000-00012 .

PMID 14726723 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ American Psychiatric Association (2000).

"Diagnostic criteria for 299.80 Asperger's Disorder (AD)" .

Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th, text revision ( DSM-IV-TR ) ed.).

ISBN 0-89042-025-4 . Retrieved 2007-06-28 .

[ dead link ] ^ Bergman, Joel (Oct 29, 2019).

The Textbook of Autism Spectrum Disorders . American Psychiatric Pub. p. 91.

ISBN 9781585623419 .

ISBN 1585623415 External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : F84.9 ICD - 9-CM : 299.9 299.80 v t e Autism Main Causes Diagnosis Epidemiology Epigenetics Heritability History Memory Pathophysiology Sex and gender Societal and cultural aspects Therapies Diagnoses Pervasive developmental disorder Autistic disorder Asperger syndrome Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder High-functioning autism Associated conditions and phenomena Alexithymia Anxiety LGBTQ identities Burnout Catatonia Masking Meltdowns Inertia Echolalia Echopraxia Emotional dysregulation Hyperlexia Infodumping Late talker Monotropism Nonspeaking Pathological demand avoidance Pronoun reversal Savant syndrome Special interests Stimming Sensory overload Comorbid conditions Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder Avoidant personality disorder Anxiety disorder obsessive–compulsive disorder Bipolar disorder Developmental coordination disorder Developmental verbal dyspraxia Epilepsy Gender dysphoria Global developmental delay Intellectual disability Major depressive disorder Schizoid personality disorder Sensory processing disorder Sleep disorder Suicide Tinnitus Associated syndromes 22q13 deletion syndrome Angelman syndrome CHARGE syndrome Cohen syndrome Cornelia de Lange syndrome DiGeorge syndrome Down syndrome Fetal valproate spectrum disorder Fragile X syndrome MECP2 duplication syndrome Neurofibromatosis type I Noonan syndrome Multiple hamartoma syndrome Rett syndrome Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome Timothy syndrome Tuberous sclerosis Williams syndrome Related issues Ableism Autistic rights movement Critical autism studies Discrimination Double empathy problem Employment Military service and conscription Multiple complex developmental disorder Neurodiversity Neuroqueer theory Peripheral neuropathy Reduced affect display Sanism Self-harm Suicidal ideation TEACCH program Twice exceptional Violence and autism Controversies Facilitated communication Lancet MMR autism fraud MMR vaccine Rapid prompting method Thiomersal Chelation Combating Autism Act Autistic supremacism Diagnostic scales Autism Diagnostic Interview Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule Childhood Autism Rating Scale Gilliam Asperger's disorder scale Screening scales Autism-spectrum quotient Childhood Autism Spectrum Test Ritvo Autism and Asperger Diagnostic Scale Lists Autism-related topics Fictional characters Schools Accommodations Autism-friendly Curb cut effect Inclusive design Neurodiversity and labor rights Neuroinclusive design Sensory friendly Supported employment Universal design Category v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pervasive_developmental_disorder_not_otherwise_specified&oldid=1287730902 " Categories : Autism spectrum disorders Neurological disorders in children Learning disabilities Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 02:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified 19 languages Add topic

