Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Conservation 4 Controversy 5 Recognition 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jason deCaires Taylor 8 languages Български Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British sculptor and creator of the world's first underwater sculpture park Jason deCaires Taylor (born 12 August 1974 in Dover ) [ 1 ] is a British sculptor and creator of the world's first underwater sculpture park – the Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park [ 2 ] – and underwater museum – Cancún Underwater Museum (MUSA).

[ 3 ] He is best known for installing site-specific underwater sculptures that develop naturally into artificial coral reefs , [ 4 ] which local communities and marine life depend on. Taylor integrates his skills as a sculptor, marine conservationist, [ 5 ] underwater photographer [ 6 ] and scuba diving instructor [ 7 ] into each of his projects. By using a fusion of Land Art traditions and subtly integrating aspects of street art, Taylor produces dynamic sculptural works that are installed on the ocean floor to encourage marine life, to promote ocean conservation and to highlight the current climate crisis.

Taylor's works in Grenada have been listed among the Top 25 Wonders of the World by National Geographic.

[ 2 ] His projects to date include the creation of the Cancún Underwater Museum , Ocean Atlas, [ 8 ] The Rising Tide [ 9 ] , Museo Atlántico , [ 10 ] Nest , [ 11 ] Coralarium , [ 12 ] Nexus , [ 13 ] Museum of Underwater Art (MOUA), [ 14 ] Écomusée sous-marin de Cannes , [ 15 ] and the Museum of Underwater Sculpture Ayia Napa (MUSAN).

[ 16 ] Early life [ edit ] The only son of an English father and Guyanese mother, Taylor was educated in Kent with further studies at Camberwell College of Arts Institute of London, where he graduated in 1998 with a B.A Honours degree in Sculpture and Ceramics.

[ 17 ] Scuba diving from the age of 18, he became a fully qualified scuba instructor in 2002.

Career [ edit ] Vicissitudes, Grenada Vicissitudes, Grenada Taylor's early work includes Vicissitudes , Grace Reef , The Lost Correspondent and The Unstill Life .

[ 18 ] All of these artworks are located in the world's first public underwater sculpture park in the Caribbean Sea in Molinere Bay, Grenada , West Indies, [ 19 ] and situated in a section of coastline that was badly damaged by Hurricane Ivan in 2004.

[ 17 ] Taylor's works create haunting, enigmatic underwater scenes, often depicting the mundaneness of life on dry land transported into an alchemic new environment. Instead of the entropic process typically associated with the ocean's corrosive tendencies, Taylor's pieces encourage organisms to grow and affect the surfaces of his creations. They are often commentaries on humanity's relationship with the natural world and the need for conservation, decay and rebirth.

[ 20 ] The majority of his sculptures are based on living people who are life cast [ 21 ] and whose phenotypical qualities alter over time as they slowly evolve from inert concrete to living artificial reefs.

[ 22 ] Taylor considers that he is "trying to portray how human intervention or interaction with nature can be positive and sustainable, an icon of how we can live in a symbiotic relationship with nature." [ 23 ] In 2009 Taylor relocated his practice to Mexico, where he achieved another milestone: the creation of the world's first underwater museum.

[ 24 ] The Cancún Underwater Museum (Museo Subacuático de Arte , known as MUSA) [ 4 ] holds more than 485 of Taylor's submerged sculptures and 30 land-based pieces. It is located off the coast of Cancún and the Western coast of Isla Mujeres [ 25 ] within the Cancún National Marine Park , and occupies an area of over 420 square metres of previously barren seabed. The project was supported and commissioned in 2008 by CONANP , National Commission of Mexican Protected Natural Areas (Comisión Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas) and The Cancún Nautical Association. MUSA was officially opened in November 2010.

[ 21 ] Works in the museum include individual installations implanted with live coral cuttings rescued from areas of damaged reef.

[ 17 ] Hombre en llamas ( Man on Fire ), cast from a local fisherman, stands towards the current with fragments of implanted fire coral in his head and torso.

[ 26 ] La Jardinera ( The Gardener ) is a girl lying on a patio nurturing a variety of potted corals. Other works include El colecionista de los sueños ( The Dream Collector ), a man archiving messages found inside bottles that have been brought together by the oceans’ currents.

[ 27 ] The Silent Evolution at the Cancún Underwater Museum Taylor created La Evolución Silencio (The Silent Evolution), which was added to MUSA in 2011. The artwork consists of more than 400 individual sculptures that immortalised about 90 real-life models from the nearby fishing village of Puerto Morelos to create a community of people, standing in defence of their oceans. The location for this particular installation was chosen to redirect visitors away from nearby natural reefs, providing these with the opportunity to regenerate.

[ 28 ] MUSA is referenced as one of the largest and most ambitious projects underwater in the world.

[ 29 ] While continuing to produce additional pieces for MUSA, Taylor completed a unique creation for illusionist David Copperfield .

The Musician , which is a full-scale mermaid seating at a Steinway concert grand piano replica, can be found in Musha Cay , Bahamas. The piano plays soft classical music, similar to the sound of a whale or dolphin, as divers approach.

[ 30 ] By the end of 2013, Taylor had placed nearly 700 sculptures around the globe.

[ 20 ] In 2014 Ocean Atlas was installed in the Bahamas weighing 60 tons and measuring 5 metres in height.

[ 31 ] Taylor's immense sculpture modelled after a local Bahamian girl, depicts her carrying the weight of the ocean, referencing the ancient Greek myth of Atlas .

Ocean Atlas was awarded a Guinness World Record for being the largest single figurative underwater sculpture in the world.

[ 32 ] Rising Tide, River Thames, London UK The Rising Tide was Taylor's first tidal installation in Central London and was part of the 2015 Totally Thames Festival.

[ 33 ] The series of working horses with riders, loosely based on the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse , were positioned within sight of the Houses of Parliament . "I quite like the idea that the piece sits in the eye line of the place where many politicians and so many people who are involved in climate change all work and make these damaging deals and policies, yet who are in this state of mad denial," Taylor said.

[ 34 ] The artwork was intended to provide a metaphor for rising sea levels, demonstrating how little time there is to act to climate change, yet crucially it offers hope as it resets itself each day, offering humankind the opportunity for change.

Crossing the Rubicon at Museo Atlántico, Spain After relocating to Lanzarote , Spain in 2016, Taylor began work on his second underwater museum, Museo Atlántico , 1,000 ft (300 m) offshore.

[ 35 ] The museum opened on 10 January 2017 within Lanzarote's UNESCO World Biosphere Reserve and was first underwater museum within Europe and in the Atlantic Ocean.

[ 36 ] Museo Atlántico contains over 300 of Taylor's sculptures and includes Crossing The Rubicon, which consists of a 4 meters high wall that stretches 30 metre long and 35 life-sized figurative sculptures walking towards it, all unaware that they are heading to a point of no return while they are looking down or at their phones. The wall acts as a reminder that our surrounding oceans, air, climate or wildlife cannot be segregated.

The Raft of Lampedusa , a sculpted boat carrying 13 refugees towards an unknown future, is also part of Museo Atlántico .

[ 37 ] The inspiration for this piece came from Théodore Géricault ’s Raft of the Medusa .

[ 38 ] Amongst the figures life-cast by Taylor for The Raft of Lampedusa was Abdel Kader, a refugee from Laayoune , who made his own journey by boat to Lanzarote when he was 13 years old. Another large artwork found within the museum is The Human Gyre, which was created by placing over 200 life-size human figures into the shape of an oceanic gyre . The piece is aimed to highlight mankind's vulnerability to the ocean's inherent power.

Museo Atlántico is accessible to scuba divers and snorkelers who are accompanied by museum guides.

[ 39 ] In 2017, Taylor traveled to Indonesia and installed his artwork, Nest , off the cost of Gili Meno .

[ 40 ] The circle of 48 life-size figures was commissioned by BASK to act as an artificial reef and diving attraction for tourists and the local community.

[ 41 ] During the same year, Taylor started designing an underwater museum for the Australian Museum of Underwater Art (MOUA) project, which would be installed within the Great Barrier Reef.

[ 42 ] Nexus, Norway In 2018, Taylor went from the tropical climate of Sirru Fen Fushi in the Maldives to the icy fjords in Norway . Commissioned by the Fairmont Maldives Sirru Fen Fushi Resort, Coralarium was the world's first semi-submerged museum.

[ 43 ] The 6 metre high stainless steel gallery cube weighs over 180 tonnes and was constructed in the UK and assembled on site.

[ 44 ] The tidal artwork was part of the first coral regeneration project to take place in the Maldives. Following the removal and destruction of the 30 figurative sculptures in September 2018, which was ordered by President Abdulla Yameen, alternative artworks were integrated into the gallery and further sustainable initiatives have since been introduced. The Fairmont Maldives Sirru Fen Fushi Resort has been recognised as a Green Globe certified organisation and continues to work with Taylor.

[ 45 ] Later the same year, Taylor completed Nexus for the Sjøholmen Children’s Art Centre in Sandvika , Norway. The aim of the art installation is to encourage exploration of art and nature, especially the diverse marine life found in the surrounding fjords. There are life-sized bronze sculptures of a father and daughter standing hand-in-hand on a floating dock, looking down into the fjord where ten additional figurative sculptures can be seen floating below the water's surface.

[ 46 ] Cannes Underwater Museum , France In December 2019, Taylor completed two significant artwork installations for the Great Barrier Reef .

[ 47 ] Ocean Siren , a tidal sculpture located at the Strand Jetty in Townsville , was commissioned by MOUA and acts as a warning beacon for climate change. The artwork was modelled on a local 12-year-old indigenous Wulgurukaba girl, Takoda Johnson. Through collaborations with scientists from Reef Ecologic, James Cook University and the Australian Institute of Marine Science (AIMS) Ocean Siren reacts to data captured by the Davies Reef Weather Station and changes colour in response to live variations in water temperature.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Taylor's third underwater museum, The Coral Greenhouse located in John Brewer Reef , comprises a 58-ton greenhouse-like structure made from marine grade stainless steel and 20 figurative sculptures placed in and around the building.

The Coral Greenhouse is the first underwater museum in Australia and in the Southern Hemisphere.

[ 50 ] In 2021, Taylor continued to support the eco-art movement [ 51 ] and completed two projects based in Europe. The first installation, which is the first underwater museum in the Mediterranean Sea , was the Cannes Underwater Eco-Museum (Écomusée sous-marin) [ 52 ] near Île Sainte-Marguerite just off the coast of Cannes , France and has been included in the world's 100 greatest places of 2021 by Time Magazine .

[ 53 ] Before the museum could be installed, the site had to be cleared of disused marine infrastructure debris and officially cordoned off to protect visitors as well as the six large sculptures and surrounding posidonia sea grass meadows.

[ 54 ] The artworks are positioned 3 – 4 metres below the water's surface near the shoreline, making the museum easily accessible to snorkelers and free divers. Taylor's split mask design concept not only links to the area's history of being where the Man in the Iron Mask was imprisoned [ 55 ] and Cannes hosting the annual Cannes Film Festival , but it is also a metaphor for the ocean – one side of the mask depicts strength and resilience and the other fragility and decay.

[ 56 ] Museum of Underwater Sculpture Ayia Napa, Cyprus The second artwork installation in 2021 was the Museum of Underwater Sculpture Ayia Napa (MUSAN) situated within a Marine Protected Area (MPA) off the coast of Ayia Napa , Cyprus to aid in the development of biodiversity in the area.

[ 57 ] The museum is a joint collaboration between the Department of Fisheries and Marine Research, the Ayia Napa municipality and the Ministry of Tourism.

[ 58 ] As the ambassador for the Ayia Napa MPA, the museum is a space for education, preservation and conservation. MUSAN's metaphorical entrance is marked by two figurative land sculptures – Irineos and Calypso – who are the children pledging to help protect the sea. Once submerged, visitors can view the remaining 93 artworks, which are situated 8 – 10 metres below the water's surface in a ravine of sand located in between natural rock formations.

[ 59 ] Eight hybrid sculptures collectively titled The Ocean Sentinels were added to John Brewer Reef in 2023 as the third sculpture installation for Museum of Underwater Art, Australia to increase climate change awareness, support eco-tourism , and provide homage to the marine conservation techniques practiced by the indigenous population.

[ 60 ] In 2024, Taylor contributed 27 new sculptures to the expansion of his first major underwater installation, the Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park .

[ 61 ] The new series, Coral Carnival , was successfully opened in October 2024.

[ 62 ] Following on from the expansion project, the government of  Grenada commissioned a new underwater museum for the coast of Carriacou .

[ 63 ] The installation, A World Adrift , has been delayed by Hurricane Beryl , which caused total devastation.

[ 64 ] Conservation [ edit ] Taylor integrates contemporary art with the conservation of marine life. These underwater artificial coral reefs installations divert tourists away from natural coral reefs that are already suffering effects from marine pollution, global warming, hurricane damage and overfishing, thus providing the opportunity for the natural reefs’ rehabilitation.

[ 65 ] Working alongside marine biologists, Taylor uses resilient, stable and environmentally responsive materials. He integrates a coral promoting neutral pH cement and propagates damaged coral fragments found in the ocean into preset keys in his figures.

[ 66 ] The structures also incorporate habitat spaces for marine life that will promote an increase in biomass of local ecosystems.

[ 67 ] The sculptures are positioned in precise locations on the sea bed to avoid contact from strong currents and tidal patterns and are installed at the correct time for coral spawning to maximize their potential influence to the oceanic ecosystem .

[ 23 ] Art writer, Dr David De Russo, writes that "the sculptures are a living evolutionary exhibition as nature colonizes, and the sea and tidal movement deform their appearance developing a platform which will promote the re-generation of marine life. They are a means of conveying hope and environmental awareness." [ 68 ] By encompassing bio-restorative and culturally educational properties Taylors work has been categorised as part of the eco-art movement.

[ 69 ] In 2010, his work featured in the campaign by Greenpeace for awareness of Global Warming ahead of the 2010 United Nations Climate Conference in Cancún.

[ 65 ] In 2016, Taylor produced Plasticide , a land-based artwork that depicts an idyllic family beach scene, which is interrupted by seagulls regurgitating plastic. Originally installed outside the National Theatre on London's Southbank, Greenpeace later used the 2.5 ton sculpture to block Coca-Cola's's UK headquarters in London as a call to action to address their plastic pollution .

[ 70 ] In 2024, Taylor created Sirens of Sewage , a tidal artwork that portrays a small cross section of the local Whitstable , UK community - a cold water swimmer, school child, kite surfer, lifeboat volunteer and local fisherman - each who holds a profound connection to the sea and a shared resolve to combat water pollution.

[ 71 ] Controversy [ edit ] Damien Hirst was accused of plagiarism [ 72 ] due to the striking similarities between his show entitled Treasures from the Wreck of the Unbelievable exhibited at the May 2017 Vince Biennale and Jason deCaires Taylor's underwater sculptures, which were first installed in 2006, and were also exhibited at the same Biennale.

[ 73 ] In September 2018, President Abdulla Yameen of the Maldives ordered the removal and destruction of the 30 figurative sculptures included within Coralarium as the country's religious leaders deemed the human-like figures to represent idols and were therefore a violation of Islamic beliefs.

[ 74 ] “I was extremely shocked and heartbroken to learn that my sculptures have been destroyed by the Maldivian authorities, despite continued consultations and dialogue,” Taylor announced. “The Coralarium was conceived to connect humans to the environment and a nurturing space for marine life to thrive.” [ 75 ] Recognition [ edit ] 2006: Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park named as one of National Geographic's Top 25 Wonders of the World, Grenada.

[ 76 ] 2009: Created the largest collection of underwater sculpture in the world and the first Underwater Museum, Mexico ( MUSA ).

[ 77 ] 2010: MUSA (Mexico) was voted by Forbes corporation as one of the world's most unusual places to visit.

[ 78 ] 2010: Awarded the Global Aquatekture Visionary Award.

2011: Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park was described as one of the "Wonders of the World – Earth's Most Awesome Places" in a 2011 special edition of National Geographic Magazine.

2012: Awarded the Guinness World Record for the largest group of life-size statues underwater ( The Silent Evolution ).

[ 79 ] 2014: Awarded the Foreign Policy Global Thinker award.

[ 80 ] 2014: Presented with the Aquarium of the Pacific 's Award Of Excellence for Artistic Achievement & Ocean Conservation.

[ 81 ] 2014: Appointed to the board of the Association of Life Casting International.

[ 82 ] 2014: Published The Underwater Museum (hardback book) with Chronicle Books.

[ 83 ] 2015: Honoured with the “Scroll” of the Friends of the Phillippe Cousteau Anchor Museum (Amigos del Museo de Anclas Philippe Cousteau), an award given annually on the anniversary of the death of Phillippe Cousteau in recognition of his magnificent contribution to the field of underwater art.

[ 84 ] 2015: Featured TED Talk, Mission Blue, Solomon Islands.

[ 85 ] 2015: Shortlisted for the Groucho Club Maverick Award.

[ 86 ] 2015: Became a member of The Royal British Society of Sculptors .

[ 87 ] 2016: Created the first Underwater Museum in Europe and the Atlantic Ocean, Canary Islands, Spain ( Museo Atlantico ).

[ 88 ] 2016: Received the Lih Pao International Sculpture Award, Tei Pei, Taiwan, China.

2019: Received the Order of the Nation from Grenada, West Indies.

[ 89 ] 2020: Listed as one of the 100 Most Creative People in Business by Fast Company, New York.

[ 90 ] 2020: Awarded the Guinness World Record for the largest underwater art structure ( The Coral Greenhouse ).

[ 91 ] 2021: Created the first Underwater Museum in the Mediterranean Sea, France ( Cannes Underwater Eco-Museum ).

[ 92 ] 2021: Cannes Underwater Eco-Museum listed as one of The World's 100 Greatest Places of 2021 in Time Magazine.

[ 93 ] 2021: Awarded the Guinness World Record for the tallest underwater figurative sculpture in the world ( Ocean Atlas ).

[ 32 ] 2021: Awarded the Guinness World Record for the most underwater sculptures in the world.

[ 94 ] 2021: Finalist for the Zumtobel Group Award 2021 - Special Prize for Innovation.

[ 95 ] 2022: Jason deCairesTaylor listed as one of the 100 Global Inspirational Leaders of 2022 by Global Leaders Today.

[ 96 ] 2022: Coral Greenhouse was awarded the silver medal in the Best Sculpture Park or Trail category of the Australian Street Art Awards.

[ 97 ] 2022: Coral Greenhouse was nominated for the LCD Berlin Awards 2021 / 2022 New Culture Destinations of the Year.

[ 98 ] 2023: Awarded the Bertha Artivism Award.

[ 99 ] 2024: Coral Carnival listed as one of 52 Places to Go in The New York Times.

[ 100 ] See also [ edit ] Ecology portal Marine biology Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park Cancún Underwater Museum Museum of Underwater Art References [ edit ] ^ Cue, Elena (11 October 2015).

"Elena Cue – Interview with Jason deCaires Taylor" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 12 October 2015 .

^ a b Spalding, Mark (18 July 2014).

"Working Towards Sustainable Coastal Tourism" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 15 January 2018 . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

^ Veselinovic, Milena (29 July 2014).

"Submerge into mystic realm of the underwater museum" .

CNN . Retrieved 29 July 2014 .

^ a b "Underwater sculpture park set to open near Cancun" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 13 October 2010 . Retrieved 11 October 2010 .

^ "Underwater Wonderland-The-Deep-Sea-Art" ″Mutual Art″, 3 November 2010.

^ ″Wide Angle Natural Light no Strobe, Silver Medal″ 2007.

^ Nunes, Neil, Sculpture Park″ ″BBC Caribbean Radio Interview″, 13 July 2007.

^ Ghose, Tia (30 October 2014).

"Photos: The Largest Underwater Sculpture" .

Live Science . Retrieved 30 October 2014 .

^ "Totally Thames: The Rising Tide by Jason deCaires Taylor" .

Time Out London . 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Fischer, John.

"Home > International First Underwater Museum in Europe to Be Completed by Late 2016" .

ABC News . Retrieved 2 December 2014 .

^ "These hauntingly beautiful underwater sculptures will help save Bali's coral reef" .

Lonely Planet . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Stewart, Jessica (23 July 2018).

"World's First Inter Tidal Art Gallery Opens in the Maldives" .

My Modern Met . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Rellihan, Kathleen (13 December 2019).

"These Underwater Art Exhibits Are Helping to Save Our Oceans" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ @NatGeoUK (1 October 2020).

"A look at the new underwater museum bringing Australian Aboriginal culture and reef conservation together" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ "Le sculpteur Jason deCaires Taylor réagit après son entrée dans le Guinness World Records Book pour ses oeuvres immergées à Cannes" .

France 3 Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (in French). 20 November 2021 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ "Cyprus's haunting new underwater sculpture park – in pictures" .

the Guardian . 5 August 2021.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ a b c Voigts, Dr Jessie, ″Jason deCaires Taylor & Museo Subauatico de Arte(MUSA)″ ″Wandering Educators″, 19 June 2010 ^ "Sculptures" .

Grenada Underwater Sculpture Park . Archived from the original on 5 November 2016.

^ "The World's First Underwater Sculpture Gallery" .

Grenada Underwater Sculpture Park . 15 September 2017. Archived from the original on 15 September 2017 . Retrieved 12 January 2012 .

^ a b Dattaro, Laura (22 January 2014).

"Stunning Underwater Sculptures Help Protect Reefs" .

The Weather Channel . Archived from the original on 5 April 2015 . Retrieved 22 January 2014 .

^ a b "The Cancun Underwater Museum Opens Its Doors to Life" .

Scuba Diving . Retrieved 3 December 2010 .

^ Vickers, Dave ‘Wet behind the Ears’, Modern Design, Architecture and Art , p.95, London, June 2008.

^ a b Pavone, P (21 June 2010).

"An Interview with Underwater Sculptor Jason DeCaires Taylor" .

Scribol . Retrieved 23 January 2017 .

^ Jang, Esther (21 March 2014).

"World's First Underwater Museum: MUSA Near Cancun, Mexico Is Full of Coral Reefs and Impressive Sculptures" .

Latin Post . Retrieved 21 March 2014 .

^ Lauren Meir, ″Underwater Wonderland-The-Deep-Sea-Art″ ″Mutual Art″, 3 November 2010.

^ Kradel, Kimberly Article in Yucutan Artist-at-large Archived 22 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 1 July 2010.

^ Voigt, Jessie (29 June 2009).

"Latest Works of Underwater Sculpture" .

Wandering Educators . Retrieved 29 June 2009 .

^ Jones, Justin (7 April 2014).

"Artist Jason deCaires Taylor's Underwater Sculptures Are a Sight to Sea" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 4 July 2014 .

^ "There's An Incredible Underwater Sculpture Colony, And It Sits on the Ocean Floor" .

Can You Actually . Retrieved 11 April 2015 .

^ Archibold, Randal C. (14 August 2012).

"Trying to Protect a Reef With an Otherworldly Diversion" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Voon, Claire.

"The World's Largest Underwater Sculpture Is Also An Artificial Reef" .

Forbes . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ a b "Tallest underwater figurative sculpture" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Trust, The Rising Tide by Jason deCaires Taylor-Totally Thames | Thames Festival.

"The Rising Tide by Jason deCaires Taylor – Totally Thames" .

Thames Festival Trust . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (2 September 2015). "Underwater sculptures emerge from Thames in climate change protest".

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

^ Chong, Samantha.

"An eerie sight on the ocean floor" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Europe's first underwater museum opens off Lanzarote" .

The Guardian . 10 January 2017.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Inside Europe's first underwater museum" .

ABC News . 24 January 2017 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ Rodriguez, Cecilia.

"The First Undersea Art Museum In The Atlantic: Swim Through Hundreds Of Life-Size Sculptures" .

Forbes . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Raphael Minder (22 January 2017).

"Undersea Museum Keeps Fish Feeding and Its Social Commentary Biting" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 January 2017 .

^ "Jason deCaires Taylor's New Sculpture "Nest" Unveiled" .

DivePhotoGuide . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "The new hauntingly beautiful underwater sculpture beneath Bali's waters" .

travel.nine.com.au . 9 August 2017 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Underwater sculptor scouts Townsville reef = Townsville Bulletin". 12 July 2017.

^ Kate Springer (10 August 2018).

"World's first semi-submerged museum debuts in the Maldives" .

CNN . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "The Sculpture Coralarium: The world's first semi-submerged tidal art gallery" .

New Atlas . 20 July 2018 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Green Globe Awards First Certification to Fairmont Maldives Sirru Fen Fushi —" .

www.greenglobe.com . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Rellihan, Kathleen (13 December 2019).

"These underwater art exhibits are helping to save our oceans" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "A look at the new underwater museum bringing Australian Aboriginal culture and reef conservation together" .

National Geographic . 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Papathanasiou, Katerina (10 July 2020).

"The Underwater World of Jason deCaires Taylor in Australia" .

The Vale Magazine . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "The Great Barrier Reef's underwater museum, Townsville, Queensland" .

Get Lost . 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 .

^ "Australia's great reefs" .

The Telegraph . 21 June 2021.

ISSN 0307-1235 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Taylor, Jason deCaires; Constantinou, Costas (5 August 2021).

"Cyprus's haunting new underwater sculpture park – in pictures" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "VIDEO. Découvrez au large de Cannes les statues immergées du sculpteur britannique Jason deCaires Taylor" .

France 3 Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur (in French). 29 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "The World's 100 Greatest Places of 2021" .

Time . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Cannes, France, Opens Its Stunning Underwater Museum" .

Architectural Digest . 23 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "See sculptures below the surface at France's new underwater museum" .

Lonely Planet . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Jason deCaires Taylor creates Underwater Museum of Cannes "to draw more people underwater" " .

Dezeen . 4 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Ledsom, Alex.

"The Mediterranean's New Theme Park Is Underwater–In Pictures" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ Tamara Hardingham-Gill (17 August 2021).

"The underwater forest growing in the Med" .

CNN . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Davis-Marks, Isis.

"You Can Now Explore an Underwater Sculpture Museum in the Mediterranean" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Once the site of the world's first floating hotel, this reef is now home to a hidden underwater museum" .

ABC News . 17 May 2023 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Cole, Margherita (19 December 2023).

"Stunning Sculptures Inspired by Grenada's Carnival Characters Are Added to Underwater Installation" .

My Modern Met . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

^ Hardingham-Gill, Tamara; CNN (1 December 2023).

"Ghostly new figures come to world's first underwater gallery in Caribbean" .

CNN . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

{{ cite web }} : |last2= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Underwater sculptures created by Kent artist in the Caribbean" .

BBC News . 8 June 2024 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ "Underwater sculpture installations highlight the dangers of climate change" .

PBS News . 16 August 2024 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ a b Faerber, Fritz (7 January 2011).

"Pictures: "Bodies" Fill Underwater Sculpture Park" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 8 January 2011 . Retrieved 7 January 2011 .

^ Scales, Helen (2014).

"From Polyp to Rampart – The science of reef building and how art can inspire a sustainable future", in The Underwater Museum by Jason de Caires Taylor . San Francisco: Chronicle Books LLC. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 978-1-4521-1887-1 .

^ Geiling, Natasha.

"Can Underwater Art Save the Ocean's Coral Reefs?" .

Smithsonian.com . Retrieved 10 June 2014 .

^ De Russo, David. "Natures Cultivates Creativity in an Underwater World", Symposium Magazine ,p.44, February 2008.

^ De Russo, David. "Natures Cultivates Creativity in an Underwater World", Symposium Magazine p.40, February 2008.

^ Judith Vonberg (10 April 2017).

"Coca-Cola UK HQ blocked by sculpture protest" .

CNN . Retrieved 2 December 2021 .

^ "Whitstable: Water quality campaigners immortalised as statues" .

BBC News . 14 February 2024 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ David Sanderson.

"Damien Hirst in another pickle over 'plagiarism' of Venice exhibition name" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 7 February 2022 .

^ Charney, Noah (4 June 2017).

"Art imitates art? Damien Hirst's Venice Biennale installation looks a lot like another's" .

Salon . Retrieved 7 February 2022 .

^ "Art and the autocrat: the final act of vandalism by the Maldives' former president" .

British GQ . 24 September 2018 . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ "Unique underwater sculpture in the Maldives destroyed after deemed un-Islamic" .

ABC News . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Rogers, Mark.

"Grenada: Why you should check out the Caribbean's underappreciated Spice Island" .

USA Today . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Largest group of life-size statues underwater" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Giuffo, John.

"In Pictures: World's Most Unique Travel Destinations" .

Forbes . Retrieved 15 December 2010 .

^ "Largest group of life-size statues underwater" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ "2014 Global Thinkers" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 23 January 2017 .

^ "Jason deCaires Taylor" .

Eden for your World . 1 May 2014 . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ "ALI News" .

Art Molds Journal .

1 (2): 12. January 2014.

^ "Underwater Museum" .

Chronicle Books . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ Salinas, I (16 June 2015).

"El "Pergamino" de Amigos del Museo de Anclas, para Jason deCaires Taylor y el GEAS" .

La Nueva España . Retrieved 16 June 2015 .

^ Taylor, Jason deCaires (22 December 2015), An underwater art museum, teeming with life , retrieved 1 December 2021 ^ "The Groucho Maverick Awards Nomination" .

Groucho Club . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ "Jason deCaires Taylor FRSS" .

sculptors.org.uk . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ Rodriguez, Cecilia.

"Swimming Through Europe's First Underwater Museum: Museo Atlantico Opens To Visitors" .

Forbes . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "National Honours and Heroes Committee recognises 4 outstanding individuals | NOW Grenada" . 10 February 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Bernstein, Jill (4 August 2020).

"Fast Company's Most Creative People in Business 2020" .

Fast Company . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Largest underwater art structure" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Oliver, Huw (3 March 2021).

"An underwater museum just opened off the coast of France" .

Time Out Worldwide . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "The World's 100 Greatest Places of 2021" .

Time . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Most underwater art installations by an individual" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ "Zumtobel Group Award" .

z.lighting . Retrieved 6 December 2021 .

^ "News,Articles & Interviews of Top Leaders Global Leaders Today Magazine" .

Global Leaders Today . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "Public Art | Australian Street Art Awards" .

Street Art Awards . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ "AWARDS" .

LEADING CULTURE DESTINATIONS . Retrieved 21 July 2022 .

^ "Bertha Artivism Awards 2023 Cohort" .

Bertha Foundation . Retrieved 28 September 2023 .

^ Dowling, Danielle; Yeginsu, Ceylan; Mod, Craig; Pearson, Stephanie; Chung, Christine; Cerva, Gina Rae La; Gill, Nicholas; Chaudhary, Poras; Graham, Adam H. (9 January 2024).

"52 Places to Go in 2024" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jason deCaires Taylor .

Official website CONANP Jason deCaires Taylor image collection on Artimage Museum of Underwater Art v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Academics CiNii Artists RKD Artists Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jason_deCaires_Taylor&oldid=1289044059 " Categories : 1974 births Living people English male sculptors English underwater divers Artificial reefs English artists English contemporary artists Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2018 Use British English from January 2013 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 04:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jason deCaires Taylor 8 languages Add topic

