Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original philosophy 2 Recreation 3 Iconography 4 As artificial beings 5 Architecture 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Simulacrum 24 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Македонски Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Simulacra ) Representation or imitation of a person or thing This article is about the term. For the album by John Zorn, see Simulacrum (album) .

"Simulacra" redirects here. For other uses, see Simulacra (disambiguation) .

Image of a real apple (left), and plastic food model apple (right). The fake apple is a simulacrum.

A simulacrum ( pl.

: simulacra or simulacrums , from Latin simulacrum , meaning "likeness, semblance") is a representation or imitation of a person or thing.

[ 1 ] The word was first recorded in the English language in the late 16th century, used to describe a representation, such as a statue or a painting, especially of a god . By the late 19th century, it had gathered a secondary association of inferiority: an image without the substance or qualities of the original.

[ 2 ] Literary critic Fredric Jameson offers photorealism as an example of artistic simulacrum, in which a painting is created by copying a photograph that is itself a copy of the real thing.

[ 3 ] Other art forms that play with simulacra include trompe-l'œil , [ 4 ] pop art , Italian neorealism , and French New Wave .

[ 3 ] Original philosophy [ edit ] Mole & Thomas, Human Statue of Liberty (1919)—12,000 people in the flame of the torch, 6,000 in the rest of the shape. Plato was referring to an optical illusion such as this in his discussion of simulacra.

Simulacra have long been of interest to philosophers. In his Sophist , Plato speaks of two kinds of image-making. The first is a faithful reproduction, attempted to copy precisely the original. The second is intentionally distorted in order to make the copy appear correct to viewers. He gives the example of Greek statuary , which was crafted larger on the top than on the bottom so that viewers on the ground would see it correctly. If they could view it in scale, they would realize it was malformed. This example from the visual arts serves as a metaphor for the philosophical arts and the tendency of some philosophers to distort the truth so that it appears accurate unless viewed from the proper angle.

[ 5 ] Nietzsche addresses the concept of simulacrum (but does not use the term) in the Twilight of the Idols , suggesting that most philosophers, by ignoring the reliable input of their senses and resorting to the constructs of language and reason, arrive at a distorted copy of reality.

[ 6 ] French semiotician and social theorist Jean Baudrillard argues in Simulacra and Simulation that a simulacrum is not a copy of the real, but becomes truth in its own right: the hyperreal . According to Baudrillard, what the simulacrum copies either had no original or no longer has an original, since a simulacrum signifies something it is not, and therefore leaves the original unable to be located. Where Plato saw two types of representation—faithful and intentionally distorted (simulacrum)—Baudrillard sees four: (1) basic reflection of reality; (2) perversion of reality; (3) pretence of reality (where there is no model); and (4) simulacrum, which "bears no relation to any reality whatsoever".

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In Baudrillard's concept, like Nietzsche's, simulacra are perceived as negative, but another modern philosopher who addressed the topic, Gilles Deleuze , takes a different view, seeing simulacra as the avenue by which an accepted ideal or "privileged position" could be "challenged and overturned".

[ 9 ] Deleuze defines simulacra as "those systems in which different relates to different by means of difference itself. What is essential is that we find in these systems no prior identity , no internal resemblance ".

[ 10 ] Alain Badiou , in speaking with reference to Nazism about Evil, writes, [ 11 ] "fidelity to a simulacrum, unlike fidelity to an event, regulates its break with the situation not by the universality of the void, but by the closed particularity of an abstract set ... (the 'Germans' or the 'Aryans')".

According to the philosopher Florent Schoumacher, [ 12 ] in societies of hypermodernity , in the West, the social contract states that we are obliged to use “simulacra”.  We are carried there by hubris ( hubris ).  However, the contemporary notion of simulacrum assumes that we all have a biased relationship with the reality of the world, not because reality is not accessible, but because we wish not to see things as they appear.  The philosopher nevertheless emphasizes that our capacity for aphairesis , our capacity for representing the world, does indeed exist.

Recreation [ edit ] Recreational simulacra include reenactments of historical events or replicas of landmarks, such as Colonial Williamsburg and the Eiffel Tower , and constructions of fictional or cultural ideas, such as Fantasyland at The Walt Disney Company 's Magic Kingdom . The various Disney parks have been regarded as the ultimate recreational simulacra by some philosophers, with Baudrillard noting that Walt Disney World Resort is a copy of a copy, or "a simulacrum to the second power".

[ 13 ] In 1975, Italian author Umberto Eco argued that at Disney's parks, "we not only enjoy a perfect imitation, we also enjoy the conviction that imitation has reached its apex and afterwards reality will always be inferior to it".

[ 14 ] Examining the impact of Disney's simulacrum of national parks , Disney's Wilderness Lodge , environmentalist Jennifer Cypher and anthropologist Eric Higgs expressed worry that "the boundary between artificiality and reality will become so thin that the artificial will become the centre of moral value".

[ 15 ] Eco also refers to commentary on watching sports as sports to the power of three, or sports cubed. First, there are the players who participate in the sport (the real), then the onlookers merely witnessing it, and finally the commentary on the act of witnessing the sport. Visual artist Paul McCarthy has created entire installations based on Pirates of the Caribbean and theme park simulacra, with videos playing inside the installation.

Iconography [ edit ] Beer (1999: p. 11) employs the term "simulacrum" to denote the formation of a sign or iconographic image, whether iconic or aniconic , in the landscape or greater field of Thangka art and Tantric Buddhist iconography . For example, an iconographic representation of a cloud formation sheltering a deity in a thangka or covering the auspice of a sacred mountain in the natural environment may be discerned as a simulacrum of an "auspicious canopy" (Sanskrit: Chhatra ) of the Ashtamangala .

[ 16 ] Perceptions of religious imagery in natural phenomena approach a cultural universal and may be proffered as evidence of the natural creative spiritual engagement of the experienced environment endemic to the human psychology .

As artificial beings [ edit ] Simulacra often appear in speculative fiction . Examples of simulacra in the sense of artificial or supernaturally or scientifically created artificial life forms include: Automaton – A self-operating robot.

Androids created to pass for human beings in several of Philip K. Dick 's novels (called "simulacra" in We Can Build You , The Simulacra , Now Wait for Last Year , Clans of the Alphane Moon , The Penultimate Truth and Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?

(called " replicants " in its film adaptation Blade Runner ).

Avatar (computing) – A graphical representation of a user.

Experience machine - A thought experiment put forward by Robert Nozick in his book Anarchy, State, and Utopia , in which any desirable experience can be simulated.

Evil Deadpool - A Marvel Comics character created by Deadpool 's preserved lost body parts being fused and  brought to life by their remaining healing factor.

Feathertop – A scarecrow created and brought to life by a witch.

Frankenstein's Monster from Frankenstein – A creation of Victor Frankenstein made from various body parts. Frankenstein's Monster was also adapted in DC Comics and Marvel Comics .

The Universal Pictures film Bride of Frankenstein featured the titular monster that was made by a collaboration of Henry Frankenstein and Doctor Septimus Pretorius . She even had comic book counterpart from DC Comics .

DC Comics also had another Frankenstein's monster-like character called Young Frankenstein .

Galatea from Metamorphoses – A statue of a female created by Pygmalion and brought to life by Aphrodite .

Gargoyles – Statues sculpted to resemble monsters.

Ham Monster - A monster from The Mr. Potato Head Show who Dr. Fruitcake created from meat and crab claws.

Hatsune Miku and other Vocaloids .

Holograms – Computerized images of anything.

Homunculus – Small miniature humanoids created through alchemy.

Jack Pumpkinhead - Princess Ozma 's Tip form created him from a jack-o'-lantern and tree limbs.

"Maria" the Robotrix from Fritz Lang 's Metropolis Neutrinos from Solaris – A race of creatures made from the memories of humans.

Nomu – Creatures from My Hero Academia . Also known as "Artificial Humans", the Nomu are deceased humans who were resurrected and modified to wield multiple powers at once.

Pinocchio – A puppet that comes to life.

Pintosmalto – A statue of a man-made from large amounts of sugar and sweet almonds, scented water, musk and amber, various jewels, gold thread, and above all a trough and a silver trowel who was brought to life by a Goddess of Love.

Realm of the Mad God has several enemies stated to be simulacrums in-universe. Most notably, the incarnation of Oryx the Mad God that the player fights in Oryx's Chamber is explicitly stated by Oryx to not be his real form. In addition, the versions of various bosses fought in the "Mad God Mayhem" dungeon are all stated to be simulacrums, and the version of Dr. Terrible fought in the Mad Lab is stated to be a simulacrum in additional media.

Robots RUR – Originated the word robot .

Simulacrum Soldier – Robotic soldiers with human minds employed by both the IMC and Frontier Militia in the Titanfall universe. While they bear a superficial resemblance to the commonly-fielded BRD-01 Spectre, Simulacra are instead human minds uploaded into robotic bodies. A simulacrum can be considered a form of transhumanism .

Revenant – An example from its spinoff, Apex Legends , a playable Legend who possesses a mind of a former human hitman.

Ash - Also an example, present in both Titanfall 2 and Apex Legends .

Simulacrum Spell – An illusion spell from Dungeons & Dragons that creates a partially real duplicate of someone, though it only has half the power and abilities of the original.

Snegurochka – A little girl made of snow.

Squadron Supreme of America - In Marvel Comics, the Squadron Supreme of America are revealed to be simulacrums created by Mephisto and programmed by the Power Elite so that Phil Coulson can have them be a United States-sponsored superhero team.

Terracotta Army – Terracotta sculptures of the armies of Qin Shi Huang .

The Gingerbread Man – A gingerbread man that came to life.

The character John Dough was also a gingerbread man that came to life.

The Golem of Jewish folklore – A creation of a rabbi made from clay that was harvested from the banks of the Vltava .

Thumbelina – A small girl created by a witch.

Ushabti – Egyptian figurines.

Vasilisa the Beautiful – A doll that came to life.

Wirehead (science fiction) - A hypothetical futuristic application of brain stimulation reward where pleasure is artificially induced.

Also, the illusions of absent loved ones created by an alien life form in Stanislaw Lem 's Solaris can be considered simulacra.

Architecture [ edit ] Architecture is a special form of simulacrum.

[ according to whom?

] In his book Simulacra and Simulation, Jean Baudrillard describes the Beaubourg effect in which the Pompidou Centre functions as a monument of a mass simulation that absorbs and devours all the cultural energy from its surrounding areas. According to Baudrillard, the Centre Pompidou is "a machine for making emptiness".

[ 17 ] An everyday use of the simulacrum are the false facades, used during renovations to hide and imitate the real architecture underneath it.

A Potemkin village is a simulation: a facade meant to fool the viewer into thinking that he or she is seeing the real thing. The concept is used in the Russian-speaking world as well as in English and in other languages. Potemkin village belongs to a genus of phenomena that proliferated in post-Soviet space. Those phenomena describe gaps between external appearances and underlying realities.

[ 18 ] Disneyland – Disneyland is a perfect model of all the entangled orders of simulacra. [...] Play of illusions and phantasms.

[ 19 ] Las Vegas – the absolute advertising city (of the 1950s, of the crazy years of advertising, which has retained the charm of that era).

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Memetics Simulacra and Simulation Simulated reality Metaverse References [ edit ] ^ "Word of the Day" . dictionary.com. 1 May 2003.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2007 . Retrieved 2 May 2007 .

^ "simulacrum" The New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary 1993 ^ a b Massumi, Brian.

"Realer than Real: The Simulacrum According to Deleuze and Guattari." Archived 23 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2 May 2007 ^ Baudrillard, Jean.

Simulacra and Simulations.

transl. Sheila Faria Glaser.

"XI. Holograms." Archived 27 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 5 May 2010 ^ Plato.

The Sophist . Translated by Jowett, Benjamin. Archived from the original on 30 December 2005 . Retrieved 2 May 2007 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1888). "Reason in Philosophy".

Twilight of the Idols . Translated by Walter Kaufmann and R. J. Hollingdale.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2007 . Retrieved 2 May 2007 .

^ "Baudrillard Simulacra" . Archived from the original on 9 February 2004 . Retrieved 2 May 2007 .

^ Baudrillard, Jean (1988). Poster, Mark (ed.).

Selected Writings . Stanford University Press. pp.

166– 184.

ISBN 978-0804714785 .

^ Deleuze, Gilles (1968).

Difference and Repetition . Translated by Patton, Paul. New York: Columbia University Press. p. 69.

^ Deleuze 1968 , p. 299.

^ Badiou, Alain (2001).

Ethics - An Essay on the Understanding of Evil . Translated by Hallward, Peter. London: Verso. p. 74.

^ Schoumacher, Florent (2024).

Eîdolon: Simulacre et hypermodernité [ Eîdolon: Simulacrum and Hypermodernity ]. Paris: Balland.

^ Baudrillard, Jean (4 March 1996).

"Disneyworld Company" .

Libération . Translated by Debrix, Francois. Archived from the original on 27 May 2010 . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ Eco, Umberto.

Travels in Hyperreality.

Reproduced in relevant portion at "The City of Robots" Archived 12 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2 May 2007 ^ Cypher, Jennifer and Eric Higgs.

"Colonizing the Imagination: Disney's Wilderness Lodge".

Archived 4 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2 May 2007 ^ Beer, Robert (1999).

The Encyclopedia of Tibetan Symbols and Motifs . Shambhala Publications. p.

11 .

ISBN 978-1-57062-416-2 .

^ Baudrillard, Jean (1994).

Simulacra and Simulation . Translated by Glaser, Sheila Faria. University of Michigan Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0472065219 .

^ Pisano, Jessica (2014), Beissinger, Mark; Kotkin, Stephen (eds.), "Pokazukhaand Cardiologist Khrenov: Soviet Legacies, Legacy Theater, and a Usable Past" , Historical Legacies of Communism in Russia and Eastern Europe , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

222– 242, ISBN 978-1-107-05417-2 , retrieved 5 May 2022 ^ Baudrillard 1994 , p. 10.

^ Baudrillard 1994 , p. 63.

External links [ edit ] Look up simulacrum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Two Essays: Simulacra and Science Fiction; Ballard’s Crash " Baudrillard, Jean "The Simulacrum's Revenge," sec 3.2 of Flatline Constructs: Gothic and Cybernetic-Theory Fiction Fisher, Mark v t e Appropriation in the arts By field Music Bootleg recording Chopped and screwed Contrafact list Contrafactum Cover version DJ mix Interpolation Medley Music mashup Music plagiarism Musical quotation Nightcore Parody music Pasticcio Plunderphonics Potpourri Quodlibet Remix Riddim Sampling Sound collage Standard Tribute act Trope Variation Vaporwave Literature / theatre Assemblage Cut-up technique Flarf poetry Found poetry Jukebox musical Trope Verbatim theatre Visual arts Collage Combine painting Photographic mosaic Readymades of Marcel Duchamp Swipe By source material Mona Lisa Michelangelo's David Michelangelo's Pietà Statue of Liberty Cinema / television / video Abridged series Anime music video Collage film Found footage Literal music video Parody film Re-cut trailer Remake Shot-for-shot Supercut TV format Vidding Video mashup YouTube Poop Other arts In-joke Internet meme Joke theft Parody advertisement Revivalism (architecture) Video game modding General concepts Intertextual figures Allusion Calque Parody Pastiche Plagiarism Quotation Translation Adaptation Film Literary Theatre Other concepts After (art) Assemblage (art) Bricolage Citation Détournement Found object Homage Imitation in art Mashup Reprise Satire Source criticism in the arts Related artistic concepts Aesthetic interpretation Anti-art Archetypal literary criticism Artistic inspiration " The Death of the Author " Divine inspiration Afflatus Genius (literature) Muses Fan labor Fan fiction Genre Genre studies Originality Simulacrum Western canon Standard blocks and forms Archetype Formula fiction Genre fiction Jazz standard Plot device Stock character Story structure Epoch-marking works L.H.O.O.Q.

(1919) " Pierre Menard, Author of the Quixote " (1939) Reality Hunger: A Manifesto (2010) Theorization Dada De Copia Rerum Diegesis Dionysian imitatio Mimesis Nachahmung Palimpsests: Literature in the Second Degree The Pictures Generation Pop art Postmodernism Russian formalism Related non- artistic concepts Academic dishonesty Appropriation in sociology Articulation in sociology Cultural appropriation History of printing Information society Intellectual property Copyright infringement Derivative work Fair use Meme Open source Participatory culture Pirate politics Recontextualisation Remix culture Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simulacrum&oldid=1286195046 " Categories : 16th-century neologisms Postmodern art Hyperreality Postmodern theory Perception Visual arts theory Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2014 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2024 This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 09:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simulacrum 24 languages Add topic

