Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Controller of HMSO and Director of OPSI 2 History 3 Published works 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Office of Public Sector Information 8 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Français Norsk bokmål Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from HM Stationery Office ) Body responsible for the operation of His Majesty's Stationery Office This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Office of Public Sector Information" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Office of Public Sector Information ( OPSI ) is the body responsible for the operation of His Majesty's Stationery Office ( HMSO ) and of other public information services of the United Kingdom . The OPSI is part of the National Archives of the United Kingdom and is responsible for Crown copyright .

The OPSI announced on 21 June 2006 that it was merging with the National Archives. The merger took place in October 2006. The OPSI continues to discharge its roles and responsibilities from within the structure of the National Archives.

Controller of HMSO and Director of OPSI [ edit ] The Controller of HMSO is also the Director of OPSI. HMSO continues to operate from within the expanded remit of OPSI. The Controller of HMSO also holds the offices of Kings's Printer of Acts of Parliament, King's Printer for Scotland, King's Printer for Wales and Government Printer for Northern Ireland.

By virtue of holding these offices OPSI publishes, through HMSO, the London Gazette , Edinburgh Gazette , Belfast Gazette and all legislation in the United Kingdom, including Acts of Parliament , Acts of the Scottish Parliament and statutory instruments .

The Controller of HMSO is appointed by Letters Patent to the office of King's Printer of Acts of Parliament. This office is separate from the functions of OPSI. Historically the role of King's (or Queen's) Printer extended to other official publishing responsibilities, e.g. the rights to print, publish and import the King James Bible and Book of Common Prayer within England , Wales and Northern Ireland . The current holder of this office is Cambridge University Press .

History [ edit ] HMSO was established as a new department of HM Treasury on 5 April 1786, when John Mayor was appointed as its first superintendent.

[ 1 ] The creation of the office was a result of the advocacy of Edmund Burke for reforms of the corrupt, expensive and inefficient Royal Household and the Civil Service. Before the establishment of HMSO, the Crown would grant patents (exclusive rights) for the supply of stationery; the patentee could buy these supplies cheaply and then charge highly inflated prices.

[ 2 ] At first, HMSO was the agent for various government departments [ 2 ] but, from 1822, all government departments were required to buy stationery through the open competitions and tenders operated by HMSO.

[ 1 ] HMSO also took over as official publisher for both houses of Parliament from Hansard in 1882.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] In 1889, HMSO was granted letters patent under which it was appointed as Queen's Printer of Acts of Parliament ("printer to Her Majesty of all Acts of Parliament"). These letters patent also appointed the Controller of HMSO as administrator of the rights of Crown copyright. HMSO also took over publication of the London Gazette in the same year.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1986 HMSO celebrated its bicentenary.

Since 1947, it has printed 86 million copies of The Highway Code . It is one of the biggest publishers in the world, having published 9,300 titles last year [ when?

] and holding 49,000 titles in stock. It produces nearly 600 pages of Hansard and other parliamentary papers overnight, as well as Bills, Acts, white papers , 2.3 million passports a year, 28.2 million pension and allowance books a year, and all sorts of other publications from the British Pharmacopoeia to guides to long-distance footpaths. In the 1980s, the Stationery Office also supplied 1,500 million envelopes a year (at a cost of £11 million) as well as 18 million ball-point pens and 188 million paper-clips.

[ 4 ] Most of its publishing functions were privatised in 1996 as a separate company known as The Stationery Office (TSO), but HMSO continued as a separate part of the Cabinet Office. Prior to 1996, it was the publisher of virtually all government material, such as command papers , legislation and official histories. After 1996, the Controller of HMSO remained Queen's Printer of Acts of Parliament and retained the role of administering Crown copyright .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] The privatisation was not the final stage in HMSO's changing role. As part of the implementation of the European Union directive on the re-use of public sector information, it was decided that there was a need for a dedicated body to be the principal focal point for advising on and regulating the operation of public sector information re-use. That new body, created in 2005, is the OPSI.

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Published works [ edit ] Great Britain. Parliament. House of Commons (1900).

Papers by Command, Volume 105 . H.M. Stationery Office . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

Great Britain. Foreign Office; MacDonald, Claude M. (1900).

Reports from Her Majesty's minister in China respecting events at Peking: Presented to both houses of Parliament by command of Her Majesty, December 1900 . Vol. 364 of Cd. (Great Britain. Parliament). H.M. Stationery Office . Retrieved 29 September 2016 .

British and Foreign State Papers . Contributor Great Britain. Foreign Office. H.M. Stationery Office. 1905 . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) See also [ edit ] United Kingdom portal History of the Second World War published by the Office ePSIplus The Stationery Office Anglia Square , former headquarters of HMSO References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Office of Public Sector Information web site.

"The History of Her Majesty's Stationery Office" .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2008 . Retrieved 9 June 2008 .

^ a b c "William Sharp - Obituary - The Register".

The Times . 28 March 2002. p. 43.

^ a b "Technology: A history of rights".

The Guardian . Guardian Technology Pages. 6 September 2007. p. 3.

The modern bureaucracy of Crown copyright dates from 1786, with the formation of a new Treasury department, His Majesty's Stationery Office (HMSO). In 1882, HMSO was made the official publisher to both Houses of Parliament, which still retain copyright on official proceedings. In 1889, Queen Victoria granted the controller of HMSO Royal Letters Patent as "printer to Her Majesty of all Acts of Parliament". The Letters Patent appointed the controller to hold Crown copyright. This grant and the office of the Queen's Printer continues today. In 1980, HMSO became a trading fund. In 2000, the government repositioned HMSO to regulate Crown copyright licensing. This role was taken on by the Office of Public Sector Information, now part of the National Archives.

^ Richard Boston, "How the Government issues the tissue", The Guardian (London), 2 May 1986, p. 15.

^ a b "Her Majesty's Stationery Office" in Jonathan Law and Elizabeth A. Martin (eds), A Dictionary of Law , Oxford University Press, 2009, via Oxford Reference Online, accessed 5 November 2011.

Further reading [ edit ] Barty-King, Hugh (1986).

Her Majesty's Stationery Office: the story of the first 200 years, 1786–1986 . London: H.M.S.O.

ISBN 0117013048 .

External links [ edit ] The Stationery Office website eContentplus Thematic Network to support the implementation of the European Directive on Public Sector Information (PSI) Re-use The ( OpenPSI project ), an OPSI-led community effort to create a UK government linked data service that supports research.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Office_of_Public_Sector_Information&oldid=1300502061 " Categories : State publishers Defunct public bodies of the United Kingdom United Kingdom copyright law The National Archives (United Kingdom) Public sector in the United Kingdom 2006 mergers and acquisitions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2020 CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: others This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Office of Public Sector Information 8 languages Add topic

