Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Rationale 3 Computation 4 Results 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents SCImago Journal Rank 11 languages Български Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Polski Português தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metric of scholarly journals "SCImago" redirects here; not to be confused with SCImago Institutions Rankings .

Part of a series on Citation metrics Author-level Composite index Eigenfactor Erdős number g-index h-index Kardashian index Science-wide author databases Citation Analysis Academic journal publishing reform DORA Leiden Manifesto I4OC Altmetrics Article-level Bibliographic coupling Bibliometrics Cartel Co-citation Proximity Analysis Coercive Dynamics Index Graph Scientometrics Journal-level CiteScore Impact factor SCImago v t e The SCImago Journal Rank ( SJR ) indicator is a measure of the prestige of scholarly journals that accounts for both the number of citations received by a journal and the prestige of the journals where the citations come from.

Etymology [ edit ] SCImago is not an acronym , although the capitalization of first 3 letters do stand for SCientific Influence. The suffix "mago" appears to be randomly chosen.

Rationale [ edit ] Citations are an indicator of popularity of scientific works and can be perceived as endorsement; prestige can be understood as a combination of the number of endorsements and the prestige of the works publishing them. Adopting this view, the SJR indicator assigns different values to citations depending on the perceived prestige of the journals where they come from.

However, studies of methodological quality and reliability have found that "reliability of published research works in several fields may be decreasing with increasing journal rank", [ 1 ] contrary to widespread expectations.

[ 2 ] The calculation of the SJR indicator is similar to the Eigenfactor score , with the former being based on the Scopus database and the latter on the Web of Science database, [ 3 ] and there are other differences.

[ 4 ] Computation [ edit ] A journal's SJR indicator is a numeric value representing the average number of weighted citations received during a selected year per document published in that journal during the previous three years, as indexed by Scopus . Higher SJR indicator values are meant to indicate greater journal prestige.
SJR is developed by the Scimago Lab, [ 5 ] originated from a research group at the University of Granada .

The SJR indicator is a variant of the eigenvector centrality measure used in network theory. Such measures establish the importance of a node in a network based on the principle that connections to high-scoring nodes contribute more to the score of the node. The SJR indicator has been developed to be used in extremely large and heterogeneous journal citation networks. It is a size-independent indicator and its values order journals by their "average prestige per article" and can be used for journal comparisons in science evaluation processes. The SJR indicator is a free journal metric inspired by, and using an algorithm similar to, PageRank .

The SJR indicator computation is carried out using an iterative algorithm that distributes prestige values among the journals until a steady-state solution is reached. The SJR algorithm begins by setting an identical amount of prestige to each journal, then using an iterative procedure, this prestige is redistributed in a process where journals transfer their achieved prestige to each other through citations. The process ends up when the difference between journal prestige values in consecutive iterations do not reach a minimum threshold value any more. The process is developed in two phases, (a) the computation of Prestige SJR ( PSJR ) for each journal: a size-dependent measure that reflects the whole journal prestige, and (b) the normalization of this measure to achieve a size-independent measure of prestige, the SJR indicator .

[ 6 ] In addition to the network-based SJR indicator, the SJR also provides a more direct alternative to the impact factor (IF), in the form of average citations per document in a 2-year period, abbreviated as Cites per Doc. (2y) .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Results [ edit ] The SCImago web site [ 9 ] gives both the SJR and H index, and the results are quite different.  Here are the journals ranking in the top three for each of the metrics.

Title SJR Rank H Index Rank Nature 17 1 Science 56 2 New England Journal of Medicine 11 3 Ca-A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 1 621 Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning 2 10205 Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 3 28 See also [ edit ] Journal-level metrics CiteScore Journal Citation Reports Journalology Impact factor References [ edit ] ^ Brembs, Björn (2018).

"Prestigious Science Journals Struggle to Reach Even Average Reliability" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

12 : 37.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2018.00037 .

PMC 5826185 .

PMID 29515380 .

^ Triggle, Chris R; MacDonald, Ross; Triggle, David J.; Grierson, Donald (2022-04-03).

"Requiem for impact factors and high publication charges" .

Accountability in Research .

29 (3): 133– 164.

doi : 10.1080/08989621.2021.1909481 .

PMID 33787413 .

One might expect, therefore, that a high JIF factor indicates a higher standard of interest, accuracy and reliability of papers published therein. This is sometimes true but unfortunately is certainly not always the case (Brembs 2018, 2019). Thus, Björn Brembs (2019) concluded: "There is a growing body of evidence against our subjective notion of more prestigious journals publishing 'better' science. In fact, the most prestigious journals may be publishing the least reliable science." ^ "SCImago Journal & Country Rank (SJR) as an alternative to Thomson Reuters's Impact Factor and EigenFactor" . 21 Aug 2008. Archived from the original on 2013-04-26 . Retrieved 20 September 2012 .

^ "Network-based Citation Metrics: Eigenfactor vs. SJR" . 28 Jul 2015. Archived from the original on 2020-04-26 . Retrieved 26 Apr 2020 .

^ "Scimago Lab" .

Scimago Lab Website . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ SCImago Journal & Country Rank.

"DESCRIPTION OF SCIMAGO JOURNAL RANK INDICATOR" (PDF) .

SCImago Journal & Country Rank . Retrieved 20 March 2018 .

^ Declan Butler (2 January 2008).

"Free journal-ranking tool enters citation market" .

Nature .

451 (6): 6.

Bibcode : 2008Natur.451....6B .

doi : 10.1038/451006a .

PMID 18172465 .

^ Matthew E. Falagas; et al. (2008).

"Comparison of SCImago journal rank indicator with journal impact factor" .

The FASEB Journal .

22 (8): 2623– 2628.

doi : 10.1096/fj.08-107938 .

PMID 18408168 .

^ "SCImago Journal & Country Rank" . Retrieved 13 Jan 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website A "description, in plain English" of Network-based Citation Metrics: Eigenfactor vs. SJR.

v t e Academic publishing Journals Academic journal Public health Papers Paper Abstract Review article Position paper Literature review Grey literature Working paper White paper Technical report Annual report Pamphlet Essay Lab notes Other publication types Thesis Collection of articles Patent Biological Chemical Book Monograph Chapter Treatise Poster session Proceedings Impact and ranking Acknowledgment index Altmetrics Article-level metrics Author-level metrics Bibliometrics C-score Journal ranking Eigenfactor g-index h -index Impact factor Rankings of academic publishers Science-wide author databases of standardized citation indicators Scientometrics SCImago Journal Rank Citation cartel Reform and access Academic journal publishing reform Open access Citation advantage Serials crisis Sci-Hub #ICanHazPDF Versioning Preprint Postprint Version of record Erratum Retraction Indexes and search engines Google Scholar AMiner BASE CORE Semantic Scholar Scopus Web of Science Paperity OpenAlex Index Copernicus ERIH PLUS Sherpa Romeo OpenAIRE Related topics Imprint Scientific writing Peer review Scholarly communication Scientific literature Learned society Open research Open scientific data ORCID Electronic publishing Ingelfinger rule Least publishable unit " Publish or perish " Lists Academic databases and search engines Academic journals Copyright policies Highly Cited Researchers Open-access journals Preprint policies Scientific journals Style/formatting guides University presses Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SCImago_Journal_Rank&oldid=1269260746 " Categories : Academic publishing Journal ranking Citation indices Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 13 January 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SCImago Journal Rank 11 languages Add topic

