Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Formation 3 Setting 4 References Toggle the table of contents Cataclasite 8 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rock found at geological faults Cataclasite under a petrographic microscope . The rock in part of the Malm Formation of the Helvetic nappes ; sample found in a landslide near Engelberg in the Swiss Alps .

Thin section image of a cataclasite in both plane polarized light (right) and crossed polarized light (left). Contact between highly fractured wall rock (right) and clast supported cataclasite (left) is outlined in red. This rock is from the San Andreas Fault at Elizabeth Lake, California.

Cataclasite is a cohesive granular fault rock .

[ 1 ] Comminution , also known as cataclasis, is an important process in forming cataclasites.

[ 2 ] They fall into the category of cataclastic rocks which are formed through faulting or fracturing in the upper crust .

[ 3 ] Cataclasites are distinguished from fault gouge , which is incohesive, and fault breccia , which contains coarser fragments.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] Thin section image of a foliated cataclasite in both plane polarized light (right) and crossed polarized light (left). The banding in this cataclasite is defined by grain size and ratio of clasts to matrix. This rock is from the San Andreas Fault at Elizabeth Lake, California.

Cataclasites are composed of fragments of the pre-existing wall rock as well as a matrix consisting of crushed microfragments, which cohesively holds the rock together.

[ 2 ] There are different types of classification schemes for cataclasites in the fault rock literature. The original classification scheme by Sibson classifies them by their proportion of fine-grained matrix to angular fragments.

[ 1 ] The term fault breccia is used for describing a cataclasite with coarser grains. A fault breccia is a cataclastic rock with clasts that are larger than two millimeters making up at least 30% of the rock.

[ 4 ] These are the varieties based on the classification scheme of cataclasites proposed by Sibson: [ 1 ] protocataclasite : a type of cataclasite in which the matrix takes up less than 50% of the total volume, mesocataclasite : a type of cataclasite in which the matrix occupies between 50 and 90 percent of the total volume, and ultracataclasite : a type of cataclasite characterized by a matrix occupying greater than 90% of the total volume.

This classification scheme separates distinct features of cataclasites, but any fault rock that has been formed through brittle deformation mechanisms containing pieces of the fractured pre-existing rock type are normally referred to as cataclasites. Cataclasites are different from mylonites , another type of fault rock, that is classified by the presence of a schistosity formed through ductile deformation methods.

[ 5 ] Although cataclasites often lack an oriented fabric , some cataclasites  are foliated .

[ 6 ] According to Sibson's 1975 classification scheme, these would be classified as mylonites [ 1 ] although it was proven experimentally that some cataclastic mechanisms can form cataclasites with an oriented foliation solely due to brittle deformation.

[ 6 ] In a modification to the original definitions, the foliated fault rock would be still considered a cataclasite because it was created by cataclastic mechanisms.

Formation [ edit ] Cataclasites form through the progressive fracturing of mineral grains and aggregates , a process known as comminution . Cataclasites are the result of comminution, along with frictional sliding and grain rotation during faulting.

[ 2 ] This crushing, frictional sliding and rotation of grains is referred to as cataclasis .

[ 2 ] Comminution, along with frictional sliding and grain boundary rotation can allow a rock to macroscopically flow over a wide brittle zone in the crust.

[ 2 ] This macroscopic flow due to the combination of brittle deformation mechanisms can be referred to as cataclastic flow .

[ 2 ] Setting [ edit ] Many faults near the earth's surface are brittle and show evidence of low temperature deformation.

[ 2 ] At low temperatures, there is not enough energy for the crystal grains to deform plastically, thus each grain fractures as opposed to elongation or recrystallizing. In these systems, cataclasites would be more likely to form as opposed to mylonites, which would require crystal plastic deformation.

[ 6 ] Due to quartz being the main mineral in many rocks in the brittle regime of the crust, the brittle-ductile transition for quartz can be a good indication of where cataclasites would form before ductile deformation plays a role.

[ 2 ] This normally refers to the uppermost 10–12 km of the continental crust .

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Sibson, R. H. (1977).

"Fault rocks and fault mechanisms" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

133 (3): 191– 213.

Bibcode : 1977JGSoc.133..191S .

doi : 10.1144/gsjgs.133.3.0191 .

S2CID 131446805 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Fossen, Haakon (2010).

Structural Geology . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-51664-8 .

^ Higgins, Michael W. (1971). Cataclastic Rocks (Report).

USGS Professional Paper 678.

doi : 10.3133/pp687 .

^ Woodcock, N.H.; Mort, K. (2008).

"Classification of fault breccias and related fault rocks" .

Geological Magazine .

145 (3): 435– 440.

Bibcode : 2008GeoM..145..435W .

doi : 10.1017/S0016756808004883 .

S2CID 55133319 .

^ Brodie, Kate; Fettes, Douglas; Harte, Ben; Schmid, Rolf (2007).

Structural terms including fault rock terms . British Geological Survey. pp.

10– 12.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b c Chester, F.M.; Friedman, M.; Logan, J.M. (1985). "Foliated Cataclasites".

Tectonophysics .

111 (1): 139– 146.

Bibcode : 1985Tectp.111..139C .

doi : 10.1016/0040-1951(85)90071-X .

v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category v t e Types of rocks Igneous rock Adakite Alkali feldspar granite Andesite Anorthosite Aplite Basalt Alkali basalt Picrite basalt Basaltic trachyandesite Mugearite Shoshonite Basanite Blairmorite Boninite Carbonatite Charnockite Enderbite Dacite Diabase Diorite Napoleonite Dunite Essexite Foidolite Gabbro Granite Granodiorite Granophyre Harzburgite Hornblendite Hyaloclastite Icelandite Ignimbrite Ijolite Kimberlite Komatiite Lamproite Lamprophyre Latite Lherzolite Monzogranite Monzonite Nepheline syenite Nephelinite Norite Obsidian Pegmatite Peridotite Phonolite Phonotephrite Porphyry Pumice Pyroxenite Quartz diorite Quartz monzonite Quartzolite Rhyodacite Rhyolite Comendite Pantellerite Scoria Shonkinite Sovite Syenite Tachylyte Tephriphonolite Tephrite Tonalite Trachyandesite Benmoreite Trachybasalt Hawaiite Trachyte Troctolite Trondhjemite Tuff Websterite Wehrlite Sedimentary rock Argillite Arkose Banded iron formation Breccia Calcarenite Chalk Chert Claystone Coal Conglomerate Coquina Diamictite Diatomite Dolomite Evaporite Flint Geyserite Greywacke Gritstone Itacolumite Jaspillite Laterite Lignite Limestone Lumachelle Marl Mudstone Oil shale Oolite Phosphorite Sandstone Shale Siltstone Sylvinite Tillite Travertine Tufa Turbidite Varve Wackestone Metamorphic rock Anthracite Amphibolite Blueschist Cataclasite Eclogite Gneiss Granulite Greenschist Hornfels Calcflinta Itabirite Litchfieldite Marble Migmatite Mylonite Metapelite Metapsammite Phyllite Pseudotachylite Quartzite Schist Serpentinite Skarn Slate Suevite Talc carbonate Soapstone Tectonite Whiteschist Specific varieties Adamellite Appinite Aphanite Borolanite Blue Granite Epidosite Felsite Flint Ganister Gossan Hyaloclastite Ijolite Jadeitite Jasperoid Kenyte Lapis lazuli Larvikite Litchfieldite Llanite Luxullianite Mangerite Novaculite Pietersite Pyrolite Rapakivi granite Rhomb porphyry Rodingite Shonkinite Taconite Tachylite Teschenite Theralite Unakite Variolite Wad Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cataclasite&oldid=1292463984 " Categories : Metamorphic rocks Structural geology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 02:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cataclasite 8 languages Add topic

