Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Achievements 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Niccolò de' Niccoli 17 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian humanist (1364-1437) Sample of Niccoli's cursive script, which developed into Italic type Niccolò de' Niccoli (1364 – 22 January 1437) was an Italian Renaissance humanist .

He was born and died in Florence , Italy, and was one of the chief figures in the company of learned men which gathered around the patronage of Cosimo de' Medici . Niccoli's chief services to classical literature consisted in his work as a copyist and collator of ancient manuscripts; he corrected the text, introduced divisions into chapters, and made tables of contents.

Achievements [ edit ] His lack of critical faculty was compensated by his excellent taste; in Greek (of which he knew very little) he had the assistance of Ambrogio Traversari . Many of the most valuable manuscripts in the Laurentian Library are by his hand, amongst them those of Lucretius and of twelve comedies of Plautus . The pursuit of ancient manuscripts was a dangerous and expensive task; agents working in the field at the time included Poggio Bracciolini . Thanks to the patronage of Cosimo de' Medici, Niccoli was able to build up his personal library of 800 manuscripts.

[ 1 ] He was generous with lending out his books since he had multiple copies of several Classical texts.

[ 1 ] This would be the basis of the library that Cosimo de' Medici built in San Marco .

[ 1 ] Niccoli's private library was bettered only by that of Cosimo de' Medici who was the pioneer of the first Florentine public library which was the largest in Europe at that time. Niccoli also possessed a small but valuable collection of ancient works of art, coins and medals. He regarded himself as an infallible critic, and could not bear the slightest contradiction; his quarrels with Francesco Filelfo , Guarino da Verona and especially with Traversari created a great sensation in the learned world at the time.

His hypercritical spirit (according to his enemies, his ignorance of the language) prevented him from writing or speaking in Latin ; his sole literary work was a short tract in Italian on Latin Orthography , which he withdrew from circulation after it had been violently attacked by Guarino. His fame as a Latin stylist was extensive, and many authors would submit to him their manuscripts prior to publication for correction; Leonardo Bruni called him the "censor of the Latin tongue".

[ 2 ] He is also regarded as the inventor of the cursive script, known today as Italic or Cancelleresca . This came about from his enduring study of ancient manuscripts and the numerous copies he made. Niccoli decided he would vary his copied manuscripts by using tilted lettering and as a result later on, when Italian printers first used Italic type , they chose Niccoli's lettering style.

Niccoli was buried in the Basilica of Santo Spirito in Florence. He was extremely indebted prior to his death, after which Cosimo offered to cover all of his outstanding payments to debtors in exchange for control over his collection of 800 manuscripts valued at around 6,000 florins .

[ 3 ] He never married, preferring to fill his houses with manuscripts, coins, statuary, vases, and gems.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Codex Ravennas 429 References [ edit ] ^ a b c Meehan 2007 .

^ a b Durant, Will (1953).

The Renaissance .

The Story of Civilization . Vol. 5. New York: Simon and Schuster. p. 81.

^ Durant, Will (1953).

The Renaissance . New York: Simon and Schuster. pp.

77 .

Meehan, William F. III (2007).

"The Importance of Cosimo de Medici in Library History" .

Indiana Libraries .

26 (3).

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Niccoli, Niccolo de' ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 646.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Niccolò Niccoli at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Artists ULAN People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Niccolò_de%27_Niccoli&oldid=1226024847 " Categories : Italian Renaissance humanists Book and manuscript collectors 1364 births 1437 deaths 15th-century people from the Republic of Florence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2024, at 04:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Niccolò de' Niccoli 17 languages Add topic

