Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Redevelopment Toggle Redevelopment subsection 2.1 Phase 1 2.2 Phase 2 3 Subsequent renovation 4 Shows 5 Groups that frequently use the theatre 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents ADC Theatre Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′30.70″N 00°07′12.13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2085278°N 0.1200361°E ﻿ / 52.2085278; 0.1200361 ﻿ ( ADC Theatre ) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theatre in Cambridge, England, and department of the University of Cambridge The facade of the theatre The ADC Theatre (full name: Amateur Dramatic Club Theatre ) is a theatre in Cambridge , England , and also a department of the University of Cambridge . It is located on Park Street , north off Jesus Lane . The theatre is owned by a trust on behalf of the Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club (CUADC) but leased to the University, operating as one of the smallest departments and run by five full-time and one part-time staff. It is a producing theatre with CUADC as its resident company.

The auditorium seats a maximum of 228 audience members in rows of 14, except for the back row which seats 18, though typical configurations generally seat slightly fewer than this. The front row is accessible step-free from the street via a passenger lift. The theatre has a bar, which opens 45 minutes before shows and often stays open into the early hours of the morning. The bar is famous for its cocktails themed around the current week's show.

The ADC Theatre is notable for its very unusual safety curtain which rises up from the floor, rather than falling down from the fly tower as is common in almost all other theatres.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] When CUADC was formed in 1855, its performances took place in rented rooms in the Hoop Hotel on Jesus Lane . By 1882, the Club's members had raised sufficient funds to buy the freehold. This building was subsequently developed into the ADC Theatre over an extended period of time. There was a disastrous fire in 1933, which gutted the building. The theatre was quickly rebuilt to a design by Harold Tomlinson and W. P. Dyson , reopening in 1935.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The building was not changed again substantially until the redevelopment programme that started in 2002.

[ 4 ] The theatre was run by CUADC until the club ran into financial difficulties in 1974 when the University of Cambridge began to lease the premises and run the theatre, an arrangement that continues to this day.

[ 5 ] A trust was set up to legally own the theatre with the members of CUADC being its beneficiaries.

[ 6 ] Many famous actors and comedians acted in the theatre at the start of their careers, including Sir Ian McKellen , Tony Church , Emma Thompson , Marius Goring , Sir Derek Jacobi , Dan Stevens , Rebecca Hall , Stephen Fry , Hugh Laurie , Hattie Morahan , Tom Hollander , Tilda Swinton , Jan Ravens , Julie Covington , Tom Hiddleston , Eddie Redmayne , Richard Ayoade , Ellie Nunn , Liam Williams , David Mitchell , Robert Webb , Phil Wang , Simon Bird , Joe Thomas and Emma Corrin . Among famous directors to have gained early experience there are Sir Peter Hall , Sir Trevor Nunn and Sam Mendes . Viral comedian Ken Cheng performed multiple times at the ADC Theatre in his early career.

[ 7 ] In 2011, the ADC Theatre took over the management of the Corpus Playroom, [ 8 ] the theatre space of Corpus Christi College, Cambridge .

Redevelopment [ edit ] In 2002, a redevelopment appeal was launched to improve the building. The bar had been refurbished in summer 2000, prior to the appeal being launched.

Phase 1 [ edit ] In summer 2003, the first phase of the redevelopment was undertaken. This phase resulted in no visible change to the theatre's facilities as it consisted of necessary groundwork to underpin the building and move services such as water and gas in preparation for the next phase.

In 2004, the major modifications to the public areas of the theatre were undertaken. A new toilet block was constructed on an area that was part of the theatre's yard. A large amount of the ground floor was remodelled, resulting in an enlarged foyer and new box office for the public, and new management offices, clubroom, production office and backstage kitchen. The theatre's facade was also completely changed.

Phase 2 [ edit ] In summer 2005, a lift was installed to give disabled access to the bar and auditorium. In addition, a corridor was constructed to give audience access to both sides of the auditorium. A bar extension and bar roof terrace were constructed on top of the toilet block built in the previous phase. The installation of the lift meant that the previous ladder access to the lighting and sound boxes could no longer be used. The lighting and sound boxes were rebuilt to allow access to them from the lift.

Latter work during the summer of 2008 concentrated on the backstage areas: new dressing rooms, a new set workshop, a rehearsal room and a green room . Offices for the Theatre's full-time staff and resources for those producing shows were rearranged and expanded. Additionally, the auditorium floor was rebuilt and new seating installed, increasing audience comfort and providing a better view of the stage from all seats.

The Theatre reopened after the final phase in October 2008 with a Gala Celebration event, at which a number of theatre alumni were present including Peter Hall and Trevor Nunn .

Subsequent renovation [ edit ] In the summer of 2018, the theatre again closed for renovations, the most substantial of which was the re-roofing of the auditorium and replacement of the auditorium ceiling.

Mechanical ventilation and new seating was installed, a small extension was made to office space and additional points above the auditorium for rigging lights were installed. A number of electrical services were also replaced including the fitting of several new mains electricity distribution boards and new dimmers .

Shows [ edit ] During the term-time of Cambridge University, there are normally two shows per night: a Mainshow starting at 7:45pm, and a Lateshow starting at 11pm. On Tuesdays, the late slot is normally filled by a one-night show that can range from comedy (such as Smokers produced by the Cambridge Footlights ) to "fringe" drama such as original writing. This format is subject to change and notably performances often take place in the theatre bar on Sunday evenings.

Outside term-time, the theatre often holds one show per week, and closes for periods during the summer and, to a lesser extent, the Christmas and Easter holidays. These closures allow essential maintenance work to be undertaken in the theatre.

Groups that frequently use the theatre [ edit ] During term-time, Cambridge University drama societies such as CUADC, Footlights and CUMTS use the theatre, as well as college drama societies.

Outside term-time, the theatre is typically used by drama societies based in the city of Cambridge such as BAWDS, the Combined Actors of Cambridge and WriteOn.

References [ edit ] ^ "Main Auditorium Technical Specification" (PDF) . ADC Theatre . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ "University: Park Street: ADC Theatre" .

Cambridge 2000 . Retrieved 9 February 2019 .

^ The New A.D.C. Theatre, Cambridge. Harold Tomlinson and W. P. Dyson, architects.

The Architect and Building News , vol. 141, pages 134–136, 25 January 1935.

^ Stubbings, Frank (1995).

Bedders, bulldogs and bedells .

ISBN 0-521-47978-9 .

^ Hartley, Andrew James (2015).

Shakespeare on the University Stage . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-04855-3 .

^ "Constitution" . CUADC . Retrieved 18 June 2024 .

^ "Person: Ken Cheng" .

Camdram . Retrieved 9 February 2019 .

^ "Corpus Playroom to be revamped in association with the university" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 September 2011 . Retrieved 17 July 2011 .

External links [ edit ] ADC Theatre website CUADC website BAWDS website Combined Actors website WriteOn website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category 52°12′30.70″N 00°07′12.13″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2085278°N 0.1200361°E ﻿ / 52.2085278; 0.1200361 ﻿ ( ADC Theatre ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ADC_Theatre&oldid=1290627487 " Categories : 1881 establishments in England Theatres in Cambridge Non-School institutions of the University of Cambridge University and college theatres in England Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents ADC Theatre Add languages Add topic

