Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recorded information 2 Translations 3 Literature 4 Notes Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Rustah 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kotava Latina Magyar مصرى Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский سرائیکی Slovenčina Slovenščina Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 10th-century Persian explorer and geographer Ahmad ibn Rustah Born Rosta, Isfahan , Abbasid Caliphate (modern-day Iran) Occupation Explorer, Geographer, Writer Language Arabic Nationality Persian Period 10th century Genre Travel literature, Geography Notable works Kitāb al-A‘lāq al-Nafīsa (Book of Precious Records) Ahmad ibn Rusta Isfahani ( Arabic : احمد ابن رسته اصفهانی , romanized : Aḥmad ibn Rusta Iṣfahānī ), more commonly known as ibn Rusta ( ابن رسته , also spelled ibn Roste ), was a tenth-century Muslim Persian [ 1 ] explorer and geographer born in Rosta , Isfahan in the Abbasid Caliphate .

[ 2 ] He wrote a geographical compendium known as the Kitāb al-A‘lāq al-Nafīsa ( Arabic : كتاب الأعلاق النفيسة , lit.

'Book of Precious Records').

The information on Isfahan is especially extensive and valuable. Ibn Rusta states that, while for other lands he had to depend on second-hand reports, often acquired with great difficulty and with no means of checking their veracity, for Isfahan he could use his own experience and observations or statements from others known to be reliable. Thus we have a description of the twenty districts ( rostaq s) of Isfahan containing details not found in other geographers' works. Concerning the town itself, we learn that it was perfectly circular in shape, with a circumference of half a parasang , walls defended by a hundred towers, and four gates.

Recorded information [ edit ] His information on the non-Islamic peoples of Europe and Inner Asia makes him a useful source for these obscure regions (he was even aware of the existence of the British Isles and of the Heptarchy of Anglo-Saxon England) and for the prehistory of the Turks and other steppe peoples.

He traveled to Novgorod with the Rus' and compiled books relating his own travels, as well as second-hand knowledge of the Khazars , Magyars , Slavs , Bulgars and other peoples.

He wrote of a 10th-century city of the Rus': "As for the Rus, they live on an island … that takes three days to walk round and is covered with thick undergrowth and forests; … They harry the Slavs, using ships to reach them; they carry them off as slaves and … sell them. They have no fields but simply live on what they get from the Slav's lands … When a son is born, the father will go up to the newborn baby, sword in hand; throwing it down, he says, 'I shall not leave you with any property: You have only what you can provide with this weapon.'" [ 3 ] His impression of the Rus' seemed to be very favorable: "They carry clean clothes and the men adorn themselves with bracelets and gold. They treat their slaves well and also they carry exquisite clothes, because they put great effort in trade. They have many towns. They have a most friendly attitude towards foreigners and strangers who seek refuge." This is in contrast to the account of Ibn Fadlan and other Arab authors, whose views on hygiene (based on Islamic hygienical jurisprudence ) contrasted with that of the Rus'. However, the word clean initially appeared in the first Russian translation of Ibn Rustah by professor Daniel Chwolson (who also misspelled his name as Ibn Dasta(h) ). Consecutive Russian editions of Chwolson's translation include a footnote saying that the Arabic original clearly says the opposite, unclean or impure , and suggesting that Chwolson made such a correction intentionally, out of a remote concern that modern Russians might be offended by such characteristic.

[ 4 ] Of ancient Croatia he wrote in the chronicle Al-Djarmi : "Their ruler is crowned … He dwells in the midst of the Slavs … He bears the title of 'ruler of rulers' and is called 'sacred king'. He is more powerful than the Zupan (viceroy), who is his deputy … His capital is called Drzvab where is held a fair of three days every month." About a certain king of the Caucasus Ibn Rustah wrote: "He prayed on Fridays with the Muslims, on Saturdays with the Jews and on Sundays with the Christians. 'Since each religion claims that it is the only true one and that the others are invalid', the king explained, 'I have decided to hedge my bets.'" He also travelled extensively in Arabia and is one of the early Persian explorers to describe the city of Sana'a . In his Book of Precious Records , he writes: "It is the city of Yemen — there not being found in the highland or the Tihama or the Hijaz a city greater, more populous or more prosperous, of more noble origin or more delicious food than it. … San'a is a populous city with fine dwellings, some above others, but most of them are decorated with plaster, burned bricks and dressed stones." Translations [ edit ] Абу-Али Ахмед Бен Омар Ибн-Даста . Известия о хозарах, буртасах, болгарах, мадьярах, славянах и руссах. — СПб.: тип. Императорской Академии Наук, 1869. [Russian translation.] Literature [ edit ] Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1997).

"EBN ROSTA, ABŪ ʿALĪ AḤMAD" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. VIII, Fasc. 1 . pp.

49– 50.

Abū Alā Ahmed ibn Omar Ibn Rosteh; Ahmed ibn Jakūb ibn Wadhih al-Kātib Al-Jakūbi (1870), Goeje , M. J. de (ed.), "Kitāb Al-A'Lāk An-Nafāsa VII auctore Abū Alā Ahmed ibn Omar Ibn Rosteh et Kitāb Al-Boldān auctore Ahmed ibn Jakūb ibn Wadhih al-Kātib Al-Jakūbi" , Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum (in Arabic and Latin), 7 , Lugdunum Batavorum ( Leiden ): Brill Ibn Rustah (1892), M. J. De Goeje (ed.), "Kitāb al-A'lāk an-Nafīsa", Bibliotheca Geographorum Arabicorum , Leiden: E. J. Brill Notes [ edit ] ^ Bosworth 1997 . "EBN ROSTA, ABŪ ʿALĪ AḤMAD b. ʿOmar (d. after 290/903), Persian author of a geographical compendium." ^ Ibn Rustah was identified with the writer ibn Dasta, by Mihály Kmoskó (1876–1931).

"Areen - arabcin" . Archived from the original on 2007-09-27 . Retrieved 2007-01-21 .

^ National Geographic , March 1985.

^ See footnote 35.

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahmad_ibn_Rustah&oldid=1283128503 " Categories : 10th-century births 10th-century deaths Writers from Isfahan 10th-century Iranian geographers Travel writers of the medieval Islamic world Iranian explorers Explorers of Asia 10th-century geographers Geographers from the Abbasid Caliphate 10th-century Iranian writers Samanid Empire 10th-century explorers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2017 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Persian-language text CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 16:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Rustah 28 languages Add topic

