Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Forms of privatization 3 Motives Toggle Motives subsection 3.1 Increasing efficiency and improving service quality 3.2 External influences 3.3 Financial motives 4 Prevalence Toggle Prevalence subsection 4.1 Prevalence of public-private partnerships 4.2 Small-scale operators: the other private sector 5 Selecting private operators 6 Forms of regulation 7 Examples of privatization Toggle Examples of privatization subsection 7.1 France 7.2 England and Wales 7.3 Manila, the Philippines 7.4 Argentina 7.5 Cochabamba, Bolivia 7.6 Colombia 8 Impact of privatization Toggle Impact of privatization subsection 8.1 Impact on access 8.2 Impact on health 8.3 Impact on tariffs 8.4 Impact on efficiency 8.5 Profitability 9 Private water operators 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Water privatization 8 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Igbo Português Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private sector participation in the provision of water services and sanitation This article is about private sector participation in the provision of water services and sanitation. For commercialized bottled water, see bottled water . For the sale of water resources themselves, see water trading .

Graffiti against the closure of a public fountain and privatization of water in Turnhout, Flanders .

Water privatization is short for private sector participations in the provision of water services and sanitation . Water privatization has a variable history in which its popularity and favorability has fluctuated in the market and politics. One of the common forms of privatization is public–private partnerships (PPPs).

[ 1 ] PPPs allow for a mix between public and private ownership and/or management of water and sanitation sources and infrastructure. Privatization, as proponents argue, may not only increase efficiency and service quality but also increase fiscal benefits. There are different forms of regulation in place for current privatization systems.

Private sector participation in water supply and sanitation is controversial. Proponents of private sector participation argue that it has led to improvements in the efficiency and service quality of utilities. It is argued that it has increased investment and has contributed to expanded access. They cite Manila , Guayaquil in Ecuador , Bucharest, several cities in Colombia and Morocco , as well as Côte d'Ivoire and Senegal as success stories.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Critics, however, contend that private sector participation led to tariff increases, and privatized water systems are incompatible with ensuring the international human right to water , with the belief that public water will no longer be public. Aborted privatizations in Cochabamba, Bolivia , and Dar es-Salaam, Tanzania , as well as privately managed water systems in Jakarta and Berlin , are highlighted as failures. In 2019, Austria forbade the privatization of water provision via its constitution.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Water privatization in Buenos Aires, Argentina and in England are cited by both supporters and opponents, each emphasizing different aspects of these cases.

Figures outlining the accessibility of water from the private sector also display the controversy of private water sources: one source claims that 909 million people were served by "private players" in 2011 globally, up from 681 million people in 2007. This figure includes people served by publicly owned companies that have merely outsourced the financing, construction, and operation of part of their assets, such as water or wastewater treatment plants, to the private sector.

[ 10 ] The World Bank estimated the urban population directly served by private water operators in developing countries to be much lower at 170 million in 2007.

[ 1 ] Among them, only about 15 million people, all living in Chile, are served by privately owned utilities. Privately managed but publicly owned companies serve the remainder under concession, lease, and management contracts.

History [ edit ] The Hampton water works serving London were part of the assets sold in 1989 as part of the privatization of water supply in England.

Privately owned water utilities were common in Europe, the United States, and Latin America in the mid and late 19th century. Their importance gradually faded away until the early 20th century as they proved unable to expand access and publicly owned utilities became stronger. A second global dawn of private water utilities came in the early 1990s in the aftermath of the Thatcher privatizations in England and Wales, the fall of communism and the ensuing global emphasis on free market policies.

[ 11 ] The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund played an important role in this process through the conditionality of their lending.

[ 12 ] In England and Wales, the emergence of the first private water companies dates back to the 17th century. In 1820, six private water companies operated in London. However, the market share of private water companies in London declined from 40% in 1860 to 10% in 1900. In the 1980s, their share all over England and Wales was about 25%.

[ 13 ] The tide turned completely in 1989 when the conservative government of Margaret Thatcher privatized all public water and sewer companies in England and Wales. In Scotland local governments dominated by the Labour party kept water systems in public hands.

The water supply of Paris was operated by two private companies from 1985 to 2010, each serving one half of the city.

Meanwhile, the water sector in France has always been characterized by a coexistence of public and private management, with their respective shares fluctuating over time. The two largest private companies are Veolia Environnement , formerly the Compagnie Générale des Eaux and then Vivendi Environnement, and Suez Environnement , formerly Lyonnaise des Eaux and then Ondeo. The Compagnie Générale des Eaux was founded in 1853 and Lyonnaise des Eaux in 1880. In the late 19th century, municipal governments, dissatisfied with high tariffs and the lack of expansion of networks to poor neighborhoods, did not renew private concessions and created instead municipally owned utilities. The share of private water operators declined to 17% in 1936. The share of the private sector gradually increased to 32% in 1954, 50% in 1975, and 80% in 2000 using a new model. Instead of the concession contracts, which gave the responsibility to finance investments to the private company, the new lease contracts ( affermages ) made the private operator only responsible for operation and maintenance, while major investments became a responsibility of the municipalities.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The French water companies also escaped the nationalizations after the war and later under President François Mitterrand , because the central government did not want to interfere with the autonomy of municipalities and was unwilling to finance heavy investments.

[ 16 ] The water supply of Paris was privatized in 1985 when a conservative mayor awarded two lease contracts, each covering one half of the city. In 2010, a socialist mayor remunicipalized the water system of the French capital.

The water supply of Barcelona has been managed by a private company, Aguas de Barcelona, since 1867.

In Spain, private water companies maintained their position, budging the global trend during the late 19th and early 20th century.

[ 16 ] The largest private water company in Spain is Aguas de Barcelona . Initially created by French and Belgian investors, it was sold to Spanish investors in 1920, only to gradually come back under French control in the early 21st century.

[ 17 ] In Germany, a British private water company had set up the first piped water system and treatment plant in Berlin in 1852, but the city, dissatisfied with the lack of investment in particular in sewerage, cancelled the contract in 1873.

[ 18 ] In 1887 Gelsenwasser was created, which remains an important regional water supplier in the Ruhr district. The German water sector has always been dominated by municipally owned utilities. Despite this, the water system of Berlin was partially privatized in 1999 for fiscal reasons.

[ 19 ] In the United States, 60% of piped water systems were privately owned in 1850. However, this share declined to 30% in 1924.

[ 20 ] As of 2010, 2000 water and wastewater facilities in the U.S. were operated under public-private partnerships, a joint effort between the private group and the municipality it was operating in.

[ 21 ] In Chile, the Pinochet dictatorship established 1980 Constitution including the water laws that is a foundation of Chile's water systems. Additionally, the government enacted the 1981 Water Code, a legal regime that decide to eliminate the government involvement in controlling water system and allow citizens to possess rights to exploit water resources. Establishing this Water Code, the Chile's government achieved the water privatization, and this regime is still in force. Today, the government has reduced its power in water resources administration; therefore, 90% of the Chile's drinking water supply is controlled by the transnational corporations. However, this water system causes the imbalance of Chile's distribution of water rights. For example, since Water Code permits companies' to exploit water resources, 71% of Chile's water resources are utilized in irrigation which is equivalent to the annual consumption of 243 millions homes.

[ 22 ] The inequal distribution of water rights induces the scarcity of Chilean citizens' water resources, particularly in the drought.

Demonstration in Johannesburg, against the privatization of water, December 2008 European and local private water companies expanded in Latin America, Africa, and Asia in the second half of the 19th century, all while their importance declined in Europe. In Uruguay, water supply was privately managed from 1867 to 1950; in Buenos Aires, Argentina, for a brief period from 1887 to 1891 and again from 1993 to 2006; in Cairo and Alexandria, Egypt, from 1867 to 1956; in Beirut, Lebanon, from the 19th century until 1951; in Shanghai, China, from 1875 to 1949; in Casablanca, Morocco, from 1914 to 1962 and then again after 1997; in Senegal until 1971 and then again after 1996; and in Côte d'Ivoire from colonial times until today without interruption.

[ 23 ] In Central and Eastern Europe, private companies expanded during the late 1990s, especially in Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Romania.

However, some water privatizations failed, most notably in 2000 in Cochabamba , Bolivia, paving the way for a new pragmatism and a reduced emphasis on privatization, and in 2019, Austria forbid the privatization of water provision via its constitution.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Forms of privatization [ edit ] Broadly speaking, there are two forms of private sector participation in water supply and sanitation. In a full privatization , assets are permanently sold to a private investor. In a public-private partnership , ownership of assets remains public and only certain functions are delegated to a private company for a specific period. Full privatization of water supply and sanitation is an exception today, being limited to England, Chile and some cities in the United States. Public-private partnerships (PPPs) are the most common form of private sector participation in water supply and sanitation today.

The three most common forms of PPPs, in the order of increasing responsibilities for the private partner, are: a management contract , under which the private operator is only responsible for running the system, in exchange for a fee that is to some extent performance-related. Investment is financed and carried out by the public sector. The duration is typically 4–7 years.

a lease contract , under which assets are leased to the private operator who receives a share of revenues. It thus typically bears a higher commercial risk than under a management contract. Investment is fully or mostly financed and carried out by the public sector. The duration is typically 10–15 years.

a mixed-ownership company in which a private investor takes a minority share in a water company with full management responsibility vested in the private partner.

a concession , under which the private operator is responsible for running the entire system. Investment is mostly or fully financed and carried out by the private operator. The duration is typically 20–30 years.

Concessions are the most common form of PPPs in water supply and sanitation. They are followed by leases, also called affermages , most commonly used in France and Francophone West Africa. Management contracts are used in Saudi Arabia, Algeria and Armenia, among others. Mixed-ownership companies are most common in Spain, Colombia, and Mexico.

A concession for the construction of a new plant is called a Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) contract. Under a BOT contract the private operator signs an agreement with a utility that purchases treated water or wastewater treatment services.

Motives [ edit ] The government of Cuba entrusted the water supply of Havana to a private company in order to improve service quality, showing the diversity of motives behind water privatization.

The motives for water privatization vary from one case to another, and they often determine which mode of privatization is chosen: management and lease contracts are used to increase efficiency and improve service quality while asset sales and concessions primarily aim to reduce the financial burden or to expand access. Ideological motives and external influences also play a role, with market-liberal ideology favoring privatization, left-leaning ideologies opposing, and both conservatives and centrists falling in between, often based on local and business-minded considerations. Usually, several of the above motives are combined.

Increasing efficiency and improving service quality [ edit ] Water privatization is seen by some as a solution to improving poorly managed public water utility systems. Symptoms of poor management can include low water bill collection, high water losses (known as non-revenue water ), and intermittent water supply , sometimes lasting only for a few hours a day or a few days per week. In Algeria, Saudi Arabia , Colombia and Cuba increasing efficiency and improving service quality were principal motives for water privatization. In these cases, the argument to privatize water is predicated on the belief that by adopting a market-based approach to the management of water, the service provider will be incentivized by profit to increase efficiency and improve service quality.

[ 12 ] Some critics argue that this belief is misguided because the water utility sector is typically monopolized by one private company. They claim that this counteracts many of the advantages associated with the market economy because without competition between multiple water service businesses there is nothing to drive prices down and levels of efficiency up.

[ 24 ] [ 12 ] External influences [ edit ] External influences, such as from the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), often play a role in the decision of governments to privatize water, as was the case in Bolivia and in several African countries. This influence may take the form of structural adjustment programs , whereby a development loan is given on the condition that the receiving country privatize their water utility system.

[ 12 ] Other aid agencies have also supported water privatization. These include the Inter-American Development Bank (e.g., in Ecuador, Colombia and Honduras), the Asian Development Bank (e.g., in China), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development in Eastern Europe, German development cooperation through KfW (e.g., in Albania, Armenia, Jordan and Peru), French development cooperation (e.g., in Senegal) and British development cooperation (e.g., in Tanzania and Guyana). Critics claim that these external influences are problematic and argue that influencing water privatization is part of a broader movement of Western powers imposing neoliberalism on countries in the Global South.

[ 12 ] In the UK, the World Development Movement campaigned against the support of water privatization through aid from the UK.

[ 25 ] Financial motives [ edit ] In some cases, where access is already universal and service quality is good, financial motives dominate, as it was the case in Berlin, Germany, and in Chile. In Berlin the state government sold a 49.9% share of its water utility in 1999 for 1.69bn Euros in exchange for a guaranteed profit for the private shareholders amounting to the interest rate on 10-year government bonds plus 2 percent, as specified in a contract that was kept confidential until the state government was forced by a referendum to make it public. As a result, tariffs increased (15% in 2004 alone) and the state government's revenues from the company declined compared to the situation before privatization (168m Euro profit for the state in 1997 compared to a 10m Euro loss in 2003).

[ 26 ] In Chile, where no wastewater treatment plants existed prior to privatization, the government's desire to finance their construction off-budget drove privatization in 1998.

[ 27 ] Financial motives for water privatization are also common in countries where water access and service quality is poor. In cities with rapidly growing slums, it is very expensive for the government to expand their water utility system infrastructure at the pace of the growing population. Furthermore, maintaining the good condition of old infrastructure is also expensive. Thus, if a significant portion of public funds is not allocated to maintenance, pipes and waste water treatment plants can fall into disrepair. For some countries, the cost of managing a public water utility system becomes unaffordable. In these cases, privatization can be seen as a possible solution for governments to attract national and international private investment.

[ 24 ] Prevalence [ edit ] Prevalence of public-private partnerships [ edit ] Prague is one of many cities whose water supply is provided by a private company There are widely differing estimates of the number of people served by private water companies. The World Bank estimated that, as of 2007, about 270 million people received water from private companies in more than 40 countries, including about 160 million in developed countries and 110 million in developing countries. However, the report did not include estimates of the number of people served by private companies on the wastewater side.

[ 1 ] The Pinsent Masons Water Yearbook uses a broader definition including also wastewater services. More importantly, it also includes cases where a water or wastewater treatment plant is operated by a private company on behalf of a publicly owned and operated utility that serves the final customer. On the basis of this broader definition and taking into account the growth of both population and water privatization between 2007 and 2011, it estimates that 909 million in 62 countries or 13% of the world population were served by the private sector in one form or another. This includes 309 million people in China, 61 million in the United States, 60 million in Brazil, 46 million in France, 23 million in Spain, 15 million in India and 14 million in Russia.

[ 28 ] In England and Wales the entire population of 55 million is served by private companies. In addition, in Chile, the Czech Republic, Armenia, and three African countries – Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon and Senegal – private companies provide water services to the entire urban population. In Hungary, they serve almost half the population. In Algeria, Colombia, Germany, Italy, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, Poland, and South Africa less than half the population is served by private companies. In the Philippines, Indonesia, Bulgaria, Estonia, and Cuba, private water companies serve only the capital city.

24 countries, such as Argentina, Bolivia, Ghana and the Central African Republic, had reverted to public management as of 2009. However, 84 percent of contracts awarded mostly in the 1990s were still active.

[ 1 ] On the other hand, in many countries, such as in Japan, Canada, Egypt, Pakistan, or Scandinavia, there are no private water companies. Nicaragua, the Netherlands, and Uruguay have even passed laws banning water privatization.

[ 29 ] In Italy, in June 2011 a law favoring water privatization was repealed by an overwhelming majority of Italians through a referendum.

[ 30 ] In 2019, the City of Baltimore , Maryland became the first major city in the United States to ban water privatization.

[ 31 ] List of countries with formal private sector participation in urban water supply with number and type of contracts Country Extent of country served by privatized urban water supply Type and number of contracts Start date France 9,000 [ 32 ] Concessions and leases 1853 [ 14 ] United Kingdom England Full privatization (26) 1989 United States 73 million people, including through PPPs [ 33 ] 14% of water revenues without PPPs [ 34 ] Investor-owned and 2,000 PPPs [ 35 ] 1772 in Providence [ 36 ] Côte d'Ivoire All urban areas Lease (1) 1960 in Abidjan 1973 country-wide Gabon All urban areas Concession (1) 1997 Mozambique Maputo and other cities Lease (1) and management contract (1) 1999 Senegal All urban areas Lease (1) 1996 South Africa Mbombela and Dolphin Coast Concessions (2) 1992 Malaysia Selangor and Penang Concession (1) and full privatization (1) 1992 Indonesia Jakarta Concessions (2) 1998 Philippines Manila Concessions (2) 1997 Armenia Yerevan and others Lease (1) and management contracts (2) 2000 Brazil 65 cities in 10 states Concessions 1995 Chile All urban areas Full privatizations and concession (1) 1998 Colombia Barranquilla , Cartagena, Colombia and more than 40 other cities and towns Mixed-ownership companies and concessions 1996 Ecuador Guayaquil Concession (1) 2001 Morocco Casablanca , Rabat , Tangiers and Tetouan Concessions (3) 1997 Honduras San Pedro Sula Concession (1) 2000 Ghana All urban areas until 2011 Management contract (1) 2000 Saudi Arabia Riyadh , Jeddah , Mecca and Taif Management contracts (3) 2008 Algeria Algiers , Constantine and Oran Management contracts (3) 2005 Cuba Havana Concession (1) 2000 China Shenzhen , Fuzhou , Lanzhou , Wuhu City and 23 others Concessions (22), full privatizations (3) and management contracts (2) 2001 Spain Barcelona and more than 1,000 other municipalities Mixed-ownership companies and concessions 1867 Romania Bucharest , Timișoara , Ploiești and Otopeni Concessions (3) and Lease (1) 2000 [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Bulgaria Sofia Concession (1) 2000 Poland Gdańsk , Bielsko-Biała , Tarnowskie Góry & Miasteczko Śląskie , Dąbrowa Górnicza , Głogów , Woźniki , Drobin and Toszek Full privatizations (4), concession (1), leases (2) and management contract (1) 1992 Estonia Tallinn Concession (1) 2001 Czech Republic Prague and 23 other cities Concessions (24) 1993 (reform) 2001 (Prague) Hungary Budapest , Szeged , Debrecen and five other cities and towns Concessions (8) 1994 [ 39 ] Mexico Cancún , Saltillo and Aguascalientes Mixed-ownership company (1) and concessions (2) 1993 A World Bank report lists the following examples of successful public-private partnerships in developing countries: the full privatization in Chile ; the mixed companies in Colombia ; the concessions in Guayaquil in Ecuador, Brazil , Argentina , Eastern Manila in the Philippines , Morocco , and Gabun; and the lease contracts in Côte d'Ivoire, Senegal , and Yerevan in Armenia .

[ 1 ] Small-scale operators: the other private sector [ edit ] A small scale private operator using a water tanker to distribute water Beyond water privatization, which involves contractual relationships between a government and formally established large companies, there is also "the other private sector" in water supply consisting of small-scale, often informal local operators. They exist in most cities in the Global South and sometimes provide a large portion of the city's population with water. For example, a study of six Latin American countries showed that they provide water to 25% of the population in seven cities.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In Africa, they serve an estimated 50% of the urban population.

[ 24 ] They mainly operate in slums, serving the people who are not catered to by the city authorities.

[ 24 ] Many small-scale water operators provide water through tanker trucks or animal-drawn carts. Others operate water distribution networks fed by wells, as it is the case in Asunción, Paraguay, and in Sanaa, Yemen. Small-scale operators can be owned by individual entrepreneurs or can take the form of cooperatives, as it is the case in Honduras. Small-scale operators do not always comply with technical norms and the quality of the water they provide or their tariffs are often not regulated. More often than not, their tariffs are significantly higher than those of public water utilities.

[ 24 ] This can attributed to either profiteering or simply the high transportation costs expended during the distribution of water.

[ 24 ] They typically lack capital to further expand their network. However, in a few pilot cases – such as in Kenya, Uganda, Cambodia and Vietnam – international aid agencies have provided them with grants to increase access, often in the form of output-based aid .

[ 42 ] Selecting private operators [ edit ] Private companies are typically selected through international competitive bidding and need to have demonstrated previous experience. Selection is either done through a combination of price and quality, or solely based on price. In the case of a management contract, the price is the management fee (fixed fee plus performance-based fee); in the case of a lease it is the lease fee per unit of water sold; in a concession it is the water tariff ; and in an asset sale it is the price paid for the company.

[ 43 ] In some cases – such as in Casablanca in 1997 and in Jakarta in 1998 – private companies have been selected through direct negotiations without competitive bidding. In other cases – such as in Cartagena (Colombia) in 1995, Cochabamba (Bolivia) in 1999 and Guayaquil (Ecuador) in 2000 – only a single bid was submitted. If development aid agencies are involved in directly financing private sector participation, they systematically require competitive bidding. However, in some cases – such as in Timişoara, Romania – the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has financed parallel investments, while a concession was awarded by the government after direct negotiations.

[ 44 ] Forms of regulation [ edit ] Being monopolies, all water utilities – public or private – need to be regulated concerning tariff approvals, service quality, environmental compliance and other aspects. The awareness for the need to regulate typically increases substantially when profit-oriented private operators become involved: Monitoring the performance of both the private and the public partner, applying sanctions in case of non-compliance and dispute resolution become particularly important. The regulatory tasks depend on the form of private sector participation: Under a management contract the monitoring of the achievement of performance standards, on which the remuneration of the private company depends, is typically carried out by an independent consulting firm. Under a concession contract or in the case of an asset sale, tariff regulation through a regulatory agency or the government is a key regulatory function. Water concessions are frequently renegotiated, often resulting in better terms for the private company. For example, negotiations of concessions in Buenos Aires and Manila resulted in investment requirements being reduced, tariffs being increased and tariffs being indexed to the exchange rate to the US dollar.

[ 45 ] The quality and strength of regulation is an important factor that influences whether water privatization fails or succeeds.

[ 46 ] The tasks, form and capacity of the public entities charged with regulation vary greatly between countries.

Globally, regulation of private water companies is being carried out by the following types of public entities or, sometimes, a combination of them.

Type of entity charged with the regulation of private water providers Examples Municipality or an association of smaller municipalities France and Spain Specialized body at the city level set up to regulate a single contract Guayaquil, Ecuador; San Pedro Sula, Honduras; Jakarta, Indonesia (with some control by the national government in the latter case); Manila, Philippines; formerly in Buenos Aires, Argentina Specialized regulatory agency at the supra-municipal sub-national level Public Utilities Commissions in U.S. states; some Brazilian states Specialized regulatory agency set up permanently under law at the country level OFWAT in England; Water Superintendency SISS in Chile; Water Regulatory Commission CRA in Colombia Specialized unit in a Ministry set up temporarily by decree Ministry of Water in Jordan Ministerial department Ministry of Interior in Morocco Examples of privatization [ edit ] The best-known examples of water privatization in the late 20th century are those undertaken in England under Margaret Thatcher, the Manila and Buenos Aires concessions as well as the failed privatization in Cochabamba, Bolivia, which became a symbol of the struggle against globalization. Less well known, but just as relevant, are water privatizations in other countries, such as in Colombia.

France [ edit ] Main article: Water privatization in France Private water firms have had a dominant role in France for more than a century. Private water firms ( Veolia Water , Suez Environnement and smaller peers such as Saur) control 60 percent of France's water market. Veolia and Suez are the world's largest private international water and wastewater firms.

[ 47 ] Water privatization in France has been going on from before the 1800s but only recently, around the 1960s, has it grown in size and power. In the 20 years between the 1950s and 1970s it is estimated that the private water sector increased its share of potable water supply by at least 20%, a figure that has increased to around 75% in the current present. The water supply is now owned by three major companies. In the 3600 local municipalities in France each of them has the power to decide whether or not they publicize or privatize drinking water and dictate the terms of the contract.

[ 48 ] The funding of French Water Agencies is completely done in by themselves. Meaning that these companies are self-funded. The total revenue is hard to estimate but from 1992 to 1996 around 81 Billion French Francs were held in revenue by these Water Agencies. This large fund is mostly used to expand and maintain public and private water projects. This model, although very profitable, lacks economic regulation due to poor logistics. This is a problem which is in the process of being fixed by implementing a clear and well-defined contract between the Water Agencies and the contractors who build the infrastructure.

[ 48 ] England and Wales [ edit ] Main article: Water privatisation in England and Wales In England and Wales, water tariffs, water company debt, water company dividends and profits increased substantially after privatization in 1989, but investments also increased and water quality in rivers improved.

[ 49 ] Tariffs increased by 46% in inflation-adjusted terms during the first nine years after privatization. Operating profits have more than doubled (+142%) in the first eight years. From privatisation in 1989 to December 2023, water company debt has increased by £60.3bn, during which time £53bn has been paid out in dividends.

[ 50 ] On the other hand, privatization increased investments: In the six years after privatization the companies invested £17 billion, compared to £9.3 billion in the six years before privatization.

[ 49 ] It also brought about compliance with stringent drinking water standards and led to a higher quality of river water.

[ 49 ] According to data from OFWAT , the economic regulator of water and sewer companies in England and Wales, from the early 1990s until 2010, network pressure has improved substantially, supply interruptions have become less frequent, the responsiveness to complaints has improved [ 51 ] and leakage has been reduced.

[ 52 ] In the 1980s, the elite largely believed that the state was not building infrastructure for water in a manner that would allow the economy to grow appropriately. For this reason, the economic and political powerful spearhead a shift towards making water a privately owned utility.

[ 53 ] Recently, the entire privatized water systems have been undergoing a complete restructuring. Small water companies in the UK have also been purchased by multinational companies from the United States, France and Scotland. The privately owned companies have been found to have trouble with water quality, environment pollution, sewage management, leakage and logistical errors.

[ 54 ] Manila, the Philippines [ edit ] Main article: Water privatization in the Philippines The private companies providing water in Manila have expanded access of water supply to the poor living in slums.

Water privatization in Manila began in 1997 with the award of two concession contracts for the Eastern and Western halves of Metro Manila . The concessions represent the largest population served by private operators in the developing world.

[ 55 ] As of 2010, the concession in Eastern Manila is highly successful and has led to significant improvements in access, service quality and efficiency: the population served more than doubled from 3 in 1997 to 6.1 million in 2009, the share of customers with continuous water supply increased from 26% to more than 98% and non-revenue water declined from 63% to 16%.

[ 56 ] The concession in Western Manila failed when the company Maynilad went bankrupt in 2003. It was sold to new investors in 2007 and performance has improved since then.

[ 57 ] The share of the population with access to piped water in Western Manila increased from 67% in 1997 to 86% in 2006 [ 58 ] and the share of customers that enjoys 24-hour water supply increased from 32% in 2007 to 71% in early 2011.

[ 59 ] Argentina [ edit ] Main article: Water privatization in Argentina Water privatization in Argentina began in 1992 under the government of Carlos Menem as part of one of the world's largest privatization programs. Concessions were signed in 28% of the country's municipalities covering 60% of the population, [ 60 ] including in 1993 for the metropolitan area of Buenos Aires . After the 2001 economic crisis , under the government of Néstor Kirchner , almost all concessions were terminated, including in Buenos Aires in 2006. The impact of the concession remains controversial. The government and critics argue that the concessionaire failed to achieve the targets set under the concession contract in terms of expansion of access, investment and service quality.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Proponents concede that targets were not reached, but argue that a freeze in tariffs at the time of the devaluation of the Peso during the Argentinian economic crisis in 2001 violated the contract and thus made it impossible to achieve the original targets. According to the Argentinian economist Sebastian Galiani, the public company OSN had invested only US$25m per year between 1983 and 1993, while the private concessionaire Aguas Argentinas increased investments to around US$200m per year between 1993 and 2000.

[ 63 ] According to the private concessionnaire Suez , during the 13-year-duration of its concession it extended access to water to 2 million people and access to sanitation to 1 million people, despite the economic crisis.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] In July 2010 the International Center for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) ruled that the Argentinian government unfairly refused to allow the private concessionaires to raise tariffs during the period after the devaluation of the Argentine peso in 2001 and that the private companies are entitled to damages. The private companies announced that they would seek US$1.2bn in damages.

[ 66 ] Cochabamba, Bolivia [ edit ] Main article: Cochabamba Water War Cochabamba was the scene of violent protests against water privatization in 2000.

In the mid-1990s the government of Bolivia , under pressure from the World Bank , decided to privatize water supply in the country's third largest city, Cochabamba . In the previous years, despite encumbered funds made available by the World Bank to support the public utility of Cochabamba, access to piped water in the city had decreased to 40%. Water losses had remained high at 40%, and water was supplied only 4 hours a day.

[ 67 ] Those not connected to the network paid ten times as much for their water to private vendors as those who were.

[ 68 ] This contrasted with the situation in Bolivia's second-largest city, Santa Cruz , where a utility run as a cooperative had managed to increase access and improve service quality with the support of the World Bank. In Santa Cruz, privatization had never been considered.

[ 67 ] In 1997, a first bid for a water concession in Cochabamba had been declared void at the request of the mayor of Cochabamba, Manfred Reyes Villa .

[ 67 ] He wanted the construction of a large dam, the Misicuni dam, and a pipeline from the dam to the city to be included in the concession.

[ 68 ] The World Bank had opposed the dam as unnecessarily expensive and subsequently ended its involvement related to water supply in the city.

[ 67 ] Despite this, in the view of the public the World Bank remains inseparably linked to the Cochabamba privatization.

The government proceeded to bid out the concession; this time including the Misicuni dam. Only a single company submitted a bid, Aguas del Tunari , a consortium led by Bechtel .

[ 69 ] The government accepted the bid and signed the concession.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] The consortium was guaranteed a minimum 15% annual return.

[ 68 ] In parallel, a law was passed that appeared to give a monopoly to Aguas del Tunari over all water resources, including water used for irrigation, communal water systems and even rainwater collected on roofs.

[ 69 ] Upon taking control the company raised water tariffs by 35%.

Demonstrations and a general strike erupted in January 2000 in protest against the tariff increase and the perceived privatization of water resources. The government arrested the leader of the protesters, Oscar Olivera . However, the protests spread to the entire country and the government declared a state of emergency in April. Protests still continued and several people were killed. In the midst of the turmoil the employees of Aguas del Tunari fled from Cochabamba.

[ 68 ] The government finally released Oscar Olivera and signed an agreement with him stating that the concession would be ended.

[ 70 ] The government then told Aguas del Tunari that by leaving Cochabamba they had abandoned the concession and parliament revoked Law 2029. The Cochabamba protests became a worldwide symbol of struggle against neoliberalism and the Cochabamba privatization is probably, both among activists against globalization and the general public, by far the best known example of the failure of water privatization.

The company, insisting that it had been forced out, filed a $25 million lawsuit in the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes .

[ 68 ] The proceedings, which were held behind closed doors, ended in 2006 with a settlement under which Bechtel dropped its claim.

[ 71 ] With financing from the Inter-American Development Bank the city expanded its piped water system in the aftermath of the riots.

[ 72 ] Nevertheless, under public management half of the 600,000 people of Cochabamba remain without piped water and those with it continue to receive intermittent service.

Oscar Olivera the leading figure in the protests admitted, "I would have to say we were not ready to build new alternatives." [ 73 ] Colombia [ edit ] Main article: Water privatization in Colombia Cartagena is one of the Colombian cities whose water supply is provided by a mixed public-private company.

Between 1996 and 2007, public-private partnerships for water and sewer services in more than 40 Colombian cities were entered into, serving more than 20% of the country's urban population. Most of the contracts were awarded in municipalities with highly deteriorated infrastructure, such as Barranquilla and Cartagena . The central government financed most investments through grants, thus reducing the need to increase tariffs. Water privatization in Colombia was largely homegrown, adapting models used elsewhere to the particular circumstances and culture of Colombia.

[ 74 ] A model introduced from Spain, the mixed company with a majority stake by the municipality and a minority stake by a private operator, was particularly successful. Foreign water companies won some of the early contracts, but quickly sold a majority of their shares to Colombian operators. There was a significant increase in access under private contracts. For example, in Cartagena, water supply coverage increased from 74 percent to almost universal coverage, while sewer coverage went up from 62 percent to 79 percent between 1996 and 2006. Half a million people gained access and 60 percent of the new connections benefited families in the poorest income quintile. To achieve universal coverage, the operator made extensive use of community bulk-supply schemes that provide safe water to the many illegal settlements that were expanding on the city's periphery. However, there is no conclusive evidence showing that access increased more rapidly under private contracts than in the case of publicly managed utilities. In Cartagena, tariffs declined substantially, indicating that the operator passed on efficiency gains to consumers.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Impact of privatization [ edit ] The evidence concerning the impact of water privatization is mixed. Often proponents and opponents of water privatization emphasize those examples, studies, methods and indicators that support their respective point of view. As with any empirical study, results are influenced by the methods used. For example, some studies simply compare the situation before privatization to the situation after privatization. More sophisticated studies try to compare the changes in privately managed utilities to those of publicly managed utilities that operate under similar conditions during the same period. The second group of studies often use econometric techniques. The results also depend on the choice of the indicator used to measure impact: One common indicator is the increase in access to water supply and sewerage. Other indicators are changes in tariffs, investments, water-borne diseases or indicators for service quality (e.g. continuity of supply or drinking water quality) and efficiency (e.g. water losses or labor productivity).

Impact on access [ edit ] A before after comparative study by World Bank analyzes how access, quality of service, operational efficiency and tariffs have evolved under 65 public-private partnerships for urban water utilities in developing countries. The study estimates that "PPP projects have provided access to piped water for more than 24 million people in developing countries since 1990".

[ 78 ] Privatized water companies generally increase tariffs to earn more profits, which consequently reduces the accessibility of the resource for poor households since the poor are not able to pay high tariffs.

[ 79 ] In other words, investments are only made to improve accessibility in richer districts where the people can pay the tariffs. In this manner, the water company's need to make adequate returns is met by supplying water only to those who can pay.

[ 80 ] However, in other countries such as Nigeria and Ghana where the governments fail to distribute access to water to the people, water privatization led to expansion of services to low-income districts.

[ 81 ] Impact on health [ edit ] One of the most effective measures of the effectiveness of water privatization is child mortality rate , since children are more likely to be adversely affected by contaminated water.

[ 82 ] Water privatization has historically had mixed impacts on child mortality and the overall health of the people affected by it. A study found that, between 1991 and 1997 in Argentina, areas where child mortality was upwards of 26% fell to just under 8% after water was privatized, [ 82 ] because the regulations imposed on private water companies were more rigorous than their government-controlled counterparts. Along with this, development of water infrastructure in impoverished areas at the hands of private companies also reduced child mortality rates. Some governments privatize water companies, among other reasons, to improve the quality of the water supply.

However in Argentina, water privatization did not fulfill many promises the citizens were expecting. This included the expansion of sewerage treatment and connections and the reduction in the price of water, which actually increased. Along with this, the private water companies in Argentina needed help from the national government to bypass regulatory agencies after it [ clarification needed ] treated [ clarification needed ] to cancel their contract due to conflicts of interest. Many workers' unions were opposed to privatizing water, but their pleas were largely ignored by the Argentine government.

[ 83 ] The impact of water privatization on the amount of carcinogenic substances found in the water supply is highly debated. In some cases, such as the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia , public water systems are likely to invest more money into improving water quality. Water companies working on a commercial basis might find it too costly to implement systems to better the water quality beyond what is necessary by law. This might increase the risk of harmful cancer-causing substances in the water.

[ 84 ] Impact on tariffs [ edit ] Although the impact on tariffs cannot be fully concluded since each country has different policy on tariffs, water tariffs tend to be increased under privatization. For instance, in Buenos Aires and in Manila, tariffs first declined, but then increased above their initial level; in Cochabamba or in Guyana, tariffs were increased at the time of privatization. However, there are some other cases that tariffs under water privatization did not increase in a long run, typically in Sub-Saharan Africa, where most of investments are funded through development aid. For example, tariffs remained stable in Senegal, while in Gabon they declined by 50% in five years (2001–2006) and by 30% in ten years in Côte d'Ivoire (1990 to 2000).

[ 85 ] In addition, initial tariffs have been well below cost recovery levels in almost all cases, sometimes covering only a fraction of the cost of service provision. The magnitude of tariff increases is influenced by the profit margin of private operators, but also to a large extent by the efficiency of utilities in terms of water losses and labor productivity.

However, comparing water expenditure between private and public management in the U.S., a study of household water expenditures in cities under private and public management in the U.S. concludes that "whether water systems are owned by private firms or governments may, on average, simply not matter much." [ 86 ] Impact on efficiency [ edit ] According to a World Bank study in 2005, the most consistent improvement made by public-private partnerships in water supply was in operational efficiency . The study reviews the impact of private management on the efficiency of water utilities in many countries from many continents including Africa, Latin America, Asia, and Eastern Europe. Most evidences from the study suggests that "there is no statistically significant difference between the efficiency performance of public and private operators in this sector.".

[ 87 ] In addition, a 2008 literature review by the Asian Development Bank shows that of 20 studies reviewed, only three show concrete evidence on technical efficiency improvements or cost reductions under private management.

[ 88 ] Therefore, by 2005, private operator, at least, made an indirect contribution to financing by improving efficiency, making it possible for utilities to finance investments internally instead of having to rely on more debt.

[ 1 ] Profitability [ edit ] An empirical study of 34 concessions in nine Latin American countries during the 1990s, including 10 water concessions in 5 countries (3 in Argentina, 1 in Bolivia, 1 in Brazil, 3 in Chile and 2 in Colombia), has estimated the profitability of concessions compared to the cost of capital of private companies. According to the study, contrary to public perception, the financial returns of private infrastructure concessions have been modest. The average annual return on capital employed was 7 percent. For a number of concessions, the returns have been below the cost of capital. On average telecommunications and energy concessions have fared much better than water concessions. Seven out of 10 water concessions had negative rates of return and two concessions had returns that were lower than the cost of capital of the private companies.

[ 89 ] Private water operators [ edit ] Private water operators come in very different forms from multinational corporations to small enterprises. According to the Pinsent Masons Water Yearbook 2010–11, 909 million people (13% of the world population) were served by private operators. The largest private water companies are: the French firm Veolia Environnement ( Vivendi ), serving 125.4 million in 2011; the French firm Suez , serving 124.3 million people in 2011 with its US subsidiary United Water and its Spanish subsidiary Aguas de Barcelona ; the Spanish firm Fomento de Construcciones Y Contratas SA (FCC), serving 28.2 million people in 2011; the German firm RWE , serving 18.3 million people in 2011; the Italian firm ACEA, serving 18 million people in 2011; the British firm Thames Water , indirectly owned by Macquarie Group , an Australian investment bank; the French firm SAUR , serving 12.4 million in 2011; and the US firm American Water , serving 16.8 million in 2011.

Domestic water operators have a strong presence in Brazil, Colombia, China, Malaysia, and the Philippines.

Public water companies also sometimes participate in bids for private water contracts. For example, the Moroccan state-owned water utility ONEP has won a bid in Cameroon [ 90 ] and the Dutch publicly owned water firm Vitens has won a management contract in Ghana .

See also [ edit ] Water consumption Remunicipalization Bottled water Nestlé Waters Countries and cities with private sector participation in water supply as of 2013: Water privatization in Algeria Water privatization in Armenia Water privatization in Brazil Water privatization in Bucharest Water privatization in Chile Water privatization in Colombia Water privatization in Cuba Water privatization in Ecuador Water privatisation in England Water privatization in Honduras Water privatization in Jakarta Water privatization in Metro Manila Water privatization in Morocco Water privatization in South Africa Water privatization in the United States Countries which had private sector participation in water supply in the past: Water privatization in Albania Water privatization in Argentina Water privatization in Bolivia Water privatization in Ghana Water privatization in Guinea Water privatization in Tanzania References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Marin, Philippe (1 February 2009).

Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries (Report). World Bank.

hdl : 10986/2703 .

^ Private Water Saves Lives , Fredrik Segerfeldt, Cato Institute, 25 August 2005.

^ Bailey, Ronald: "Water Is a Human Right: How privatization gets water to the poor" Reason Magazine, 17 August 2005.

^ Lobina, Emanuele; Hall, David (June 2003).

"Problems with private water concessions: a review of experience" . Public Services International Research Unit (PSIRU), University of Greenwich. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ Barlow, Maude :Blue Covenant: the Global Water Crisis and the Coming Battle for the Right to Water. New York, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-59558-186-0 .

^ Lohan, Tara: Fighting the Corporate Theft of Our Water , AlterNet , 25 April 2007.

^ Finger, Matthias; Allouche, Jeremy (2002).

Water Privatisation: Transnational corporations and the re-regulation of the global water industry . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780415232081 .

^ a b Beschluss Nationalrat Österreich die Verfassung zu ändern , Result of the vote of the Austrian Parliament to amend the constitution that Water, and its Distribution is a public good, 2019-07-02 ^ a b < Nationalrat stimmt für Glyphosatverbot , Austrian parliament votes to forbid Glyphosphat & water is a public good necessary for the existence of a human, orf.at, 2019-07-02> ^ Steadman, Lis.

"East to West: the Future of Water?" . WaterWorld. Archived from the original on 23 February 2012 . Retrieved 26 January 2012 .

The figures are quoted from the Pinsent Masons' 12th Annual Water Yearbook ^ Edwards, Chris (Winter 2017).

"Margaret Thatcher's Privatization Legacy" (PDF) .

The Cato Journal .

37 : 89– 101.

^ a b c d e Greiner, Patrick Trent (2020).

"Community water system privatization and the water access crisis" .

Sociology Compass .

14 (5): e12785.

doi : 10.1111/soc4.12785 .

ISSN 1751-9020 .

S2CID 216417111 .

^ Bertrand Dardenne: Avant le public était le privé (before the public was the private) Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in:Aymeric Blanc and Sarah Botton:Services d'eau privé dans les pays en développement (Private water services in developing countries), Agence française de développement, 2011, pp. 31, 35.

^ a b Cezon, P. et L. Breuil: Les PPP pour développer les services d'eau potable:quelques leçons de l'experience française pour les PED (PPP to develop drinking water services: some lessons from the French experience for developing countries) Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in: Aymeric Blanc and Sarah Botton:Services d'eau privé dans les pays en développement (Private water services in developing countries), Agence française de développement, 2011, p. 56.

^ Guerin-Schneider, Laetitia and Dominique Lorrain: Les relations puissance publique-firmes privées dans le secteur de l'eau et de l'assainissement (Public-private power relations in water supply and sanitation) Archived 19 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine , in:Eau:le temps d'un bilan, La gazette des communes, Cahier détaché no. 2, 30/1752.

^ a b Bertrand Dardenne: Avant le public était le privé (before the public was the private) Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in: Aymeric Blanc and Sarah Botton:Services d'eau privé dans les pays en développement (Private water services in developing countries), Agence française de développement, 2011, pp. 36-37.

^ Aguas de Barcelona: History Archived 17 April 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Werle, Hermann (August 2004).

"Zwischen Gemeinwohl und Profitinteresse (Between the Common Good and Profit Seeking): Erfahrungen bei der Teilprivatisierung der Wasserwirtschaft in Berlin (Experiences with the partial water privatization in Berlin)" (PDF) (in German). Brot für die Welt: Hintergrund-Materialien 13. p. 26. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 9 October 2013 .

^ Beveridge, Ross (June 2017).

"The partial-privatisation of the Berlin Water Company in 1999 and urban development in 1990s Berlin" [ dead link ] (PDF).

Waterlat-Gobacit Network Working Paper .

4 : 27–40.

^ Melosi, Martin: The Sanitary City:Urban Infrastructure in America from Colonial Times to the Present , Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000.

^ National Association of Water Companies.

"Public-Private Partnerships" . Archived from the original on 17 December 2011 . Retrieved 20 December 2011 .

^ Correa-Parra, Juan; Vergara-Perucich, José Francisco; Aguirre-Nuñez, Carlos (1 December 2020).

"Water Privatization and Inequality: Gini Coefficient for Water Resources in Chile" .

Water .

12 (12): 3369.

Bibcode : 2020Water..12.3369C .

doi : 10.3390/w12123369 .

^ Bertrand Dardenne: Avant le public était le privé (before the public was the private) Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in:Aymeric Blanc and Sarah Botton:Services d'eau privé dans les pays en développement (Private water services in developing countries), Agence française de développement, 2011, pp. 38-45.

^ a b c d e f Dagdeviren, Hulya; Robertson, Simon A. (2011).

"Access to Water in the Slums of Sub-Saharan Africa" .

Development Policy Review .

29 (4): 485– 505.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7679.2011.00543.x .

ISSN 1467-7679 .

S2CID 153624406 .

^ Joy, Clare and Peter Hardstaff: "Dirty aid, dirty water: The UK Government's push to privatise water and sanitation in poor countries" Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , World Development Movement , February 2005.

^ Werle, Hermann (August 2004).

"Zwischen Gemeinwohl und Profitinteresse (Between the Common Good and Profit Seeking): Erfahrungen bei der Teilprivatisierung der Wasserwirtschaft in Berlin (Experiences with the partial water privatization in Berlin)" (PDF) (in German). Brot für die Welt: Hintergrund-Materialien 13. p. 26. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 9 October 2013 .

^ Larrain, Sara (2012).

"Human Rights and Market Rules in Chile's Water Conflicts: A Call for Structural Changes in Water Policy" .

Environmental Justice .

5 (2): 82– 88.

Bibcode : 2012EnvJ....5...82L .

doi : 10.1089/env.2011.0020 .

ISSN 1939-4071 .

^ "Pinsent Masons Water Yearbook 2011–2012" . Retrieved 25 March 2012 .

^ In Uruguay a civil-society-initiated referendum banning water privatization was passed in October 2004. The law banning privatization of public water supply in the Netherlands was passed in September 2004, with broad cross-party support.

^ "Berlusconi accepts nuclear blow" .

BBC News . 14 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ "Baltimore votes to become first large U.S. city to ban water privatization" .

Reuters . 7 November 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2019 .

^ Alain Tiret, Délégué général de la Fédération professionnelle des entreprises de l'eau (25 June 2008).

"Présentation des services publics de l'eau et de l'assainissement en France, 2e Rencontres des Maires – Symposium de Cannes" (PDF) (in French). p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 February 2012 . Retrieved 10 October 2013 .

^ National Association of Water Companies: Private Water Solutions . Retrieved 11 May 2012.

^ Privatization of Water Services in the United States: An Assessment of Issues and Experience , 2002, p. 3, Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB). Retrieved 11 May 2012.

^ National Association of Water Companies: The Truth about PPP . Retrieved 11 May 2012.

^ Privatization of Water Services in the United States: An Assessment of Issues and Experience , 2002, p. 30, Water Science and Technology Board (WSTB). Retrieved 11 May 2012.

^ World Bank: Water in Bucharest:A Utility's Efficiency Gains under a Concession Archived 24 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , February 2011, Viewpoint Note No. 326, by David Earhardt, Melissa Rekas and Martina Tonizz.

^ PPI database ^ Hungary – Water privatisation in the context of transition , by Gabor Scheiring.

^ Solo, Tova (2003).

"Independent water entrepreneurs in Latin America – the other private sector in water services" . World Bank . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ The study covered Córdoba, Argentina; Barranquilla, Colombia; Asunción, Paraguay; Guatemala City, Guatemala; and three cities in Peru (Lima, Cuzco and Ica). The cooperative of Santa Cruz, Bolivia, is also covered in the study, but is a special case, since it serves the entire city and operates more like a formal utility.

^ "Supporting small providers in poor and underserved communities" . World Bank . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ "Approaches to Private Participation in Water Services – A Toolkit" (PDF) . World Bank/Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility. pp.

167– 179. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ Lobina, Emanuele; Hall, David (June 2003).

"Problems with private water concessions: a review of experience" . Public Services International Research Unit (PSIRU), University of Greenwich. pp.

6– 7. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ Lobina, Emanuele; Hall, David (June 2003).

"Problems with private water concessions: a review of experience" . Public Services International Research Unit (PSIRU), University of Greenwich. pp.

10– 12. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 18 June 2011 .

^ Gunatilake, Herath and Mary Jane F. Carangal–San Jose: Privatization Revisited: Lessons from Private Sector Participation in Water Supply and Sanitation in Developing Countries , Asian Development Bank , ERD Working Paper No. 115, 2008, p. 19.

^ Paris's return to public water supplies makes waves beyond France ^ a b Neto, Frederico (May 1998). "Water privatization and regulation in England and France: a tale of two models".

Natural Resources Forum .

22 (2): 107– 117.

doi : 10.1111/j.1477-8947.1998.tb00718.x .

ISSN 0165-0203 .

^ a b c Water privatization and regulation in England and Wales Archived 8 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , by Caroline van den Berg 1997.

^ The Guardian : [1] Retrieved 16 October 2024.

^ OFWAT : Service and delivery – performance of the water companies in England and Wales 2009–10 Archived 31 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , p. 21. Retrieved 16 June 2011.

^ OFWAT : Service and delivery – performance of the water companies in England and Wales 2009–10 Archived 31 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , p. 40. Retrieved 16 June 2011.

^ Page, Ben; Bakker, Karen (2005). "Water governance and water users in a privatised water industry: participation in policy-making and in water services provision: a case study of England and Wales".

International Journal of Water .

3 (1): 38.

Bibcode : 2005IJWat...3...38P .

doi : 10.1504/ijw.2005.007158 .

ISSN 1465-6620 .

^ Lobina, Emanuele. (2001).

UK water privatisation : a briefing . Public Services International Research Unit.

OCLC 612915200 .

^ World Bank / Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility: Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , by Philippe Marin, 2009, p. 114.

^ Regulation and corporate innovation:The case of Manila Water, by Perry Rivera, in:Transforming the world of water, Global Water Summit 2010, Presented by Global Water Intelligence and the International Desalination Association.

^ Wu, Xun; Malaluan, Nepomuceno A. (2008). "A Tale of Two Concessionaires: A Natural Experiment of Water Privatisation in Metro Manila".

Urban Studies .

45 (1): 207– 229, 212– 217.

Bibcode : 2008UrbSt..45..207X .

doi : 10.1177/0042098007085108 .

S2CID 221015268 .

^ Philippe Marin: Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities , World Bank, 2009, p. 56f.

^ Maynilad: Maynilad doubles 24-hr service coverage under MPIC, DMCI Archived 22 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 18 January 2011.

^ Galiani, Sebastian; Gertler, Paul; Schargrodsky, Ernesto (31 August 2002).

"Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality" (PDF) . p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2008 . Retrieved 10 October 2013 .

^ A Loftus and DA McDonald. 2001. Of Liquid Dreams: A Political Ecology of Water Privatization in Buenos Aires, Environment and Urbanization, Volume 12, Number 2, pp. 179–200.

^ Solanes, Miguel (2006).

Efficiency, Equity, and Liberalisation of Water Services in Buenos Aires, Argentina . Vol. 2006. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). pp.

124– 148.

ISBN 978-92-64-02867-8 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) , p. 168.

^ Galiani, Sebastian; Gertler, Paul; Schargrodsky, Ernesto (31 August 2002).

"Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality" (PDF) . p. 15. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2008 . Retrieved 14 February 2008 .

^ Suez Environment.

"Argentinian official website" . Archived from the original on 15 December 2007 . Retrieved 18 February 2008 .

^ Sarah Botton, Alexandre Braïlowsky and Sarah Matthieussent: The real obstacles to universal access to the water service in developing countries:Thoughts stemming from the experience of access to drinking water of the poor neighbourhoods populations living in Port-au-Prince (Haiti) and Buenos Aires (Argentina) , May 2005, pp. 15-18, 31.

^ Global Water Intelligence: Suez seeks $1.2bn in damages in Argentina , Vol 11, Issue 8 (August 2010). Retrieved 17 October 2010.

^ a b c d World Bank: Bolivia Water Management: A Tale of Three Cities , Operations Evaluation Department Précis, Spring 2002, Number 222. Retrieved 31 December 2010.

^ a b c d e f Finnegan, William (8 April 2002).

"Leasing The Rain" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 29 June 2016 .

^ a b c Nash, June C. (2002).

Social Movements: An Anthropological Reader . United Kingdom: Blackwell Publishing.

^ "Timeline:Cochabamba Water Revolt" . PBS. June 2002 . Retrieved 15 February 2007 .

^ Opinio Juris: Bechtel Abandons its ICSID Claim Against Bolivia , 10 February 2006. Retrieved 11 June 2011.

^ Inter-American Development Bank : IDB maintains US$18.6mn for Cochabamba waterworks Archived 11 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine , 24 June 2002.

^ Forero, Juan (14 December 2005).

"Bolivia regrets IMF experiment" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 29 June 2016 .

^ World Bank (2006).

"Local Solutions Improve Water Supply and Sanitation Services in Colombia" (PDF) . Retrieved 2 March 2008 .

^ Gomes-Lobo, Andrés, and M. Melendez: Social Policy, Regulation and Private Sector Participation: the Case of Colombia.

United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD) Working Paper, April 2007, Geneva.

^ World Bank / Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility: Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , by Philippe Marin, 2009, pp. 37-38, 43, 60.

^ Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) (2006).

"When a water meter is worth more than a house" . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007 . Retrieved 2 March 2008 .

^ Marin, Philippe (22 September 2009).

Public Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries . World Bank Publications.

ISBN 978-0-8213-7957-8 .

^ Labonte, Ronald (2004).

Fatal indifference: the G8, Africa and global health . IDRC.

^ Salina, Irena, dir. Flow. Prod. Steven Starr. Oscilloscope, 2008. Film. 20 May 2013.

^ "Item Details Page for From curiosity to commodity: a review of the evolution of sachet drinking water in West Africa" .

soka.on.worldcat.org . Retrieved 21 November 2020 .

^ a b Galiani, Sebastian; Gertler, Paul; Schargrodsky, Ernesto (31 August 2002).

"Water for Life: The Impact of the Privatization of Water Services on Child Mortality" (PDF) . p. 1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 April 2008 . Retrieved 14 February 2008 .

^ Loftus, A. J (1 October 2001).

"Of liquid dreams: a political ecology of water privatization in Buenos Aires" .

Environment and Urbanization .

13 (2): 179– 199.

Bibcode : 2001EnUrb..13..179L .

doi : 10.1177/095624780101300215 .

ISSN 0956-2478 .

S2CID 153477386 .

^ Wilhelm, Michael; Bergmann, Sabine; Dieter, Hermann H. (June 2010). "Occurrence of perfluorinated compounds (PFCs) in drinking water of North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany and new approach to assess drinking water contamination by shorter-chained C4–C7 PFCs".

International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health .

213 (3): 224– 232.

Bibcode : 2010IJHEH.213..224W .

doi : 10.1016/j.ijheh.2010.05.004 .

ISSN 1438-4639 .

PMID 20556880 .

^ World Bank / Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility: Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries Archived 20 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , by Philippe Marin, 2009, pp. 107-116.

^ Wallsten, Scott and Katrina Kosec: "Public or Private Drinking Water? The Effects of Ownership and Benchmark Competition on U.S. Water System Regulatory Compliance and Household Water Expenditures" , Brookings Institution Working Paper 05-05. (March 2005).

^ Antonio Estache(World Bank and ECARES, Université Libre de Bruxelles), Sergio Perelman (CREPP, Université de Liège), Lourdes Trujillo (DAEA, Universidad de Las Palmas de Gran Canaria): World Bank Infrastructure Performance and Reform in Developing and Transition Economies: Evidence from a Survey of Productivity Measures , World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3514, February 2005, pp. 11-13.

^ Gunatilake, Herath and Mary Jane F. Carangal–San Jose: Privatization Revisited: Lessons from Private Sector Participation in Water Supply and Sanitation in Developing Countries , Asian Development Bank , ERD Working Paper No. 115, 2008, p. 13.

^ Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility / World Bank: How Profitable Are Infrastructure Concessions in Latin America? Empirical Evidence and Regulatory Implications Archived 6 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , January 2005, by Sophie Sirtaine, Maria Elena Pinglo, J. Luis Guasch and Vivien Foster.

^ Business Cameroon: Drinking water: the partnership ONEP-CAMWATER , 13 August 2010.

Further reading [ edit ] Balanyá, Belén, Brid Brennan, Olivier Hoedeman, Satoko Kishimoto and Philipp Terhorst (eds): Reclaiming Public Water: Achievements, Struggles and Visions from Around the World , Transnational Institute and Corporate Europe Observatory , January 2005.

ISBN 90-71007-10-3 .

Schiffler, Manuel: Water, Politics and Money. A Reality Check on Privatization, Springer International Publishing, 2015.

ISBN 978-3-319-16690-2 .

Segerfeldt, Fredrik: Water for sale: how business and the market can resolve the world's water crisis Archived 16 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Presentation at the Amigo Society, Brussels, 30 May 2006.

Sjölander Holland, Ann-Christin: The Water Business: Corporations versus People , Zed Books, 2005, ISBN 1-84277-564-2 .

Kleemeier, Elizabeth L.

Private Operators and Rural Water Supplies : A Desk Review of Experience The World Bank, Nov. 2010.

Marin, Philippe Public-Private Partnerships for Urban Water Utilities: A Review of Experiences in Developing Countries The World Bank, Feb. 2009, ISBN 978-0-8213-7956-1 .

External links [ edit ] Look up publification in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The World Bank's work and publications on water resources Multimedia Flow: For Love of Water , a 2008 documentary film v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Portals : Water Companies Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐qr25f
Cached time: 20250815213340
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.741 seconds
Real time usage: 0.854 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4525/1000000
Revision size: 88446/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 146569/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2816/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 220105/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.419/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6965493/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  678.884      1 -total
 53.22%  361.319      1 Template:Reflist
 13.81%   93.740     19 Template:Cite_web
 13.05%   88.617      4 Template:Navbox
 11.95%   81.144      1 Template:Natural_resources
  9.98%   67.742      1 Template:Short_description
  9.31%   63.237     10 Template:Cite_journal
  9.26%   62.836      1 Template:Cite_report
  5.89%   39.975      6 Template:Cite_book
  5.55%   37.685      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1303230:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815213340 and revision id 1306087161. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_privatization&oldid=1306087161 " Categories : Water privatization Privatization controversies Water Water and politics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2021 CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 21:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water privatization 8 languages Add topic

