Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Academic career 3 Bishop 4 Family 5 Character 6 Swift and Stella 7 External links 8 References Toggle the table of contents St George Ashe Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Irish mathematician, university administrator, and Church of Ireland bishop This article is about St George Ashe, Irish cleric. For Saint-George Ashe, British rower, see Saint-George Ashe .

The Right Reverend St. George Ashe Provost St George Ashe, by Hugh Howard .

15th Provost of Trinity College Dublin In office 1 August 1692 – 30 July 1695 Preceded by Robert Huntington Succeeded by George Browne Personal details Born ( 1657-03-03 ) 3 March 1657 Roscommon , Ireland Died 27 February 1718 (1718-02-27) (aged 60) Dublin , Ireland Resting place Christ Church Cathedral Spouse Jane St George (m. 1684) Children 2 Alma mater Trinity College, Dublin (B.A., 1676; D.D., 1681) St. George Ashe , D.D.

(3 March 1657 – 27 February 1718) was an Irish mathematician who served as the 15th Provost of Trinity College Dublin from 1692 to 1695. In the late 17th and early 18th centuries, he served as Church of Ireland Bishop of Cloyne , Clogher [ 1 ] and Derry , in succession.

[ 2 ] From 1685 to 1692, he was the Donegall Lecturer in Mathematics at Trinity College Dublin . He is remembered now chiefly for his alleged role in performing a secret marriage between Jonathan Swift and Esther Johnson (Stella) .

Early life and education [ edit ] Ashe was born in Roscommon in 1658, a younger son of Thomas Ashe and his wife Mary St George, daughter of Richard St George of Athlone .

Dillon Ashe , Archdeacon of Clogher , was his brother. He was educated at Trinity College, where he earned his B.A. (1676), Academic career [ edit ] He became a Fellow of Trinity College in 1679, then Professor of Mathematics in 1685, and ultimately became Provost in 1692, a position he served in until July 1695. He later returned to Trinity College as Vice-Chancellor in 1702. He afterwards acted as secretary and chaplain to the British Embassy at Vienna . Returning to Ireland in 1692, he was made Provost of Trinity College .

Bishop [ edit ] He was consecrated Bishop of Cloyne in 1695, and promoted to the see of Clogher in 1697, and to that of Derry in 1717. He spent a large sum on refurbishing the episcopal palace at Clogher. He refused to become Archbishop of Tuam in 1716 because the stipend was inadequate. He had a reputation for being an absentee bishop. He was sharply reprimanded on that account by William King , Archbishop of Dublin , who wrote that the enemies of the church were led by his conduct to conclude that "bishops are not necessary, since they can so long be spared", and pleaded with him to "think of coming home as soon as possible".

He occasionally contributed to the Proceedings of the Royal Society , of which he was a member. He died in Dublin , on 27 February 1718, and was buried in Christ Church . He bequeathed his mathematical library to the College.

[ 3 ] Family [ edit ] Two years before he died, Ashe sent his son, also called St George Ashe, on a Grand Tour with the philosopher George Berkeley , a Fellow of Trinity College, as his tutor. Having been conducted on one of the most extensive tours of the period, including the length and breadth of Italy, including Sicily , Ischia, Calabria , and Apulia , the young Ashe died, presumably without having seen his father again, in Brussels in 1721.

[ 4 ] By his wife (and distant cousin) Jane St George, daughter of Sir George St George of Dunmore, County Galway and Elizabeth Hannay, the Bishop as well as his son had one daughter Elizabeth, who married as his second wife Sir Ralph Gore, 4th Baronet , and had numerous children, including Ralph Gore, 1st Earl of Ross .

[ 5 ] Character [ edit ] Despite his record as an absentee bishop, Ashe was much loved by his friends.

Joseph Addison wrote to Swift to commiserate him on Ashe's death, and said that Ashe was a man "who has scarce left behind his equal in humanity, agreeable conversation and all kinds of learning".

[ citation needed ] Swift and Stella [ edit ] Bishop Ashe was a lifelong friend of Jonathan Swift, whose tutor he had been at Trinity College. In 1726, Esther Johnson ("Stella") the lifelong companion of Swift, is said to have confided to her friends that Ashe had performed a secret marriage ceremony, with no witnesses, between herself and Swift in 1716. Whether or not her claim was true has been the subject of endless debate. Their friends were deeply divided on the truth of the story, and historians conclude that it is impossible to be certain one way or the other, since Ashe, the only person other than Swift and Stella who could have known the truth, was already dead when Stella reportedly made her disclosure.

[ 6 ] External links [ edit ] http://www.libraryireland.com/biography/StGeorgeAshe.php References [ edit ] ^ Clogher clergy and parishes: being an account of the clergy of the Church of Ireland in the Diocese of Clogher, from the earliest period, with historical notices of the several parishes, churches, etc" Leslie, J.B. pp15/16: Enniskille; R. H. Ritchie; 1929 ^ Full text of "Clerical and Parochial Records of Cork, Cloyne, and Ross: Taken from Diocesan and Parish ..." ^ Webb, Alfred (1878).

"Ashe, St. George" .

A Compendium of Irish Biography . Dublin: M. H. Gill & son. p. 6.

^ Edward Chaney , 'George Berkeley's Grand Tours: The Immaterialist as Connoisseur of Art and Architecture', The Evolution of the Grand Tour (Routledge, 2000), pp. 314-76.

^ Cokayne "Complete Peerage" Vol.XI  p.164 ^ "St George Ashe" Dictionary of Ulster Biography 2021 Academic offices Preceded by Robert Huntington Provost of TCD 1692–1695 Succeeded by George Browne v t e Provosts of Trinity College Dublin Adam Loftus Walter Travers Henry Alvey William Temple William Bedell Robert Ussher William Chappell Richard Washington Anthony Martin Samuel Winter Thomas Seele Michael Ward Narcissus Marsh Robert Huntington St George Ashe George Browne Peter Browne Benjamin Pratt Richard Baldwin Francis Andrews John Hely-Hutchinson Richard Murray John Kearney George Hall Thomas Elrington Samuel Kyle Bartholomew Lloyd Franc Sadleir Richard MacDonnell Humphrey Lloyd John Hewitt Jellett George Salmon Anthony Traill John Pentland Mahaffy John Bernard Edward Gwynn William Thrift Ernest Alton Albert Joseph McConnell F. S. L. Lyons William Arthur Watts Thomas Mitchell John Hegarty Patrick Prendergast Linda Doyle v t e Bishops of Derry and of Derry and Raphoe Derry George Montgomery Brutus Babington John Tanner George Downham John Bramhall George Wilde Robert Mossom Michael Ward Ezekiel Hopkins William King Charles Hickman John Hartstonge St George Ashe William Nicolson Henry Downes Thomas Rundle Carew Reynell George Stone William Barnard Frederick Hervey (later Earl of Bristol) William Knox Richard Ponsonby (became Bishop of Derry and Raphoe) Derry & Raphoe Richard Ponsonby William Higgin William Alexander George Chadwick Joseph Peacocke Robert Boyd Charles Tyndall Cuthbert Peacocke Robin Eames James Mehaffey Ken Good Andrew Forster v t e Anglican bishops of Clogher Hugh O'Carolan Miler Magrath Denis Campbell George Montgomery James Spottiswood Henry Jones John Leslie Robert Leslie Roger Boyle Richard Tennison St George Ashe John Stearne Robert Clayton John Garnett Sir John Hotham William Foster John Porter Lord John Beresford Hon Percy Jocelyn Lord Robert Tottenham Archbishops of Armagh Charles Stack Charles D'Arcy Maurice Day James MacManaway Richard Tyner Alan Buchanan Richard Hanson Robert Heavener Gordon McMullan Brian Hannon Michael Jackson John McDowell Ian Ellis v t e Bishops of Cloyne George Synge Patrick Sheridan Edward Jones William Palliser Tobias Pullen St George Ashe John Pooley Charles Crow Henry Maule Edward Synge George Berkeley James Stopford Robert Johnson Frederick Hervey Charles Agar George Chinnery Richard Woodward William Bennet Charles Warburton John Brinkley Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands People Trove Ireland Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=St_George_Ashe&oldid=1258939166 " Categories : 1658 births 1718 deaths Anglican bishops of Cloyne Anglican bishops of Derry Bishops of Clogher (Church of Ireland) Donegall Lecturers of Mathematics at Trinity College Dublin Fellows of the Royal Society 18th-century Irish mathematicians Members of the Privy Council of Ireland Christian clergy from County Roscommon Provosts of Trinity College Dublin 17th-century Anglican bishops in Ireland 18th-century Anglican bishops in Ireland 17th-century Irish mathematicians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from A Compendium of Irish Biography (1878) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Hiberno-English from May 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Hiberno-English Use dmy dates from January 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 This page was last edited on 22 November 2024, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents St George Ashe Add languages Add topic

