Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Past wranglers 3 Optimes 4 In fiction 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Wrangler (University of Cambridge) 6 languages Español Euskara Français Nederlands Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Student laurel For other uses, see Wrangler (disambiguation) .

A student is named as Senior Wrangler in 1842, an accolade "synonymous with academic supremacy".

At the University of Cambridge in England, a " Wrangler " is a student who gains first-class honours in the Mathematical Tripos competition. The highest-scoring student is the Senior Wrangler , the second highest is the Second Wrangler , and so on. By contrast, the person who achieves the lowest exam marks while still earning a third-class honours degree (that is, while still earning an honours degree at all) is known as the wooden spoon .

History [ edit ] Until 1909, the university made the rankings public. Since 1910, it has publicly revealed only the class of degree gained by each student. An examiner reveals the identity of the Senior Wrangler "unofficially" by tipping his hat when reading out the person's name, but other rankings are communicated to each student privately. Therefore, the names of only some 20th-century Senior Wranglers (such as Crispin Nash-Williams , Christopher Budd , Frank P. Ramsey , Donald Coxeter , Kevin Buzzard , Jayant Narlikar , George Reid and Ben J. Green ) have become publicly known.

Another notable was Philippa Fawcett . She was educated at Newnham College, Cambridge , which had been co-founded by her mother . In 1890, Fawcett became the first woman to obtain the top score in the Cambridge Mathematical Tripos exams. Her score was 13 per cent higher than the second-highest score. When the women's list was announced, Fawcett was described as "above the senior wrangler", but she did not receive the title of senior wrangler, as at that time only men could receive degrees and therefore only men were eligible for the Senior Wrangler title. The results were always highly publicised, with the top scorers receiving great acclaim. Women had been allowed to take the Tripos since 1881, after Charlotte Angas Scott was unofficially ranked as eighth wrangler.

It was recorded that "virtually every high wrangler (for whom records exist) participated in some form of regular physical exercise to preserve his strength and stamina." [ 1 ] Obtaining the position of a highly ranked Wrangler created many opportunities for the individual's subsequent profession. Such individuals would often become Fellows initially, before moving on to other professions.

[ 2 ] Throughout the United Kingdom and the British Empire, university mathematics professors were often among the top three Wranglers.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The order of Wranglers was widely publicised and shaped the public perception of mathematics as being the most intellectually challenging of all subjects.  According to Andrew Warwick, author of Masters of Theory ,  the term "Senior Wrangler" became "synonymous with academic supremacy".

[ 1 ] Past wranglers [ edit ] See also: a list of Senior Wranglers since 1910 and a list of Senior Wranglers and Second Wranglers, 1748-1909 Top marks in the Cambridge mathematics exam did not always guarantee the Senior Wrangler success in life; the exams were largely a test of speed in applying familiar rules, and some of the most inventive and original students of Mathematics at Cambridge did not come top of their class.

Lord Kelvin was second, William Henry Bragg was third, Augustus De Morgan and G. H. Hardy were fourth, Adam Sedgwick fifth, Bertrand Russell seventh, Thomas Robert Malthus ninth, John Maynard Keynes twelfth, and some fared even worse: Klaus Roth was not even a wrangler.

Joan Clarke , who helped to break the Nazi Enigma code at Bletchley Park, was a wrangler at Cambridge and earned a double first in mathematics, although she was prevented from receiving a full degree based on the university's policy of awarding degrees only to men.

[ 4 ] That policy was abandoned in 1948.

The present Astronomer Royal , Martin Rees , a wrangler, went on to become one of the world's leading scientists, also holding the illustrious posts of Master of Trinity College, Cambridge , and President of the Royal Society , and being a member of the Order of Merit .

Optimes [ edit ] Students who achieve second-class and third-class mathematics degrees are known as Senior Optimes (second-class) and Junior Optimes (third-class). Cambridge did not divide its examination classification in mathematics into 2:1s and 2:2s until 1995 [ citation needed ] but now there are Senior Optimes Division 1 and Senior Optimes Division 2 .

[ citation needed ] In fiction [ edit ] "The Senior Wrangler" is a member of the faculty of Unseen University in Terry Pratchett 's Discworld series of novels .

Roger Hamley, a character in Elizabeth Gaskell 's Wives and Daughters , achieved the rank of Senior Wrangler.

Vivie Warren, the headstrong heroine of George Bernard Shaw's Mrs. Warren's Profession (1893) and daughter of the play's infamous madam, tied with the Third Wrangler, settling for that place because she recognized that "it was not worth [her] while to face the grind" because she did not intend an academic career for herself.

"Wrangler" is a jargon term applied to codebreakers in some of John Le Carré 's spy novels, such as Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy .

Thomas Jericho, the main character of Robert Harris 's book Enigma , was Senior Wrangler in 1938.

In Ford Madox Ford 's Parade's End , reference is made to the fact that Christopher Tietjens left Cambridge as "a mere Second Wrangler".

In Rumer Godden 's In This House of Brede , Dame Agnes is noted to have been Eighth Wrangler before entering the abbey.

In C S Forester 's book, The General , a member of the main character's staff (the deputy assistant quartermaster-general, Spiller) is described as a Second Wrangler.

In Bram Stoker 's The Judge's House , the main character Malcom Malcomson is looking for a quiet place to stay whilst preparing his Mathematical Tripos examinations. Mrs Witham, the inn's landlady, warns Malcom about the judge's house, but the charwoman, Mrs Dempster, dispels these fears – explaining she is not afraid of 'bogies' because they are only rats. Malcom replies: "Mrs. Dempster, [...] you know more than a Senior Wrangler! And let me say, that, as a mark of esteem for your indubitable soundness of head and heart, I shall, when I go, give you possession of this house, and let you stay here by yourself for the last two months of my tenancy, for four weeks will serve my purpose." See also [ edit ] List of mathematics awards Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Andrew Warwick (2003) Masters of Theory: Cambridge and the Rise of Mathematical Physics ,  page 197, University of Chicago Press ISBN 0-226-87374-9 ^ a b Forfar, D.O. (1996).

"What became of the Senior Wranglers?" (PDF) .

Mathematical Spectrum .

29 (1). Applied Probability Trust . Retrieved 25 September 2008 .

^ Andrew Forsyth (1935) Old Tripos Days in Cambridge , Mathematical Gazette 19: 162-179 ^ "Joan Clarke, woman who cracked Enigma cyphers with Alan Turing" .

BBC News . 10 November 2014 . Retrieved 4 January 2015 .

References [ edit ] Galton, Francis (1869).

"Classification of Men According to their Natural Gifts" . pp.

14– 36.

Peter Groenewegen (2003).

A Soaring Eagle: Alfred Marshall 1842-1924 . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.

ISBN 1-85898-151-4 .

gives the story about Rayleigh; Alfred Marshall was the commoner who came second to Rayleigh.

C. M. Neale (1907) The Senior Wranglers of the University of Cambridge . Available online External links [ edit ] Information on the wranglers in the period 1860–1940 can be extracted from the BritMath database: BritMath Many of the wranglers who made careers in mathematics can be identified by searching on "wrangler" in: The MacTutor History of Mathematics archive Cambridge Mathematical Tripos: Wooden Spoons v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jv2kp
Cached time: 20250812000021
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.282 seconds
Real time usage: 0.386 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1195/1000000
Revision size: 9657/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70704/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2583/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27649/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.167/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5470453/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  309.899      1 -total
 27.45%   85.079      2 Template:Navbox
 27.31%   84.628      1 Template:University_of_Cambridge
 27.18%   84.244      1 Template:Reflist
 21.39%   66.282      1 Template:Short_description
 15.14%   46.929      2 Template:ISBN
 13.43%   41.626      2 Template:Citation_needed
 12.03%   37.277      2 Template:Pagetype
 11.29%   34.981      2 Template:Fix
  7.79%   24.146      4 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:639371:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000021 and revision id 1253575235. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wrangler_(University_of_Cambridge)&oldid=1253575235 " Categories : 1748 establishments in England 1909 disestablishments in England Mathematical awards and prizes of the University of Cambridge Mathematics education in the United Kingdom Senior Wranglers Second Wranglers Terminology of the University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2008 This page was last edited on 26 October 2024, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wrangler (University of Cambridge) 6 languages Add topic

