Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Goals 3 Focus 4 EM-DAT 5 The team 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters ( CRED ) is a research unit of the University of Louvain (UCLouvain). It is part of the School of Public Health located on the UCLouvain Brussels Woluwe campus, in Brussels , Belgium.

[ 1 ] CRED has been active for over thirty years in the fields of international disaster and conflict health studies, with research and training activities linking relief, rehabilitation and development. It promotes research, training and technical expertise on humanitarian emergencies , with a special focus on public health and epidemiology .

History [ edit ] In 1971, Professor Michel F. Lechat [ Wikidata ] , an epidemiologist at UCLouvain, initiated a research programme to study health issues in disaster situations. Two years later he established CRED as a non-profit institution with international status. Since 1980, CRED has been a World Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre .

Following the retirement of Professor Lechat in 1992, Professor Debarati Guha-Sapir —a researcher in the programme since 1984—became CRED's director.

Goals [ edit ] CRED promotes research and provides an evidence base to the international community on the burden of disease and related health issues arising from disasters and conflicts to improve preparedness and responses to humanitarian emergencies.

[ citation needed ] CRED trains field managers, students, relief personnel and health professionals in the management of short- and long-term humanitarian emergencies.

[ 2 ] Focus [ edit ] CRED's research focuses on humanitarian and emergency situations with major impacts on human health. These include all types of natural disasters such as earthquakes , floods , windstorms , famines and droughts ; and human induced disasters creating mass displacement of people from civil strife and conflicts.

CRED focuses on health aspects and the burden of disease arising from disasters and complex emergencies. CRED also promotes research on the broader aspects of humanitarian crises, such as human rights and humanitarian law , socio-economic and environmental issues , early warning systems, mental health care, and the special needs of women and children.

CRED is actively involved in stimulating debates on the effectiveness of various humanitarian interventions. It encourages scientific and policy discussions on existing and potential interventions and their impacts on acute and chronic malnutrition , human survival, morbidity , infectious diseases , and mental health .

The CRED team works in four main areas: Natural disasters & their impacts Conflict & health research Database & information support Capacity building & training EM-DAT [ edit ] The centre maintains the Emergency Disaster Database (EM-DAT), a repository of information on mass disasters that happened since 1900. As of 2024 it contained records on 26,000 disasters. About 2/3 of the disasters are classified as natural, e.g. storms or earthquakes, while the rest are technological, e.g. industrial disasters. The database was founded in 1988 as a joint project between CRED and the World Health Organization .

[ 3 ] Data is sourced from UN agencies, non-governmental organizations, insurance companies, academic sources, and press agencies.

[ 4 ] As of 2024 it receives primary funding from the US Agency for International Development .

[ 3 ] EM-DAT is freely available, searchable by disaster type, country of origin, and source of information.

[ 5 ] The NASA GDIS Global dataset of geocoded disaster locations relies on EM-DAT data.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The team [ edit ] CRED's multinational and multidisciplinary team includes experts in medicine and public health , informatics and database management, psychology , nutritional sciences , sociology , economics and geography . The working languages are English and French .

References [ edit ] ^ "Site de l'UCLouvain à Bruxelles" . Archived from the original on 2006-10-08 . Retrieved 2008-05-23 .

^ APHES – Assessing Public Health in Emergency Situations ^ a b "EM-DAT – The international disaster database" .

emdat.be . Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters . Retrieved 2024-11-01 .

^ "Emergency Events Database: The International Disaster Database" .

SDG Integration . United Nations Development Programme . Retrieved 2024-11-01 .

^ Smith, Nathan.

"Research Guides: Natural Disasters" . Library of Congress . Retrieved 2024-11-01 .

^ Rosvold, E.; Buhaug, H. (2021).

"GDIS, a Global Dataset of Geocoded Disaster Locations" .

Scientific Data .

8 (61).

doi : 10.1038/s41597-021-00846-6 .

PMC 7887188 .

^ "Geocoded Disasters (GDIS) Dataset, v1: Natural Disasters" . NASA Socioeconomic and Applications Data Center (SEDAC) . Retrieved 2024-11-01 .

External links [ edit ] CRED website The EM-DAT International Disaster Database The CE-DAT Complex Emergency Database The MICRODIS Project – Integrated Health, Social and Economic Impact of Extreme Events: Evidence, Methods and Tools an FP6 project funded by the European Commission .

v t e Universities of Louvain/Leuven 1425–1797 Old University of Leuven Faculty of Theology Arras College Collegium Trilingue Holy Ghost College Liège College Saint Ivo's College Pope's College Saint Anne's College St Anthony's College Trinity College University Hall Academic staff Alumni 1817–1835 State University of Leuven 1834–1835 Catholic University of Mechlin 1835–1968 Catholic University of Louvain Institutions: American College of the Immaculate Conception St Anthony's College Lovanium University Faculty of Theology University Hall Personalities: Pope Gregory XVI Rector Pierre de Ram Désiré-Joseph Mercier Rector Paulin Ladeuze Georges Lemaître Nobel prizes: Auguste Beernaert Dominique Pire Alumni Belgian American Educational Foundation Sedes Sapientiae Split of the Catholic University of Louvain Since 1968 UCLouvain Campuses Louvain-la-Neuve Brussels Woluwe FUCaM Mons Saint-Louis Brussels CHU Namur UCLouvain Charleroi Cities Louvain-la-Neuve Brussels Woluwe-Saint-Lambert Saint-Gilles Mons Tournai Charleroi Namur Dinant Yvoir Faculties Louvain School of Management Louvain School of Engineering Marie Haps Faculty of Translation and Interpreting Faculty of Economic, Social and Political Sciences and Communication Faculty of Architecture, Architectural Engineering and Urban Planning Research Higher Institute of Philosophy Cyclotron Research Center Center for Operations Research and Econometrics Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters Centre d'Etudes des Crises et Conflits Internationaux Hoover Chair Laboratory for the Analysis of Organisational Communication Systems Hospitals Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc CHU UCLouvain Namur Press Presses universitaires de Louvain Revue philosophique de Louvain International Philosophical Bibliography Cahiers de l'Institut de Linguistique de Louvain Revue d'histoire ecclésiastique Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium Subsidiary entities Musée L Aula Magna Louvain-la-Neuve Cyclotron Louvain Coopération Louvain-la-Neuve Science Park Initialis Science Park Académie Louvain Rectors Pierre Macq Bernard Coulie Vincent Blondel Nobel prizes Christian de Duve Albert Claude Miscellaneous Louvain modularity Claroline Orchestre Symphonique des Étudiants de Louvain-la-Neuve 24h vélo de Louvain-la-Neuve Progressive Congolese Students ANLO Oz Ekiga Ion Beam Applications Kot-à-projet Academic staff Alumni KU Leuven Campuses KULAK Cities Leuven Kortrijk Antwerp Ghent Bruges Geel Diepenbeek Aalst Sint-Katelijne-Waver Brussels Faculties Institute of Philosophy Research Leuven Centre for Global Governance Studies Rega Institute for Medical Research Switch Laboratory Hospitals UZ Leuven Press Leuven University Press Revue d'histoire ecclésiastique ITL International Journal of Applied Linguistics Subsidiary entities Arenberg Castle Arenberg Research-Park KU Leuven Association University Hall Rectors Pieter De Somer Marc Vervenne Mark Waer Rik Torfs Luc Sels Other Evangelical Theological Faculty Academic libraries in Leuven · Universities in Leuven Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centre_for_Research_on_the_Epidemiology_of_Disasters&oldid=1279769126 " Categories : Research institutes in Belgium Medical and health organisations based in Belgium World Health Organization collaborating centres Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 10 March 2025, at 13:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters 1 language Add topic

