Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 19th century 1.2 20th century 1.3 21st century 2 Alumni 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Daily Sun Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Newspaper in Ithaca, New York The Cornell Daily Sun The newspaper's 6 November 2017 front page Type Student newspaper Format Tabloid Owner(s) Independent Founded September 16, 1880 Headquarters 139 W State St., Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Circulation 3,000 (as of 2022) [ 1 ] ISSN 1095-8169 Website cornellsun .com The Cornell Daily Sun is an independent newspaper at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York . It is published twice weekly by Cornell University students and hired employees. Founded in 1880, The Sun is the oldest continuously independent college daily in the United States.

[ 2 ] The Sun features coverage of the university and its environs. It prints on Wednesdays when the university is open for academic instruction.

[ 3 ] In addition to these regular issues, The Sun publishes a graduation issue, reunion issue, and a freshman issue, which is mailed to incoming Cornell freshmen before their first semester. The paper is free on campus and online.

The Sun edits under its proprietary "Sun Style Guide," an amended version of AP Style .

Aside from a few full-time production positions, The Sun is staffed by Cornell students and is fully independent of the university. It operates out of its own building in downtown Ithaca. As of 2023, The Sun is ranked the third-best college student newspaper in the nation, behind Yale and Syracuse , according to College Choice's annual rankings.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Front pages of The Cornell Era and The Cornell Daily Sun on April 30, 1886 19th century [ edit ] The Cornell Daily Sun was founded in 1880 by William Ballard Hoyt to challenge Cornell's original and leading publication, the weekly Cornell Era , which was founded in 1868. In the newspaper's first edition, published on September 16, 1880, The Sun boasted in its opening paragraph: "We have no indulgence to ask, no favors to beg." 20th century [ edit ] The newspaper later incorporated and changed to daily frequency, earning its longstanding boast "Ithaca's Only Morning Newspaper." In 1912, it added a second, "first collegiate member of the Associated Press ." Following the shift of its main competitor, The Ithaca Journal , from evening to morning daily publication in 1996, The Sun changed its traditional front page slogan which, after several iterations, now states "Independent Since 1880." This period also marked a shift in The Sun ' s content from national to local and university-related stories.

21st century [ edit ] The newspaper's common features include "Around the Sun," a weekly multimedia recap series, and a sex column that appears weekly on Thursdays.

The headquarters of The Cornell Daily Sun In January 2003, the Cornell Daily Sun Alumni Association purchased the former Elks Lodge in downtown Ithaca, erected 1916. Led by Stanley Chess, the founding president of the Association, John Schroeder '74, and Gary L. Rubin '72, the alumni completely renovated the building over the next several months. Now called the Cornell Daily Sun Building, it has housed the paper's offices since June 2003 and is coincidentally located next door to The Ithaca Journal ' s offices. The building also houses a kava bar in its basement.

In the fall semester of 2004, The Sun turned free and started featuring full-color front and back pages as part of a redesign in its layout. These moves were partially effected to boost circulation in response to Cornell's Student Assembly 's decision to provide The New York Times and USA Today on campus for free to all undergraduate Cornell students.

On September 17, 2005, more than 370 Sun alumni and guests gathered in Manhattan to celebrate The Sun's 125th anniversary. Speakers included Kurt Vonnegut '43, Carl Leubsdorf '59, Sam Roberts '68, Jay Branegan '73, Howard A. Rodman '71, S. Miller Harris '44, and Jeremy Schaap '91. The emcee was Stan Chess '69. A 130th anniversary dinner was held on September 25, 2010.

In 2016, the newspaper announced that it was reducing its publication rate from five days a week to three.

[ 5 ] In 2020, it further cut back to twice a week as a cost-reducing measure. At the beginning of the 2024-2025 academic year, the paper further reduced publication to once per week, with 24/7 publishing online.

The Cornell Daily Sun Alumni Association, comprising former editors, managers, and staff of the Cornell Daily Sun , exists to further journalism by Cornell University students.

Alumni [ edit ] See also: List of Cornell University alumni E. B. White , editor-in-chief of The Sun in 1920–21, author of Charlotte's Web , and 1978 Pulitzer Prize winner Kurt Vonnegut , associate editor in 1942–43, novelist and satirist Harold O. Levy , columnist, New York City Schools Chancellor from 2000– 02 and executive director of the Jack Kent Cooke Foundation S.E. Cupp , arts and entertainment editor, CNN host, political commentator, and author Farhad Manjoo , editor-in-chief in 1999–2000, author and technology writer and opinion columnist, The New York Times [ 6 ] Svante Myrick , editorial board, former mayor of Ithaca, New York The Cornell Daily Sun claims over a dozen Pulitzer Prize winners and boasts a number of prominent alumni, including: Tom Allon , publisher and co-owner, City & State Stephen Asprinio , food and wine columnist; restaurateur, sommelier, chef, and former Top Chef contestant Jim Axelrod , sports journalist; chief investigative journalist, CBS News Whitney Balliett , film critic; book reviewer and jazz critic, The New Yorker Victor Berlin , Business Board; information security expert and founder, University of the Potomac and University of Fairfax Neil Best , sports journalist, Newsday Keri Blakinger , copy editor; criminal justice author and journalist, The Marshall Project Jay Branegan, senior editor (1971–72); 1976 Pulitzer Prize -winning journalist with the Chicago Tribune Dick Brass , associate editor (1971–72); technology investor, executive, and pioneer who developed first electronic dictionary and thesaurus, ClearType , and Open eBook Gordon G. Chang , editorial board; lawyer, author, and television pundit S. E. Cupp , arts and entertainment editor; CNN host, political commentator, and author Allison Danzig , author and sportswriter, The New York Times Charles Divine , news editor; poet and playwright Edward D. Eddy , editor-in-chief (1943–44); president, Chatham College and University of Rhode Island Bob Filner , Business Board; former mayor of San Diego and U.S. Congressman Rob Fishman , columnist; entrepreneur and writer David Folkenflik , editor-in-chief (1990–91); NPR media correspondent Frank Gannett , Sun Board; media mogul and founder, Gannett Jeffrey Gettleman , photographer; 2012 Pulitzer Prize -winning journalist and East Africa Bureau Chief, The New York Times Joey Green , political cartoonist; former contributing editor, National Lampoon , author of over 60 books Daniel Gross , News Board; financial and economic journalist and executive editor, strategy+business magazine Lewis Henry , editor-in-chief (1908–09); former U.S. Congressman Marvin Josephson , managing editor (1948–49); founder, chair, and CEO, ICM Partners Lawrence Kasanoff , business manager; film and television producer, co-founder of Lightstorm Entertainment and Threshold Entertainment with James Cameron Neeraj Khemlani , editor-in-chief (1991–92); former president, CBS News and CBS News and Stations Andrew Kopkind , editor-in-chief (1956–57); journalist, The Washington Post , The New Republic , and others Marc Lacey , editor-in-chief (1986–87); managing editor, The New York Times [ 7 ] and two-time Pulitzer Prize winner at the Los Angeles Times Carl Leubsdorf , associate editor (1958–59); Washington columnist, The Dallas Morning News Harold O. Levy , columnist; former New York City Schools Chancellor and former executive director, Jack Kent Cooke Foundation Eric Lichtblau , news reporter; Washington bureau reporter, The New York Times and 2006 Pulitzer Prize recipient Stuart Loory , editor-in-chief (1953–54); academic and managing editor, Chicago Sun-Times Farhad Manjoo , editor-in-chief (1999–2000); author and technology journalist and opinion writer, The New York Times [ 8 ] Joseph Masci , supplement editor; physician, educator, and author Will Maslow , associate editor; lawyer and civil rights leader Oscar G. Mayer Jr.

, business manager (1933–34); former chairman, Oscar Mayer James C. McKinley Jr.

, journalist, The New York Times Anne Morrissy Merick , sports editor; Vietnam War journalist Philip Merrill , managing editor (1954–55); diplomat, banker, and philanthropist and Export-Import Bank of the United States chairman Andrew Morse , editor-in-chief (1995–96); former executive vice president, CNN Svante Myrick , editorial board; former mayor of Ithaca, New York George Jean Nathan , editorial board; drama critic, editor, and co-founder, The American Mercury Scot J. Paltrow , News Board; financial journalist Paul A. Rahe , associate editor; historian, writer and professor of history Jon Ralston , Sports Department; journalist, political commentator, and talk show host Henry S. Reuss , editor-in-chief (1932–33); former U.S. Congressman Sam Roberts , managing editor (1967–68); reporter, columnist, and editor, The New York Times and biographer of David Greenglass and Nelson Rockefeller Howard A. Rodman , editor-in-chief (1970–71); screenwriter and professor Wallace A. Ross , News Board; advertising executive and founder, Clio Awards Kirkpatrick Sale , editor-in-chief (1957–58); environmental and technology scholar and author and leader of secessionist movement Dick Schaap , editor-in-chief (1954–55); sports writer and broadcaster Jeremy Schaap , sports editor (1990–91); ESPN contributor and son of Dick Schaap Richard Schechner , news editor (1955), theatre reviewer (1956); author, editor, theatre director, professor, New York University Tisch School of the Arts Danny Schechter , television producer, filmmaker, and media critic Melville Shavelson , humor columnist (1936–37); film director, producer, screenwriter, author Alan Sisitsky , former member, Massachusetts House of Representatives and Massachusetts Senate Deborah Solomon , associate editor; magazine columnist, article critic, and biographer, The New York Times Magazine Barry S. Strauss , feature editor (1973–74); history and classics professor, Cornell University and ancient military history author Elmer E. Studley , editorial board; former U.S. Congressman Jacob Sullum , senior editor; syndicated newspaper columnist Molly O'Toole , news editor (2009); inaugural recipient of the 2020 Pulitzer Prize for audio reporting Ronald Thwaites , editor-in-chief (1966–1967); former Jamaica Minister of Education Elbert Tuttle , editor-in-chief (1917–18); Chief Judge, United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit Jamie Weinstein , columnist; political journalist and commentator David Wild , arts editor; TV and music writer and critic, Rolling Stone Kurt Vonnegut , associate editor (1942–43); novelist and satirist [ 9 ] E. B. White , editor-in-chief (1920–21); columnist and author, Charlotte's Web , Stuart Little , The Trumpet of the Swan , co-author, The Elements of Style , and 1978 Pulitzer Prize special award recipient Other prominent Cornellians have written letters to the editor, including former U.S. Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg , who responded to an op-ed on wiretapping written by Cornell Law School students with a letter to the editor in 1953.

See also [ edit ] Cornell University List of college newspapers References [ edit ] ^ "The Cornell Daily Sun Media Kit 2022–2023" (PDF) . 2022 . Retrieved March 30, 2023 .

^ "16 Sep: The First Student Newspaper" , The Retro Spectors ^ "About The Sun – The Cornell Daily Sun" .

cornellsun.com . November 30, 2001 . Retrieved November 30, 2023 .

^ "Best College Newspapers" , College Choice, January 19, 2023 ^ Victor, Daniel (May 10, 2016).

"At Cornell, the College Daily Will No Longer Be Daily" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 31, 2023 .

^ Bennet, James; Dao, Jim; Kingsbury, Katie (November 27, 2018).

"Farhad Manjoo to Join Opinion as a Columnist" .

New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2019 .

^ Grynbaum, Michael M. (April 20, 2022).

"New York Times Names Marc Lacey and Carolyn Ryan as Managing Editors" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 22, 2023 .

^ Bennet, James; Dao, Jim; Kingsbury, Katie (November 27, 2018).

"Farhad Manjoo to Join Opinion as a Columnist" .

New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2019 .

^ Lowery, George (April 12, 2007).

"Kurt Vonnegut Jr., novelist, counterculture icon and Cornellian, dies at 84" .

Cornell Chronicle . Cornell University. Archived from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

"I spent the whole time I was here working on the Cornell Sun, and that's how I got my liberal arts education," Vonnegut once said " From the Hill: Housing News: A Home for the Sun ," Cornell Magazine , Vol. 105 No. 5, March/April 2003.

Bishop, Morris.

A History of Cornell .

New York, New York : Cornell University Press , 1962.

ISBN 0-8014-0036-8 Margulis, Daniel ed.

A Century at Cornell: Published to Commemorate the Hundredth Anniversary of the Cornell Daily Sun . Ithaca, New York: Cornell Daily Sun, 1980.

ISBN 0-938304-00-3 External links [ edit ] Official website Cornell Daily Sun Alumni Association Cornell University Library , Cornell Daily Sun Digitization Project Cornell Daily Sun editorial board v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category v t e Ithaca, New York Arts and entertainment Ithaca Discovery Trail Herbert F. Johnson Museum of Art Performing arts Cayuga Chamber Orchestra Hangar Theatre Kitchen Theatre Company State Theatre Business and economy Cornell Business & Technology Park Kionix Gimme! Coffee Ithaca Commons Ithaca Gun Company Ithaca Hours Moosewood Restaurant Tompkins Trust Company United States Post Office Education Ithaca Discovery Trail Tompkins County Public Library Higher Cornell University Ithaca College TC3 Ithaca Extension Center K–12 Cascadilla School Ithaca City School District Beverly J. Martin Elementary School Ithaca High School Lehman Alternative Community School South Hill Elementary School Health Cayuga Medical Center News and media Newspapers The Cornell Daily Sun Ithaca Journal Ithaca Times Radio WFIZ WHCU WICB WINO WITH WNYY WQNY WSQG WVBR-FM WYXL Television ICTV WNYI People List of people from Ithaca, New York Cornellians Ithaca College people Mayors Recreation and sports Allan H. Treman State Marine Park Ithaca Dog Park De Witt Park Stewart Park Athletics Cornell Big Red Glazer Arena Ithaca Bombers Ithaca Little Red TC3 Panthers Science and environment Ithaca Discovery Trail Cayuga Nature Center Cornell Lab of Ornithology Cornell Botanic Gardens Museum of the Earth Sciencenter Sagan Planet Walk Society and culture Clinton House Namgyal Monastery Institute of Buddhist Studies Transportation Ithaca Bus Station Ithaca Tompkins International Airport OurBus New York State Routes NY 13 NY 13A NY 34 NY 79 NY 89 NY 96 NY 96B NY 366 Tompkins Consolidated Area Transit Travel and tourism Buttermilk Falls State Park Ithaca Falls Robert H. Treman State Park Taughannock Falls State Park Trails Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Cornell_Daily_Sun&oldid=1279022086 " Categories : 1880 establishments in New York (state) Cornell University publications Newspapers established in 1880 Student newspapers published in New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 01:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Daily Sun Add languages Add topic

