Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Types of common Toggle Types of common subsection 2.1 Pasture commons 2.2 Arable and haymeadow commons 2.3 Lammas rights 3 Enclosure and decline 4 Modern use 5 Governing law in England and Wales Toggle Governing law in England and Wales subsection 5.1 Erection of Cottages Act 1588 5.2 Commons Act 1876 5.3 Commons Act 1899 5.4 Law of Property Act 1925 5.5 Commons Registration Act 1965 5.6 Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 5.7 Commons Act 2006 6 Management Toggle Management subsection 6.1 Fencing 6.2 Controls on development 6.3 Boards of conservators and commons councils 6.4 Roadways 7 Finland and Sweden 8 Ireland 9 Scotland Toggle Scotland subsection 9.1 Commonties 9.2 Common mosses 9.3 Run rig 9.4 Scattalds 9.5 Crown Commons 9.6 Greens and loans 9.7 Burgh commons 10 United States 11 See also Toggle See also subsection 11.1 Historical movements in defence of English commons 12 Notes 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Common land 27 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Boarisch Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Italiano Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land owned collectively See also: Commons Poohsticks Bridge in Ashdown Forest , an area of common land Common land is collective land (sometimes only open to those whose nation governs the land) in which all persons have certain common rights , such as to allow their livestock to graze upon it, to collect wood , or to cut turf for fuel .

[ 1 ] A person who has a right in, or over, common land jointly with another or others is usually called a commoner .

[ 2 ] In Great Britain, common land or former common land is usually referred to as a common ; for instance, Clapham Common and Mungrisdale Common . Due to enclosure , the extent of common land is now much reduced from the hundreds of square kilometres that existed until the 17th century, but a considerable amount of common land still exists, particularly in upland areas. There are over 8,000 registered commons in England alone.

[ 3 ] Origins [ edit ] Modern-day pannage , or common of mast, in the New Forest Conjectural map of a mediaeval English manor . The part allocated to "common pasture" is shown in the north-east section, shaded green.

Originally in medieval England the common was an integral part of the manor , and was thus part of the estate held by the lord of the manor under a grant from the Crown or a superior peer (who in turn held his land from the Crown; it is sometimes said that the Crown was held to ultimately own all land under its domain). This manorial system, founded on feudalism, granted rights of land use to different classes. These could be appurtenant rights whose ownership attached to tenancies of particular plots of land held within a manor.

[ 4 ] A commoner would be the person who, for the time being, was the occupier of a particular plot of land. Most land with appurtenant commons rights is adjacent to the common. Other rights of common were said to be in gross , that is, they were unconnected with tenure of land. This was more usual in regions where commons were more extensive, such as in the high ground of Northern England or in the Fens , but also included many village greens across England and Wales.

Historically manorial courts defined the details of many of the rights of common allowed to manorial tenants, and such rights formed part of the copyhold tenancy whose terms were defined in the manorial court roll.

Example rights of common are: Pasture . Right to pasture cattle, horses, sheep or other animals on the common land.  The most widespread right.

Piscary. Right to fish.

Turbary . Right to take sods of turf for fuel.

Common in the Soil. This is a general term used for rights to extract minerals such as sands, gravels, marl, walling stone and lime from common land.

Mast or pannage . Right to turn out pigs for a period in autumn to eat mast ( beech mast, acorns and other nuts).

Estovers . Right to take sufficient wood for the commoner's house or holding; usually limited to smaller trees, bushes (such as gorse ) and fallen branches.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] On most commons, rights of pasture and pannage for each commoner are tightly defined by number and type of animal, and by the time of year when certain rights could be exercised.  For example, the occupier of a particular cottage might be allowed to graze fifteen cattle , four horses , ponies or donkeys , and fifty geese , whilst the numbers allowed for their neighbours would probably be different.  On some commons (such as the New Forest and adjoining commons), the rights are not limited by numbers, and instead a marking fee is paid each year for each animal turned out .

[ 7 ] However, if excessive use was made of the common, for example, in overgrazing , a common would be stinted , [ 8 ] that is, a limit would be put on the number of animals each commoner was allowed to graze. These regulations were responsive to demographic and economic pressure. Thus rather than let a common become degraded, access was restricted even further.

The lord of the manor must only exercise his rights so far as to leave a "sufficiency" of resource for commoners. This was at issue in 1889 when the lord of the manor and owner of Banstead Downs and Heath, a Mr Hartopp, excavated gravel and threatened to reduce the available pasture.  The meaning of sufficiency was challenged in court, expert witnesses stated that the grazing capacity was 1,200 animals, the commoners rights totalled 1,440 animals, and 600 animals were normally turned out. It was decided sufficiency was whether enough grazing would be available for all the animals that could be turned out. The judgment was that "The Lord is bound to leave pasture enough to satisfy the commoners rights whether such rights are to be exercised or not". Commoners also have the right to "peaceful enjoyment" of their rights, so that they cannot be hindered by the lord of the manor. This was first proposed in 1500 and became case law in 1827.

[ 9 ] Types of common [ edit ] Snake's head fritillary, North Meadow, Cricklade. This is grazed as Lammas common land.

View of the Scafell massif from Yewbarrow, Wasdale, Cumbria. In the valley bottom are older enclosures and higher up on the fell-side are later enclosures on poorer land with substantial walls following boundary lines regardless of terrain. Above those is the unenclosed common land.

Pasture commons [ edit ] Pasture commons are those where the primary right is to pasture livestock . In the uplands, they are largely moorland , on the coast they may be salt marsh , sand dunes or cliffs , and on inland lowlands they may be downland , grassland , heathland or wood pasture , depending on the soil and history. These habitats are often of very high nature conservation value, because of their very long continuity of management extending in some cases over many hundreds of years. In the past, most pasture commons would have been grazed by mixtures of cattle, sheep and ponies (often also geese).  The modern survival of grazing on pasture commons over the past century is uneven.

[ 10 ] The use of hefting (or heafing ) – the characteristic of some breeds of sheep for example, keeping to a certain heft (a small local area) throughout their lives – allows different farmers in an extensive landscape such as moorland to graze different areas without the need for fences while maintaining their effective individual interest in them, as each ewe remains on her particular area. Lambs usually learn their heft from their mothers. Also known as 'hoofing' in some areas like North Yorkshire.

[ 11 ] This ability to keep sheep from straying without fences is still an important factor in sheep farming on the extensive common land in upland areas.

Arable and haymeadow commons [ edit ] Surviving commons are almost all pasture, but in earlier times, arable farming and haymaking were significant, with strips of land in the common arable fields and common haymeadows assigned annually by lot . When not in use for those purposes, such commons were grazed . Examples include the common arable fields around the village of Laxton in Nottinghamshire, and a common meadow at North Meadow, Cricklade .

Lammas rights [ edit ] Lammas rights entitled commoners to pasture following the harvest, between Lammas day, 12 August ( N.S.

), to 6 April, even if they did not have other rights to the land. Such rights sometimes had the effect of preventing enclosure and building development on agricultural land.

[ 12 ] Enclosure and decline [ edit ] Main article: Enclosure Most of the medieval common land of England was lost due to enclosure. In English social and economic history, enclosure or inclosure is the process which ends traditional rights such as mowing meadows for hay , or grazing livestock on common land formerly held in the open field system . Once enclosed, these uses of the land become restricted to the owner, and it ceases to be land for the use of commoners.  In England and Wales the term is also used for the process that ended the ancient system of arable farming in open fields . Under enclosure, such land is fenced ( enclosed ) and deeded or entitled to one or more owners. The process of enclosure began to be a widespread feature of the English agricultural landscape during the 16th century. By the 19th century, unenclosed commons had become largely restricted to large areas of rough pasture in mountainous areas and to relatively small residual parcels of land in the lowlands.

Enclosure could be accomplished by buying the ground rights and all common rights to accomplish exclusive rights of use, which increased the value of the land.  The other method was by passing laws causing or forcing enclosure, such as Parliamentary enclosure.  The latter process of enclosure was sometimes accompanied by force, resistance, and bloodshed, and remains among the most controversial areas of agricultural and economic history in England.

Enclosure is considered one of the causes of the British Agricultural Revolution .  Enclosed land was under control of the farmer who was free to adopt better farming practices.  There was widespread agreement in contemporary accounts that profit making opportunities were better with enclosed land.

[ 13 ] Following enclosure, crop yields and livestock output increased while at the same time productivity increased enough to create a surplus of labour.  The increased labour supply is considered one of the factors facilitating the Industrial Revolution .

[ 14 ] Following the era of enclosure, there was relatively little common land remaining of value although some residual commoners remained until the end of the Second World War. By that time lowland commons had become neglected because the commoners were able to find better-paid work in other sectors of the economy. As a result they largely stopped exercising their rights; relatively few commoners exist today.

Modern use [ edit ] Much common land is still used for its original purpose. The right to graze domestic stock is by far the most extensive commoners right registered, and its ongoing use contributes significantly to agricultural and rural economies.  Rights to graze sheep are registered on 53% of the Welsh and 16% of the English commons. Cattle are registered on 35% of Welsh and 20% of English commons, whilst horses and ponies are registered on 27% of Welsh and 13% of English commons. In some cases rights to graze goats, geese and ducks are registered, whilst in others the type of livestock is not specified. These figures relate to the number of common land units, and due to discrepancies in the registers and large numbers of small commons with no rights in England, the apparent distinction between Wales and England may be exaggerated.

[ 15 ] Today, despite the diverse legal and historical origins of commons, they are managed through a community of users, comprising those who hold rights together with the owner(s) of the soil. Such communities generally require joint working to integrate all interests, with formal or informal controls and collaborative understandings, often coupled with strong social traditions and local identity.

[ 15 ] However, 26% of commons in Wales, and as many as 65% in England, have no common rights shown on the registers. Such areas are derived from wastes of manors , where rights probably existed formerly.

[ 15 ] When such open habitats are no longer grazed they revert to scrub and then dense woodland, losing the grassy or heathland vegetation which may have occupied the land continuously for many centuries. In 2007, Ashdown Forest , the Sussex heathland which was the setting for the Winnie-the-Pooh stories, became the centre of a dispute between some local residents and the forest's governing body, the Board of Conservators, which is responsible for administering the forest's 24 km 2 of common land. The conservators wished to restore the forest's landscape to one that predominantly consisted of heathland—its defining characteristic until the mid-twentieth century, but something that was in danger of being lost after the Second World War as a result of the advance of woodland into traditional heathland areas when, as one commentator stated: ...returning soldiers gave up trying to scratch a living out of the forest. Whereas once hundreds of commoners used the wood and heath—their livestock obliging by chewing down young tree shoots—today there is only one commercial grazer.

[ 16 ] The conservators were forced to intervene to stem the invasion of trees, scrub and bracken that threatened the ecologically precious heathlands, cutting down saplings, removing scrub and mowing the bracken. Some residents complained that the results looked like a First World War battle field. This is not a problem restricted to this common, but according to Jonathan Brown writing in the Independent on 21 April 2007 "similar debates are raging between locals and the authorities at other heathland areas in the New Forest and Surrey".

[ 16 ] In 2008 the Foundation for Common Land was created in the UK to try to enhance the understanding and protection of commons.

[ 17 ] Governing law in England and Wales [ edit ] The legal position concerning common land has been confused, but recent legislation has sought to remedy this and remove the legal uncertainties so that commons can be better used and protected.

Most commons are based on ancient rights under British common law , which pre-date statutes passed by the Parliament of England . The exact usufruct rights which apply to individual commons were in some cases documented, but more often were based on long-held traditions. A major reform began in 1965, with a national register of common land which recorded the land ownership and the rights of any commoners, and two other important statutes have followed.

Owners of land in general have all the rights of exclusive ownership, to use the land as they wish. However, for common land the owner's rights are restricted, and other people known as commoners have certain rights over the land.  The landowner may retain other rights to the land, such as rights to minerals and large timber, and to any common rights left unexercised by the commoners. The commoners will continue to exercise their rights, or have a document which describes their rights, which may be part of the deeds of another property. A number of commoners still exercise rights, for example, there are 500 practising commoners in the New Forest , [ 18 ] and there is a federation of commoners in Cumbria .

[ 19 ] In many cases commons have no existing commoners, the rights having been neglected.

Erection of Cottages Act 1588 [ edit ] Main article: Erection of Cottages Act 1588 It was a common a belief that if a squatter and their friends could—between sunrise and sunset in a single day—build a house on common land, raise the roof over their head and light a fire in the hearth, then they would have the right of undisturbed possession.

[ 20 ] The belief—sometimes called "keyhole tenure", and which persisted as recently as the early 20th century—was actually a fallacy, but to stop landless peasants unlawfully squatting on commons, the Erection of Cottages Act 1588 ( 31 Eliz. 1 . c. 7) was introduced.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Commons Act 1876 [ edit ] Commons Act 1876 Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Citation 39 & 40 Vict.

c. 56 Under the Commons Act 1876 ( 39 & 40 Vict.

c. 56) some 36 commons in England and Wales were regulated. The act also enabled the confirmation of orders providing for the inclosure of common land or common fields.

Commons Act 1899 [ edit ] Commons Act 1899 [ a ] Act of Parliament Parliament of the United Kingdom Long title An Act to amend the Inclosure Acts 1845 to 1882 and the Law relating to Commons and Open Spaces.

Citation 62 & 63 Vict.

c. 30 Territorial extent United Kingdom Dates Royal assent 9 August 1899 Commencement 9 August 1899 [ b ] Other legislation Amends Inclosure Act 1845 Repeals/revokes Inclosure Act 1756 Inclosure Act 1757 Inclosure (Consolidation) Act 1801 Inclosure Act 1821 Common Fields Exchange Act 1834 Inclosure Act 1836 Inclosure Act 1840 Amended by Statute Law Revision Act 1883 Statute Law Revision Act 1908 Status: Amended Text of statute as originally enacted Revised text of statute as amended Text of the Commons Act 1899 as in force today (including any amendments) within the United Kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk .

The Commons Act 1899 ( 62 & 63 Vict.

c. 30) provides a mechanism of enabling district councils and National Park authorities to manage commons where their use for exercise and recreation is the prime consideration and where the owner and commoners do not require a direct voice in the management, or where the owner cannot be found. There are at least 200 schemes of management made under the 1899 act.

Law of Property Act 1925 [ edit ] The Law of Property Act 1925 ( 15 & 16 Geo. 5 . c. 20), which still forms the core of English property law, has two provisions for common land: Section 193 gave the right of the public to "air and exercise" on metropolitan commons and those in pre-1974 urban districts and boroughs. This constituted about one fifth of the commons, but the 1925 act did not give this right to commons in essentially rural areas (although some urban districts had remarkably rural extent, such as the Lakes Urban District), which had to wait for the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 .

Section 194 restricted the inclosure of commons, which would now require Ministerial consent.

[ 24 ] Commons Registration Act 1965 [ edit ] The UK government regularised the definitions of common land with the Commons Registration Act 1965 (c. 64), [ 25 ] which established a register of common land.

Not all commons have owners, but all common land by definition is registered under Commons Registration Act 1965, along with the rights of any commoners if they still exist. The registration authorities are the county councils, and when there is no ownership, a local council, such as a parish council is normally given guardianship by vesting the property under section 8 the act.

An online database of registered common land was compiled by DEFRA in 1992–93 as part of a survey of the condition and wildlife of commons.

[ 26 ] The official up to date registers of common land are held by the commons registration authorities.

The following registration information is held: [ 27 ] Land Section This includes a description of the land, who applied to register the land, and when the land became finally registered. There are also related plans which show the boundaries of the land.

Rights Section This includes a description of the rights of common (e.g. a right to graze a certain number of sheep), the area of common over which the right is exercisable, the name of the holder of the right and whether the right is attached to land in the ownership of the holder of the right (the commoner) or is a right held in gross i.e. unattached to land.

Ownership Section This includes details of the owner(s) of the common land. Entries in this section however, are not held to be conclusive.

Numerous inconsistencies and irregularities remained, mainly because a period of only three years was given for registration submissions. However, there is now an opportunity to clear these up under the 2006 act, and to add land omitted under the 1965 act.

[ 28 ] Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 [ edit ] Other than for those commons covered by the Law of Property Act 1925 , the Commons Act 1899 and certain other statutes, the public did not have the right to use or enjoy common land if they were not a commoner. However, the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000 (c. 37) gave the public the freedom to roam freely on all registered common land in England and Wales.

[ 29 ] The new rights were introduced region by region through England and Wales, with completion in 2005. Maps showing accessible areas have been produced, and are available online as "open access maps" produced by Natural England.

[ 30 ] Commons are included in the public access land now shown on the Ordnance Survey Explorer maps.

Commons Act 2006 [ edit ] The Commons Act 2006 (c. 26) is an important recent piece of legislation.

[ 31 ] The act: Enables commons to be managed more sustainably by commoners and landowners working together through commons councils with powers to regulate grazing and other agricultural activities Provides better protection for common land and greens – this includes reinforcing existing protections against abuse, encroachment and unauthorised development Recognises that the protection of common land has to be proportionate to the harm caused and that some specified works can be carried out without the need for consent Requires commons registration authorities to bring their registers up-to-date by recording past changes affecting the registers during a 'transitional period', and to keep the registers up-to-date by recording new changes affecting the registers – commons registration authorities will have new powers to correct many of the mistakes in the registers Sets out new, clearer criteria for the registration of town or village greens Prohibits the severance of rights of common grazing, preventing commoners from selling, leasing or letting their rights away from the property to which rights are attached, [ 32 ] though temporary severance of such rights is permitted [ 33 ] for renewable terms of up to two years (in England) and five years (in Wales).

[ 34 ] Several hundred square kilometres of 'waste land' that was provisionally registered under the Commons Registration Act 1965 was not, in fact, finally registered. As a consequence, it ceased to be recognised as common land. A partial remedy for this defect in the earlier legislation is provided by the Commons Act 2006 . Under Schedule 2(4) to the Act, applications that failed to achieve final registration under the 1965 Act may, in certain circumstances, be reconsidered – offering, in effect, a second chance for the land to be confirmed ('re-registered') as common. Land that is re-registered in this way will enjoy the special legal protection afforded to common land. It will also become subject in due course to the public right of access introduced by the Countryside and Rights of Way Act 2000; or depending on location, may qualify as a section 193 'urban' common (in which case, it would also be subject to a right of access for horse-riders).

[ 35 ] Management [ edit ] Fencing [ edit ] The windmill on Wimbledon Common The act of transferring resources from the commons to purely private ownership is known as enclosure , or (especially in formal use, and in place names) Inclosure . The inclosure acts were a series of private acts of Parliament, mainly from about 1750 to 1850, which enclosed large areas of common, especially the arable and haymeadow land and the better pasture land.

The maintenance of fences around a common is the responsibility of the occupiers of the adjacent enclosed land, not (as it would be with enclosed land) the responsibility of the owners of the grazed livestock.  This can lead to difficulties where not all adjacent occupiers maintain their fences properly. However the fencing of land within a registered common is not allowed, as this is a form of enclosure and denies use of the land to others.

A celebrated landmark case of unauthorised fencing of a common was in 1866 by Lord Brownlow who illegally enclosed 434 acres of Berkhamsted Common to add to his Ashridge Estate . Brownlow had failed to buy out the commoners, so resorted to this action. A public outcry followed, and the Commons Preservation Society found a champion in Augustus Smith who had the inclination and the money to act, and himself held commons rights. Smith hired 120 navvies armed with hammers, chisels and crowbars, who on the night of 6 March 1866, under the aegis of the newly formed Commons Preservation Society (now the Open Spaces Society ), felled to the ground two miles of iron railings. Soon after, local people flocked in. Lord Brownlow took action against Augustus Smith and the court case lasted until 1870 when it ended with the complete vindication of Smith.

[ 36 ] Controls on development [ edit ] Development of common land is strictly controlled. The government states that common land should be open and accessible to the public, and the law restricts the kind of works that can be carried out on commons. HM Planning Inspectorate is responsible for determining applications under the 2006 Act regarding common land in England, and several other pieces of legislation regarding commons and greens. All applications are determined on behalf of the Secretary of State for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra).

[ 37 ] Under section 38 of the Commons Act 2006, consent is required to carry out any restricted works on land registered as common land under the Commons Registration Act 1965. Restricted works are any that
prevent or impede access to or over the land. They include fencing, buildings, structures, ditches, trenches, embankments and other works, where the effect of those works is to prevent or impede access. They also include, in every case, new solid surfaces, such as for a new car park or access road.

[ 38 ] Boards of conservators and commons councils [ edit ] Some commons are managed by boards of conservators for the wider public benefit. However, for areas where these are not established, or an improved system is required, the Commons Act 2006 [ 39 ] provides for the establishment of commons councils to manage common land.

[ 40 ] The Standard Constitution Regulations relating to commons councils were formally approved in April 2010, and commons councils are most likely to be useful where they can improve current management practices.  This may be where commons are in agricultural use, but where it can be difficult to reach agreement on collective management. Commons councils are voluntary and can be established only where there is substantial support among those with interests in the land, such as; the commoners (especially those who actively exercise their rights); owners and other legal interests.

Commons councils enable decisions to be made by majority voting, so relieving the burden of trying to reach unanimous decisions.  They will have the power to make rules about agricultural activities, the management of vegetation, and the exercise of common rights, which are binding on all those with interests on a common.

[ 41 ] Roadways [ edit ] A parliamentary enclosure road near Lazonby in Cumbria. The roads were made as straight as possible, and the boundaries much wider than a cart width to reduce the ground damage of driving sheep and cattle.

[ 42 ] Commons are often crossed by unfenced public roads, and this leads to another problem on modern pasture commons where grazing survives (or is to be reintroduced).  Historically, the roads would have been cart -tracks, and there would have been no conflict between their horse -drawn (or ox -drawn) traffic and the pastured animals, and no great difficulty if pastured animals wandered off the common along the roads.  However, these roads now have fast motorised traffic which does not mix safely with animals.  To continue (or restore) grazing, such roads may need fencing or at least blocking at the edge of the common with cattle grids – however fencing a common is reminiscent of the process of enclosure, historically fatal to its survival, and permission for fencing on a common is a strictly controlled process within the UK planning system.

[ 37 ] Public roads through enclosed common land were made to an accepted width between boundaries. In the late eighteenth century this was at least 60 feet (18 m), but from the 1790s this was decreased to 40 feet (12 m), and later 30 feet (9.1 m) as the normal maximum width. The reason for these wide roads to was to prevent excessive churning of the road bed, and allow easy movement of flocks and herds of animals.

[ 42 ] Finland and Sweden [ edit ] A partition unit is a corporation that owns common land. In this case, the land is not state-owned or in joint-ownership under a trust, but is owned by a definite partition unit, a legal partnership whose partners are the participating individual landowners. Common lands and waterways owned by a partition unit were created by an agreement where certain land was reserved for the common use of all adjacent landowners. For the most part, this was due to the Great Partition (Swedish: storskiftet , Finnish: isojako ), which started in 1757 and was largely complete by the 1800s. Earlier, the land of a village was divided into narrow stripes of farmland for each to own in an open-field system , with the remainder commonly owned. Work on the land was collective. In the Great Partition, villages were organized as corporations termed partition units (Swedish: skifteslag , Finnish: jakokunta ), and land was divided into large chunks that were divided among the households (commoners) for individual cultivation and habitation. Land or waterways that remained undivided was kept by the partition unit as commons, owned by the partition unit. Later, Gustav III claimed the yet unclaimed forest for the Crown – this was the origin of the large forest holdings of the state in Sweden and Finland. Today, partition units are a common way of owning waterways.

Ireland [ edit ] In Ireland, commonage ( Irish : cimíneacht, cimín [ 43 ] ) is a holding held by two or more persons in specified shares or jointly and originally purchased from the Irish Land Commission under the Land Purchase Acts (1885 and 1903).

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Traditionally, tenants on large estates rented their land from the landlord. The farm consisted of an enclosed parcel of land and permission to use nearby unenclosed land belonging to the landlord. In many areas access unenclosed land (the "hill") was vital as it allowed the tenant to keep livestock and gain a cash income.

[ 46 ] There are over 4,500 commonages in Ireland, with 11,000–14,000 farmers having grazing rights.

[ 47 ] 4,260 square kilometres (1,640 sq mi; 1,050,000 acres) of commonage is currently grazed, mostly in counties Mayo , Galway , Sligo , Donegal , Kerry and Wicklow . It is generally used for grazing sheep in upland areas.

[ 48 ] Overgrazing in the 1980s and 1990s led to damage to hill areas and river banks; numbers are now limited.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In Gaelic Ireland , prior to the Norman-English conquest of Ireland (begun in the 12th century AD, not complete until the late 16th century), land was owned by tribes. A portion of the tribe's territory, known as the Fearan Fine ("tribe's quarter") was held in common by the entire tribe. This was generally low-quality land, used for grazing pigs and cattle , and was leased to tribe members for a year at a time.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Scotland [ edit ] Commoning has probably existed in Scotland for over a millennium. However, there is no modern legislation relating to commons which formally identifies the extent of common land or clarifies the full range of rights. The right of turbary – the ability to cut peat as fuel – clearly exists in large parts of Scotland, whilst the scale of such rights, and the extent to which they are utilised, remain unknown. The main work undertaken on Scottish commons concerns grazing, using a pragmatic definition, where such commons were defined as pastures with multiple grazing rights and/or multiple graziers.

[ 15 ] There are seven main historic types of common land in Scotland, [ 53 ] some of which have similarities to common land in England and Wales.

Commonties [ edit ] The overwhelming majority of areas of common land in lowland Scotland and the Highland fringes were commonties . A commonty is an area of land where the rights of property or use are shared by two or more neighbouring (though not necessarily adjacent) landowners. They are not therefore truly 'common' land in the sense that anyone can use them, and this distinction meant that it was often very easy for commonties to be divided between landowners after a series of Acts permitting this were passed by the Parliament of Scotland in the 17th century, most notably the 1695 Act for the Division of Commonties. As a result, the number of commonties declined very rapidly in the 18th and 19th centuries.

Common mosses [ edit ] Common mosses were areas of bog where the right to dig peat for fuel were shared by neighbouring landowners. They are therefore similar to commonties and most commonties included a common moss. However the difficulties of dividing such wet areas meant that they were left out of many commonty divisions and many common mosses may still survive, un-noticed because of the decline of peat-cutting.

Run rig [ edit ] Main article: Run rig Rig and furrow marks at Buchans Field, Wester Kittochside Run rig is a system of agriculture involving the cultivation of adjacent, narrow strips of raised land (rigs). Traditionally adjacent rigs would be used by different farmers and the rigs were periodically re-allocated between them. The system was common throughout Scotland until the 18th century, but survived longer in the Western Highlands , where runrig was often associated with an adjacent area of common hill grazing which was also shared by the same farmers as the runrig.

Scattalds [ edit ] Scattalds are unique to Shetland and are based on udal law , rather than the feudal law that predominated in the rest of Scotland. However, Scattalds are very similar to commonties and many were divided under the same 1695 Act that allowed for the division of commonties.

Crown Commons [ edit ] Crown Commons were areas of land held directly by the crown and therefore the common rights that could be used were rights of use rather than rights of property. Unlike commonties, the rights to use crown commons (for example for grazing livestock) were available to anyone, not just the neighbouring landowners. There are no crown commons left in Scotland; those that survived into the 20th century were taken over by the Crown Estate .

Greens and loans [ edit ] Greens were small areas of common land near a settlement where livestock could be kept overnight, markets held and other communal activities carried out. Sometimes they were adjacent to drovers' roads near river crossing points or overnight accommodation. Most were genuinely common land with only the Crown holding any title to them. A loan was a common route through private property allowing access to an area of common land or other public place. As the traditional uses of greens and loans declined, they were often absorbed by the neighbouring landowners.

Burgh commons [ edit ] Burgh commons were areas of common land where property rights or privileges of use were held by the burgh for their inhabitants. They could include any of the other six types of common land and were sometimes shared with landowners outside the burgh. By the early 19th century, most burgh commons had been appropriated by the wealthy landowners who dominated burgh councils, and very few have survived.

United States [ edit ] See also: Public land , Open range , Range war , and Sheep Wars Common land, an English development, was used in many former British colonies, for example in Ireland and the United States. The North American colonies adopted the English laws in establishing their own commons. Famous examples include the Boston Common in Massachusetts and the New Haven Green in New Haven, Connecticut , some of the oldest commons in the United States.

[ 54 ] Cambridge Common , c.

1808 –9, with Harvard College at left and Christ Church at right Wakefield, Massachusetts , town common showing bandstand/gazebo at right and lake at left Central Burying Ground on the Boston Common in Boston, Massachusetts See also [ edit ] Agrarian Justice by Thomas Paine Alquería Commune Commons Crown land English land law Exmoor Georgism Homeowner associations (often associated with common-interest developments ) Kibbutz Leyton Marsh and Leicester Square in London, historically lammas land Moshav Public land Original Appropriation Rights of way in England and Wales Royal forest Satoyama Tragedy of the commons Trespass to land Historical movements in defence of English commons [ edit ] The Diggers The Levellers Notes [ edit ] ^ Section 24.

^ The Acts of Parliament (Commencement) Act 1793 .

References [ edit ] ^ Natural England Archived 28 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Short, Christopher; Winter, Michael (September 1999). "The Problem of Common Land: Towards Stakeholder Governance".

Journal of Environmental Planning and Management .

42 (5): 616.

Bibcode : 1999JEPM...42..613S .

doi : 10.1080/09640569910911 .

^ Short, Chris (1 July 2008).

"The traditional commons of England and Wales in the twenty-first century: meeting new and old challenges" (PDF) .

International Journal of the Commons .

2 (2): 192.

Bibcode : 2008IJCom...2..192S .

doi : 10.18352/ijc.47 .

^ Kerridge, Eric (1992).

The common fields of England . Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press. p. 52.

ISBN 0719035724 .

^ New Forest explorers guide .

^ UK government .

^ Forest rights .

^ Susan Jane Buck Cox - "No tragedy on the Commons" Journal of Environmental Ethics, Vol 7, Spring 1985 [1] ^ Campbell, Ian (1971).

A guide to the Law of Commons . Open Spaces Society.

^ "Impacts of grazing on lowland heathland" .

Bournemouth University . Archived from the original on 23 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2013 .

^ Shepherd Amanda Owen in Our Yorkshire Farm .

^ Pritchard, Evelyn (2000). Chave, Leonard (ed.).

The Historical Background . Ham Amenities Group. p. 23.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Overton 1996 , pp. 165 ^ Overton, Mark (1996).

Agricultural Revolution in England: The transformation if the agrarian economy 1500–1850 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-56859-3 .

^ a b c d "Foundation for Common Land - A gathering of those across Great Britain and beyond with a stake in pastoral commons and their future" .

www.foundationforcommonland.org.uk .

^ a b Brown 2007 .

^ Bathe, Graham "Common Land". Pitkin. 2015 ^ "newforestcommoners.co.uk" .

newforestcommoners.co.uk . Archived from the original on 2 February 2010 . Retrieved 16 February 2010 .

^ Federation of Cumbrian Commoners website – retrieved Nov 2014 [Cumbria http://www.cumbriacommoners.org.uk/commons-councils Archived 6 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine ] ^ a b Harrison. The Common People. pp. 135-136 ^ Croly, Elizabeth (1925).

The Lure of the New Forest . Richmond: Mills & Boon. p. 153.

^ Williams, Abraham (1924).

Law Notes, Vol.43 . London: Reeves & Turner. p. 302.

^ Basket, Mark (1763).

Statutes at Large:From the fifth year of King Edward IV to the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth etc. Vol.2 . London: Mark Basket et al. p. 664.

^ "Law of Property Act 1925" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

^ Commons Registration Act 1965 , UK.

^ "Database of registered common land in England" .

GOV.UK . Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs. 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 .

^ Cumbria CC website 2014 ^ Defra Archived 23 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine , UK.

^ "Open Access land" . Natural England . Retrieved 25 February 2013 .

^ "Open access maps at Natural England" .

^ "Commons Act 2006" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

^ "Common land: guidance for commons registration authorities and applicants" .

GOV.UK . 18 November 2015.

^ "The Commons (Severance of Rights) (England) Order 2006" .

www.legislation.gov.uk .

^ [Natural England "Commons Toolkit" NE 285] ^ Open Spaces Society website retrieved Nov 2014 – section on the Commons Act 2006 "The Commons Act 2006 | Open Spaces Society" . Archived from the original on 27 November 2014 . Retrieved 17 November 2014 .

^ Ashbrook, Kate (July 2013).

"Modern commons: a protected open space?" (PDF) .

Open Spaces Society . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 November 2017 .

^ a b Garrett, James.

"Other permissions you may require" .

www.planningportal.co.uk .

^ "Works on Common land and Deregistering Common Land: guidance" .

GOV.UK . 26 March 2024.

^ Commons Act 2006 , UK.

^ How is Common Land managed?

Archived 14 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, UK.

^ "Commons Councils - Federation of Cumbria Commoners" .

www.cumbriacommoners.org.uk . Archived from the original on 6 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 November 2014 .

^ a b Transforming Fell and Valley, Ian Whyte. Published by Centre for North West regional Studies, University of Lancaster 2003 ^ "Béaloideas: The Journal of the Folklore of Ireland Society" . The Society. 25 December 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Deeney, John (24 August 2013).

"Legal advice, subdividing commonage land" .

Agriland.ie .

^ Macken, James; Galligan, Eamon; McGrath, Michael (1 January 2013).

Compulsory Purchase and Compensation in Ireland: Law and Practice . A&C Black.

ISBN 9781845922306 – via Google Books.

^ "WHAT IS COMMONAGE" .

^ "Ireland: new commonage grazing plans explained - Foundation for Common Land" .

www.foundationforcommonland.org.uk .

^ "Commonage, common land, commonage in Ireland, Commonage Framework plans" .

^ OECD (21 April 2010).

OECD Environmental Performance Reviews OECD Environmental Performance Reviews: Ireland 2010 . OECD Publishing.

ISBN 9789264079502 – via Google Books.

^ "Commonage plans threaten livelihoods of many hill farmers" .

www.irishexaminer.com . 9 October 2014.

^ "The Ceiles and the Land Laws - Brehon Laws" .

www.libraryireland.com .

^ Ginnell, Laurence (16 April 2013).

The Brehon Laws: A Legal Handbook . Read Books Ltd.

ISBN 9781446549407 – via Google Books.

^ Callander, Robin Fraser (1987).

A pattern of landownership in Scotland : with particular reference to Aberdeenshire . Finzean, Aberdeenshire: Haughend Publications.

ISBN 978-0907184133 .

OCLC 60041593 .

^ "New Haven Green (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 26 June 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Bathe, Graham (2015) Common Land Pitkin Brown, Jonathan (21 April 2007), "Oh bother! Nimbies do battle with council over Pooh's forest" , The Independent , archived from the original on 7 June 2008 (section: This Britain) Clayden, Paul (2007) Our Common Land. Open Spaces Society Gadsden, G.D.,(1988) The Law of Commons. Sweet and Maxwell. See also Cousins, E.F. & Honey, R. (2012) Gadsden on Commons and Greens. Sweet & Maxwell Gonner, E. C. K (1912).

Common Land and Inclosure . London: Macmillan & Co.

[2] HM Government guide for Common land: "Management, protection and registering to use" [3] HM Government guide for Common land: "Common land and village greens" [4] HM Govt planning inspectorate – planning portal for common land.

[5] DEFRA Database of registered common land in England [6] Federation of Cumbrian Commoners [7] Further reading [ edit ] New commons for old – Presentation to the Newcastle Common Land Conference 5 July 2013, [8] Archived 29 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine Modern commons: a protected open space?  Kate Ashbrook, general secretary, Open Spaces Society [9] Archived 10 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine De Moor, Martina; Shaw-Taylor, Leigh; Warde, Paul, eds. (2002), The Management of Common Land in North West Europe, c. 1500–1850 , Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, ISBN 978-2-503-51273-0 . Comparative Rural History of the North Sea Area Series, no. 8.

Galhano Alves, João Pedro (2009), The artificial simulacrum world. The geopolitical elimination of communitary [ sic ] land use and its effects on our present global condition , Eloquent Books, New York, USA, 71 p.

Hill, Howard (1980) Freedom to Roam: the struggle for access to Britain's moors and mountains . Ashbourne: Moorland ISBN 978-0-903485-77-7 Meinzen-Dick, Ruth; Mwangi, Esther; Dohrn, Stephan (May 2006), "Securing the Commons" (PDF) , CAPRi: CGiAR Systemwide Program on Collective Action and Property Rights Policy Brief (4) .

Neeson, J. M. (1993), Commoners : common right, enclosure and social change in England, 1700–1820 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-56774-2 External links [ edit ] British Agricultural History Society Common land research Archived 16 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine – website of research project at Newcastle university DEFRA guide to village greens in England Foundation for common land – A gathering of those across Great Britain and beyond with a stake in pastoral commons and their future Website of the Open Spaces Society Open access maps at Natural England "Commons" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

779– 784.

v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National Germany Japan Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐vtr46
Cached time: 20250814220423
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.898 seconds
Real time usage: 1.051 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4530/1000000
Revision size: 55753/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 118659/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4322/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 171065/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.567/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25996349/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  898.570      1 -total
 34.54%  310.362      2 Template:Reflist
 12.56%  112.855     23 Template:Cite_web
 11.09%   99.652      1 Template:Langx
 10.30%   92.553      1 Template:Property_navbox
 10.24%   92.034      2 Template:Navbox
  9.38%   84.290      1 Template:Short_description
  8.59%   77.157      2 Template:Cite_journal
  8.48%   76.224     12 Template:Cite_book
  6.81%   61.210      2 Template:Infobox_UK_legislation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:910535:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220423 and revision id 1300910579. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Common_land&oldid=1300910579 " Categories : Common land Legal history English property law Parks Protected areas Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles containing Irish-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 02:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Common land 27 languages Add topic

