Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Mechanism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hypercane 14 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical class of extreme tropical cyclone A hypercane is a hypothetical class of extreme tropical cyclone that could form if sea surface temperatures reached approximately 50 °C (122 °F), which is 12 °C (22 °F) warmer than the warmest ocean temperature ever recorded.

[ 1 ] Such an increase could be caused by a large asteroid or comet impact, a large supervolcanic eruption, a large submarine flood basalt , or "incredible" global warming .

[ 2 ] There is some speculation that a series of hypercanes resulting from the impact of a large asteroid or comet contributed to the demise of the non-avian dinosaurs .

[ 3 ] The hypothesis was created by Kerry Emanuel of MIT , who also coined the term.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 3 ] Description [ edit ] The relative sizes of Typhoon Tip , Cyclone Tracy , and the Contiguous United States . While hypercanes can be smaller than Cyclone Tracy, the largest hypercanes could even exceed Typhoon Tip in size.

In order to form a hypercane, according to Emanuel's hypothetical model, the ocean temperature would have to be at least 49 °C (120 °F). A critical difference between a hypercane and present-day hurricanes is that a hypercane would extend into the upper stratosphere , where as present-day hurricanes extend into only the lower stratosphere.

[ 6 ] [ full citation needed ] Hypercanes would have wind speeds of over 800 kilometres per hour (500 mph), potentially gusting to 970 km/h (600 mph), [ 7 ] and would also have a central pressure of less than 700 hectopascals (20.67 inHg ), giving them an enormous lifespan of at least several weeks.

[ 5 ] The pressure drop, compared to mean sea level pressure, would be the equivalent of being at almost 3,000 metres (9,800 ft) in elevation, [ 8 ] a level sufficient to cause altitude sickness.

[ 9 ] This extreme low pressure could also support massive storm systems roughly the size of North America.

[ 5 ] [ 10 ] For comparison, the largest and most intense storm on record was 1979's Typhoon Tip , with a 1-minute sustained wind speed of 305 km/h (190 mph) and a minimum central pressure of 870 hPa (25.69 inHg). Such a storm would be nearly eight times more powerful than Hurricane Patricia , the storm with the highest sustained wind speed recorded, which had 1-minute sustained winds of 345 km/h (214 mph).

[ 11 ] [ full citation needed ] However, hypercanes may be as small as 25 km (15 mi) in size, and they would lose strength quickly after venturing into colder waters.

[ 7 ] The waters after a hypercane could remain hot enough for weeks, allowing more hypercanes to form. A hypercane's clouds would reach 30 to 40 km (20 to 25 mi) into the stratosphere . Such an intense storm would also damage the Earth's ozone layer , potentially having devastating consequences for life on Earth.

[ 5 ] [ failed verification ] Water molecules in the stratosphere would react with ozone to accelerate decay into O 2 and reduce absorption of ultraviolet light .

[ 12 ] Mechanism [ edit ] A hurricane can be idealized as a Carnot heat engine powered by the temperature difference between the sea and the uppermost layer of the troposphere. As air is drawn in towards the eye it acquires latent heat from evaporating sea-water, which is then released as sensible heat during the rise inside the eyewall and radiated away at the top of the storm system. The energy input is balanced by energy dissipation in a turbulent boundary layer close to the surface, which leads to an energy balance equilibrium.

[ citation needed ] In Emanuel's model, if the temperature difference between the sea and the top of the troposphere is too large, there is no solution to the equilibrium equation. As more air is drawn in, the released heat reduces the central pressure further, drawing in more heat in a runaway positive feedback. The actual limit to hypercane intensity depends on other energy dissipation factors that are uncertain: whether inflow ceases to be isothermal , whether shock waves would form in the outflow around the eye , or whether turbulent breakdown of the vortex happens.

[ 3 ] [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Climate change portal Tropical cyclones portal Extraterrestrial cyclone Global catastrophic risk Great Dark Spot Great Red Spot Saffir–Simpson scale Tornado References [ edit ] ^ "Temperature of Ocean Water" .

Windows to the Universe .

University Corporation for Atmospheric Research . August 31, 2001. Archived from the original on March 13, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2008 .

^ Leahy, Stephen (September 16, 2005).

"The Dawn of the Hypercane?" .

Inter Press Service . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved July 24, 2008 .

^ a b c Emanuel, Kerry; Speer, Kevin; Rotunno, Richard; Srivastava, Ramesh; Molina, Mario (July 20, 1995).

"Hypercanes: A Possible Link to Global Extinction Scenarios" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

100 (D7): 13755– 13765.

Bibcode : 1995JGR...10013755E .

doi : 10.1029/95JD01368 . Archived from the original on October 2, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2008 .

^ Hecht, Jeff (February 4, 1995).

"Did storms land the dinosaurs in hot water?" .

New Scientist . No. 1963. p. 16 . Retrieved July 24, 2008 .

^ a b c d Emanuel, Kerry (September 16, 1996).

"Limits on Hurricane Intensity" .

Center for Meteorology and Physical Oceanography , MIT . Retrieved July 24, 2008 .

^ Emanuel, Kerry (2008). "Hypercane".

Mega Disasters (Interview). History Channel.

^ a b Michael Cabbage (September 10, 1997).

" 'HYPERCANE' THEORY PACKS 600 MPH WINDS" .

South Florida Sun Sentinel . Archived from the original on May 13, 2019 . Retrieved May 13, 2019 .

^ "Altitude to Pressure Conversion Table" .

SensorsONE . May 22, 2024 . Retrieved May 23, 2024 .

^ "Travel to High Altitudes" .

CDC . September 14, 2020 . Retrieved May 24, 2024 .

^ Jhaneel Lockhart (2017).

"Could a 500 Mph "Hypercane" End Life As We Know It?" . Roaring Earth . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

^ Henson, Robert (2008). "Hypercane".

Mega Disasters (Interview). History Channel.

^ "ozone decomposition" .

www.lenntech.com . Retrieved February 5, 2019 .

^ Emanuel, Kerry A. (1988).

"The Maximum Intensity of Hurricanes" .

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

45 (7): 1143– 1155.

Bibcode : 1988JAtS...45.1143E .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0469(1988)045<1143:TMIOH>2.0.CO;2 .

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal External links [ edit ] Hypercanes: The Next Big Disaster Movie?

– YouTube Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hypercane&oldid=1292772901 " Categories : Tropical cyclone meteorology Weather hazards Doomsday scenarios Geological hazards Future problems Meteorological hypotheses Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2013 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 18:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hypercane 14 languages Add topic

