Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contemporary issues 2 Modern history Toggle Modern history subsection 2.1 Social ecology movement 2.2 Deep ecology movement 2.3 Resacralization of nature 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Environmental philosophy 19 languages العربية বাংলা भोजपुरी Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी עברית Kiswahili Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Português Suomi ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of philosophy Environmental philosophy is the branch of philosophy that is concerned with the natural environment and humans' place within it.

[ 1 ] It asks crucial questions about human environmental relations such as "What do we mean when we talk about nature?" "What is the value of the natural, that is non-human environment to us, or in itself?" "How should we respond to environmental challenges such as environmental degradation , pollution and climate change?" "How can we best understand the relationship between the natural world and human technology and development?" and "What is our place in the natural world?" Environmental philosophy includes environmental ethics , environmental aesthetics, ecofeminism , environmental hermeneutics , and environmental theology .

[ 2 ] Some of the main areas of interest for environmental philosophers are: Marco Casagrande Sandworm , Beaufort04 Triennial of Contemporary Art, Wenduine, Belgium 2012 Defining environment and nature How to value the environment Moral status of animals and plants Endangered species Environmentalism and deep ecology Aesthetic value of nature Intrinsic value Wilderness Restoration of nature Consideration of future generations [ 1 ] Ecophenomenology Contemporary issues [ edit ] Modern issues within environmental philosophy include but are not restricted to the concerns of environmental activism, questions raised by science and technology, environmental justice , and climate change . These include issues related to the depletion of finite resources and other harmful and permanent effects brought on to the environment by humans, as well as the ethical and practical problems raised by philosophies and practices of environmental conservation, restoration, and policy in general. Another question that has settled on the minds of modern environmental philosophers is "Do rivers have rights?" [ 3 ] At the same time environmental philosophy deals with the value human beings attach to different kinds of environmental experience, particularly how experiences in or close to non-human environments contrast with urban or industrialized experiences, and how this varies across cultures with close attention paid to indigenous people .

Modern history [ edit ] Environmental philosophy emerged as a branch of philosophy in 1970s. Early environmental philosophers include Seyyed Hossein Nasr , Richard Routley , Arne Næss , and J. Baird Callicott . The movement was an attempt to connect with humanity's sense of alienation from nature in a continuing fashion throughout history.

[ 4 ] This was very closely related to the development at the same time of ecofeminism, an intersecting discipline. Since then its areas of concern have expanded significantly.

The field is today characterized by a notable diversity of stylistic, philosophical and cultural approaches to human environmental relationships, from personal and poetic reflections on environmental experience and arguments for panpsychism to Malthusian applications of game theory or the question of how to put an economic value on nature's services. A major debate arose in the 1970s and 80s was that of whether nature has intrinsic value in itself independent of human values or whether its value is merely instrumental, with ecocentric or deep ecology approaches emerging on the one hand versus consequentialist or pragmatist anthropocentric approaches on the other.

[ 5 ] Another debate that arose at this time was the debate over whether there really is such a thing as wilderness or not, or whether it is merely a cultural construct with colonialist implications as suggested by William Cronon . Since then, readings of environmental history and discourse have become more critical and refined. In this ongoing debate, a diversity of dissenting voices have emerged from different cultures around the world questioning the dominance of Western assumptions, helping to transform the field into a global area of thought.

[ 6 ] In recent decades, there has been a significant challenge to deep ecology and the concepts of nature that underlie it, some arguing that there is not really such a thing as nature at all beyond some self-contradictory and even politically dubious constructions of an ideal other that ignore the real human-environmental interactions that shape our world and lives.

[ 7 ] This has been alternately dubbed the postmodern, constructivist, and most recently post-naturalistic turn in environmental philosophy. Environmental aesthetics, design and restoration have emerged as important intersecting disciplines that keep shifting the boundaries of environmental thought, as have the science of climate change and biodiversity and the ethical, political and epistemological questions they raise.

[ 8 ] Social ecology movement [ edit ] Main article: Social ecology (Bookchin) In 1982, Murray Bookchin described his philosophy of Social Ecology [ 9 ] which provides a framework for understanding nature, our relationship with nature, and our relationships to each other.
According to this philosophy, defining nature as "unspoiled wilderness" denies that humans are biological creatures created by natural evolution. It also takes issue with the attitude that "everything that exists is natural", as this provides us with no framework for judging a landfill as less natural than a forest. Instead, social ecology defines nature as a tendency in healthy ecosystems toward greater levels of diversity, complementarity, and freedom. Practices that are congruent with these principles are more natural than those that are not.

Building from this foundation, Bookchin argues that "The ecological crisis is a social crisis": Practices which simplify biodiversity and dominate nature (monocropping, overfishing, clearcutting, etc.) are linked to societal tendencies to simplify and dominate humanity.

Such societies create cultural institutions like poverty, racism, patriarchy, homophobia, and genocide from this same desire to simplify and dominate.

In turn, Social Ecology suggests addressing the root causes of environmental degradation requires creating a society that promotes decentralization, interdependence, and direct democracy rather than profit extraction.

Deep ecology movement [ edit ] Main article: Deep ecology In 1984, George Sessions and Arne Næss articulated the principles of the new Deep Ecology Movement.

[ 10 ] These basic principles are: The well-being and flourishing of human and non-human life have value.

Richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of these values and are also values in themselves.

Humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to satisfy vital needs.

The flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a substantial decrease in the human population.

Present human interference with the nonhuman world is excessive, and the situation is rapidly worsening.

Policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic economic, technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs will be deeply different from the present.

The ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality (dwelling in situations of inherent value), rather than adhering to an increasingly higher standard of living . There will be a profound awareness of the difference between big and great.

Those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation directly or indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes.

Resacralization of nature [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Resacralization of nature .

[ edit ] Resacralization of nature is a term used in environmental philosophy to describe the process of restoring the sacred quality of nature . The primary assumption is that nature has a sanctified aspect that has become lost in modern times as a result of the secularization of contemporary worldviews . These secular worldviews are said to be directly responsible for the spiritual crisis in " modern man ", which has ultimately resulted in the current environmental degradation . This perspective emphasizes the significance of changing human perceptions of nature through the incorporation of various religious principles and values that connect nature with the divine . The Iranian philosopher Seyyed Hossein Nasr first conceptualized the theme of resacralization of nature in contemporary language, which was later expounded upon by a number of theologians and philosophers including Alister McGrath , Sallie McFague and Rosemary Radford Ruether .

See also [ edit ] Environmental Philosophy (journal) Environmental Values Environmental Ethics (journal) List of environmental philosophers Environmental hermeneutics Islamic environmentalism References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Belshaw, Christopher (2001).

Environmental Philosophy . Chesham: Acumen.

ISBN 1-902683-21-8 .

^ "International Association of Environmental Philosophy" . Retrieved 2008-07-30 .

^ Sarkar, 2012. "Environmental philosophy: from theory to practice," Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, West Sussex.

^ Weston, 1999. "An Invitation to Environmental Philosophy," Oxford University Press, New York, New York.

^ Benson, 2000.

^ Callicott & Nelson, 1998.

^ Vogel, 1999; Keulartz, 1999.

^ Auer, 2019.

^ Bookchin, 1982. "The Ecology of Freedom," Cheshire Books ^ Drengson, Inoue, 1995. "The Deep Ecology Movement," North Atlantic Books, Berkeley, California.

Further reading [ edit ] Armstrong, Susan, Richard Botzler.

Environmental Ethics: Divergence and Convergence, McGraw-Hill, Inc., New York, New York.

ISBN 9780072838459 .

Auer, Matthew, 2019.

Environmental Aesthetics in the Age of Climate Change , Sustainability , 11 (18), 5001.

Benson, John, 2000.

Environmental Ethics: An Introduction with Readings , Psychology Press.

Callicott, J. Baird, and Michael Nelson, 1998.

The Great New Wilderness Debate , University of Georgia Press.

Conesa-Sevilla, J., 2006.

The Intrinsic Value of the Whole: Cognitive and Utilitarian Evaluative Processes as they Pertain to  Ecocentric, Deep Ecological, and Ecopsychological "Valuing" , The Trumpeter , 22 (2), 26-42 .

Derr, Patrick, G, Edward McNamara, 2003.

Case Studies in Environmental Ethics, Bowman & Littlefield Publishers.

ISBN 0-7425-3136-8 DesJardins, Joseph R., Environmental Ethics Wadsworth Publishing Company, ITP, An International Thomson Publishing Company, Belmont, California.  A Division of Wadsworth, Inc.

Devall, W. and G. Sessions. 1985.

Deep Ecology: Living As if Nature Mattered , Salt Lake City: Gibbs M. Smith, Inc.

Drengson, Inoue, 1995. "The Deep Ecology Movement", North Atlantic Books, Berkeley, California.

Foltz, Bruce V., Robert Frodeman. 2004.

Rethinking Nature, Indiana University Press, 601 North Morton Street, Bloomington, IN 47404-3797 ISBN 0-253-21702-4 Gade, Anna M. 2019.

Muslim Environmentalisms: Religious and Social Foundations , Columbia University Press, New York Keulartz, Jozef, 1999.

The Struggle for Nature: A Critique of Environmental Philosophy , Routledge.

LaFreniere, Gilbert F, 2007.

The Decline of Nature: Environmental History and the Western Worldview, Academica Press, Bethesda, MD ISBN 978-1933146409 Light, Andrew, and Eric Katz,1996.

Environmental Pragmatism , Psychology Press.

Mannison, D., M. McRobbie, and R. Routley (ed), 1980.

Environmental Philosophy, Australian National University Matthews, Steve, 2002. [ https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/48856927.pdf A Hybrid Theory of Environmentalism , Essays in Philosophy, 3.

Næss, A. 1989.

Ecology, Community and Lifestyle: Outline of an Ecosophy, Translated by D. Rothenberg. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Oelschlaeger, Max, 1993.

The Idea of Wilderness: From Prehistory to the Age of Ecology, New Haven: Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0300053708 Pojman, Louis P., Paul Pojman.

Environmental Ethics, Thomson-Wadsworth, United States Sarvis, Will.

Embracing Philanthropic Environmentalism: The Grand Responsibility of Stewardship, (McFarland, 2019).

Sherer, D., ed, Thomas Attig.  1983.

Ethics and the Environment, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632.

ISBN 0-13-290163-3 VanDeVeer, Donald, Christine Pierce.

The Environmental Ethics and Policy Book, Wadsworth Publishing Company.  An International Thomson Publishing Company Vogel, Steven, 1999.

Environmental Philosophy After the End of Nature, Environmental Ethics 24 (1):23-39 Weston, 1999.

An Invitation to Environmental Philosophy, Oxford University Press, New York, New York.

Zimmerman, Michael E., J. Baird Callicott, George Sessions, Karen J. Warren, John Clark. 1993.

Environmental Philosophy: From Animal Rights to Radical Ecology, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 ISBN 0-13-666959-X External links [ edit ] "American Wilderness Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dr7qt
Cached time: 20250816110243
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.444 seconds
Real time usage: 0.619 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1297/1000000
Revision size: 12902/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 147725/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 538/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48357/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.260/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5668657/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  409.347      1 -total
 31.01%  126.923      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 30.42%  124.507      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 23.20%   94.977      1 Template:Reflist
 18.49%   75.699      1 Template:Cite_book
 16.69%   68.327      1 Template:Short_description
 13.49%   55.215      1 Template:Excerpt
 10.45%   42.771      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.98%   40.838      9 Template:Navbox
  7.64%   31.287      1 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3340881:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816110243 and revision id 1302022062. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_philosophy&oldid=1302022062 " Category : Environmental philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 23:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental philosophy 19 languages Add topic

