Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Political involvement up to 1970 3 Electoral system 4 1970 election 5 Presidency Toggle Presidency subsection 5.1 "The Chilean Path to Socialism" 5.2 Agrarian and literacy reforms 5.3 Economic policy 5.4 Foreign policy 5.5 Socioeconomic and political tensions 6 Foreign relations during Allende's presidency Toggle Foreign relations during Allende's presidency subsection 6.1 United States involvement 6.2 Relations with the Soviet Union 7 Crisis Toggle Crisis subsection 7.1 Resolution by the Chamber of Deputies 7.2 Allende's response 8 Coup Toggle Coup subsection 8.1 Death 9 Family 10 Memorials Toggle Memorials subsection 10.1 South America 10.2 Europe 10.3 North America 10.4 Africa 10.5 Asia 10.6 Postage stamps 11 Public perception 12 Electoral History Toggle Electoral History subsection 12.1 1952 Presidential election 12.2 1958 Presidential election 12.3 1964 Presidential election 12.4 1970 Presidential election 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Citations 14.2 Sources 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Salvador Allende 101 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла سرائیکی Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of Chile from 1970 to 1973 "Allende" redirects here. For other uses, see Allende (disambiguation) .

In this Chilean name , the first or paternal surname is Allende and the second or maternal family name is Gossens .

Salvador Allende Official portrait, 1970 28th President of Chile In office 3 November 1970 – 11 September 1973 Preceded by Eduardo Frei Montalva Succeeded by Augusto Pinochet 56th President of the Senate of Chile In office 27 December 1966 – 15 May 1969 Preceded by Tomás Reyes Vicuña Succeeded by Tomás Pablo Elorza Member of the Senate In office 15 May 1969 – 3 November 1970 Preceded by Constituency established Succeeded by Adonis Sepúlveda Acuña Constituency Chiloé , Aysén and Magallanes In office 15 May 1961 – 15 May 1969 Preceded by Carlos Alberto Martínez Succeeded by Hugo Ballesteros Reyes Constituency Aconcagua and Valparaíso In office 15 May 1953 – 15 May 1961 Preceded by Elías Lafertte Gaviño Succeeded by Raúl Ampuero Díaz Constituency Tarapacá and Antofagasta In office 15 May 1945 – 15 May 1953 Preceded by Luis Ambrosio Concha Succeeded by Aniceto Rodríguez Arenas Constituency Valdivia , Osorno , Llanquihue , Chiloé, Aysén and Magallanes Secretary of the Socialist Party of Chile In office January 1943 – July 1944 Preceded by Marmaduke Grove Succeeded by Bernardo Ibáñez Minister of Health and Social Welfare In office 28 September 1939 – 2 April 1942 President Pedro Aguirre Cerda Preceded by Miguel Etchebarne Riol Succeeded by Eduardo Escudero Forrastal Member of the Chamber of Deputies In office 15 May 1937 – 28 September 1939 Preceded by Humberto Casali Monreal Succeeded by Vasco Valdebenito García Constituency Quillota and Valparaíso Personal details Born Salvador Guillermo Allende Gossens ( 1908-06-26 ) 26 June 1908 Santiago , Chile Died 11 September 1973 (1973-09-11) (aged 65) Santiago, Chile Cause of death Suicide Resting place Santiago General Cemetery Political party Socialist Party of Chile Other political affiliations Popular Unity Coalition Popular Action Front Spouse Hortensia Bussi ​ ( m.

1940) ​ Children 3, including Beatriz and Isabel Relatives Allende family Alma mater University of Chile Profession Civil servant medical doctor Signature Website Foundation Salvador Guillermo Allende Gossens [ A ] (26 June 1908 – 11 September 1973) was a Chilean socialist politician [ 4 ] [ 5 ] who served as the 28th president of Chile from 1970 until his death in 1973 .

[ 6 ] As a socialist committed to democracy, [ 7 ] [ 8 ] he has been described as the first Marxist to be elected president in a liberal democracy in Latin America.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Allende's involvement in Chilean politics spanned a period of nearly forty years, during which he held various positions including senator , deputy , and cabinet minister . As a life-long committed member of the Socialist Party of Chile , whose foundation he had actively contributed to, he unsuccessfully ran for the national presidency in the 1952 , 1958 , and 1964 elections. In 1970 , he won the presidency as the candidate of the Popular Unity coalition in a close three-way race. He was elected in a run-off by Congress , as no candidate had gained a majority. In office, Allende pursued a policy he called " The Chilean Path to Socialism ". The coalition government was far from unanimous. Allende said that he was committed to democracy and represented the more moderate faction of the Socialist Party, while the radical wing sought a more radical course. Instead, the Communist Party of Chile favored a gradual and cautious approach that sought cooperation with Christian democrats , [ 7 ] which proved influential for the Italian Communist Party and the Historic Compromise .

[ 12 ] As president, Allende sought to nationalize major industries, expand education, and improve the living standards of the working class. He clashed with the right-wing parties that controlled Congress and with the judiciary. On 11 September 1973, the military moved to oust Allende in a coup d'état supported by the CIA , which initially denied the allegations.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 2000, the CIA admitted its role in the 1970 kidnapping of General René Schneider who had refused to use the army to stop Allende's inauguration.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Declassified documents released in 2023 showed that US president Richard Nixon , his national security advisor Henry Kissinger , and the United States government, which had branded Allende as a "dangerous" communist, [ 8 ] were aware of the military's plans to overthrow Allende's democratically elected government in the days before the coup d'état.

[ 17 ] As troops surrounded La Moneda Palace , Allende gave his last speech vowing not to resign.

[ 18 ] Later that day, Allende died by suicide in his office ; [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] the exact circumstances of his death are still disputed.

[ 22 ] [ B ] Following Allende's death, General Augusto Pinochet refused to return authority to a civilian government, and Chile was later ruled by the Government Junta , ending more than four decades of uninterrupted democratic governance, a period known as the Presidential Republic . The military junta that took over dissolved Congress, suspended the Constitution of 1925 , and initiated a program of persecuting alleged dissidents, in which at least 3,095 civilians disappeared or were killed.

[ 24 ] Pinochet's military dictatorship only ended after the successful internationally backed 1989 constitutional referendum led to the peaceful Chilean transition to democracy .

Early life [ edit ] Salvador Allende Castro and Laura Gossens Uribe, the parents of Salvador Allende Salvador Allende's birth certificate.

Allende was born on 26 June 1908 [ 25 ] in Santiago .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] He was the son of Salvador Allende Castro and Laura Gossens Uribe.

Allende's family belonged to the Chilean upper middle class and had a long tradition of political involvement in progressive and liberal causes. His grandfather was a prominent physician and a social reformist who founded one of the first secular schools in Chile.

[ 28 ] Salvador Allende was of Basque [ 29 ] and Belgian descent.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] In 1909, he moved with his family to the city of Tacna (then under Chilean administration ) until he returned to his country to live in Iquique in 1916. In 1918, he studied at the National Institute of Santiago, and from 1919 to 1921, he studied at the Liceo de Valdivia. In 1922, he entered the Eduardo de la Barra school at the age of 16, studying there until 1924.

[ 33 ] As a teenager, his main intellectual and political influence came from the shoe-maker Juan De Marchi , an Italian-born anarchist .

[ 28 ] In 1925, he attended the military service in the Cuirassier Regiment of Tacna .

[ 33 ] Allende was a talented athlete in his youth, being a member of the Everton de Viña del Mar sports club (named after the more famous English football club of the same name ).

[ 34 ] In 1926, at the age of 18, he studied medicine at the University of Chile in Santiago and was elected President of the Student Center in 1927. In 1928, he entered the Grand Lodge of Chile and was elected vice president of the Federation of Students of the University of Chile in 1929. In 1930, he became the representative of the students of the School of Medicine.

[ 33 ] During his time at medical school, Allende was influenced by Professor Max Westenhofer , a German pathologist who emphasized the social determinants of disease and social medicine .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In 1931, he was expelled from the university and relegated to the north. That same year, he retook his sixth year of medical school and graduated at age 23. In 1932, he began practicing as a physician and anatomo-pathologist in the morgue of the Van Buren Hospital. He became the union leader of the Valparaíso doctors, becoming 1st Regional Secretary in Valparaíso. In 1935, at age 27, he was relegated to the city of Caldera for the second time and, in 1936, he was imprisoned in the Popular Front in Valparaíso. In 1937, he was elected Deputy of Valparaíso and Aconcagua and, in 1938, he served as Undersecretary General of the Socialist Party of Chile .

[ 33 ] In 1933, Allende co-founded with Marmaduque Grove and others a section of the Socialist Party of Chile in Valparaíso [ 28 ] and became its chairman. He married Hortensia Bussi with whom he had three daughters. He was a Freemason , a member of the Lodge Progreso No. 4 in Valparaíso.

[ 37 ] In 1933, he published his doctoral thesis Higiene Mental y Delincuencia (Crime and Mental Hygiene) in which he criticized Cesare Lombroso 's proposals.

[ 38 ] Political involvement up to 1970 [ edit ] 1958 presidential campaign with a train with Allende's face called the "Victory Train" Salvador Allende in 1964 Chilean workers marching in support of Allende in 1964 In 1938, Allende was in charge of the electoral campaign of the Popular Front headed by Pedro Aguirre Cerda .

[ 28 ] The Popular Front's slogan was "Bread, a Roof and Work!" [ 28 ] After its electoral victory, he became Minister of Health in the Reformist Popular Front government which was dominated by the Radicals .

[ 28 ] While serving in that position, Allende was responsible for the passage of a wide range of progressive social reforms, including safety laws protecting workers in the factories, higher pensions for widows, maternity care, and free lunch programs for schoolchildren.

[ 39 ] Upon entering the government, Allende relinquished his congressional seat for Valparaíso, which he had won in 1937. Around that time, he wrote La Realidad Médico Social de Chile ( The Social and Medical Reality of Chile ). After Kristallnacht in Nazi Germany , Allende was one of 76 members of the Congress who sent a telegram to Adolf Hitler denouncing the persecution of Jews .

[ 40 ] Following President Aguirre Cerda's death in 1941, he was again elected deputy while the Popular Front was renamed Democratic Alliance .

In 1945, Allende became senator for the Valdivia , Llanquihue , Chiloé , Aisén , and Magallanes provinces; then for Tarapacá and Antofagasta in 1953; for Aconcagua and Valparaíso in 1961; and once more for Chiloé, Aisén, and Magallanes in 1969. He became president of the Chilean Senate in 1966. During the 1950s, Allende introduced legislation that established the Chilean national health service, the first program in the Americas to guarantee universal health care.

[ 41 ] His three unsuccessful bids for the presidency (in the 1952 , 1958 , and 1964 elections ) prompted Allende to joke that his epitaph would be "Here lies the next president of Chile." In 1952, as candidate for the Frente de Acción Popular (Popular Action Front, FRAP), he obtained only 5.4% of the votes, partly due to a division within socialist ranks over support for Carlos Ibáñez . In 1958, again as the FRAP candidate, Allende obtained 28.5% of the vote. This time, his defeat was attributed to votes lost to the populist Antonio Zamorano.

[ 42 ] This explanation has been questioned by modern research that suggest Zamorano's votes came from across the political spectrum.

[ 42 ] Electoral system [ edit ] Declassified documents show that from 1962 through 1964, the CIA spent a total of $2.6 million to finance the campaign of Eduardo Frei and $3 million in anti-Allende propaganda "to scare voters away from Allende's FRAP coalition". The CIA considered its role in the victory of Frei a great success.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] They argued that "the financial and organizational assistance given to Frei, the effort to keep Durán in the race, the propaganda campaign to denigrate Allende – were 'indispensable ingredients of Frei's success'", and they thought that his chances of winning and the good progress of his campaign would have been doubtful without the covert support of the government of the United States .

[ 45 ] Thus, in 1964 Allende lost once more as the FRAP candidate, polling 38.6% of the votes against 55.6% for Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei . As it became clear that the election would be a race between Allende and Frei, the political right – which initially had backed Radical Julio Durán– settled for Frei as "the lesser evil".

1970 election [ edit ] Main article: 1970 Chilean presidential election Allende as presidential candidate in 1970 Photo taken on 4 September 1970 at 00:57 by Paul Lowry Allende was considered part of the moderate wing of the socialists, with support from the communists who favored taking power via parliamentary democracy; in contrast, the left-wing of the socialists (led by Carlos Altamirano ) and several other far-left parties called for violent insurrection. Some argue, however, that this was reversed at the end of his period in office.

[ 46 ] [ C ] Allende won the 1970 Chilean presidential election as leader of the Unidad Popular ("Popular Unity") coalition. On 4 September 1970, he obtained a narrow plurality of 36.6% to 35.3% over Jorge Alessandri , a former president, with 27.8% going to a third candidate, Radomiro Tomic of the Christian Democratic Party (PDC). According to the Chilean constitution of the time, if no presidential candidate obtained a majority of the popular vote, Congress would choose one of the two candidates with the highest number of votes as the winner. Tradition was for Congress to vote for the candidate with the highest popular vote, regardless of margin. Former president Jorge Alessandri had been elected in 1958 with a plurality of 31.6% over Allende's 28.85%.

[ 48 ] One month after the election, on 20 October, while the Senate had still to reach a decision and negotiations were actively in place between the Christian Democrats and the Popular Unity, General René Schneider , Commander in Chief of the Chilean Army, was shot resisting a kidnap attempt by a group led by General Roberto Viaux . Hospitalized, he died of his wounds three days later on 23 October.

[ 49 ] Schneider was a defender of the "constitutionalist" doctrine that the army's role is exclusively professional, its mission being to protect the country's sovereignty and not to interfere in politics.

[ 50 ] General Schneider's death was widely disapproved of and, for the time, ended military opposition to Allende, [ 51 ] whom the Congress finally chose on 24 October. On 26 October, President Eduardo Frei named General Carlos Prats as commander in chief of the army to replace René Schneider.

[ 52 ] Allende assumed the presidency on 3 November 1970 after signing a Statute of Constitutional Guarantees proposed by the Christian Democrats in return for their support in Congress. In an extensive interview with Régis Debray in 1972, Allende explained his reasons for agreeing to the guarantees.

[ 53 ] Some critics [ who?

] have interpreted Allende's responses as an admission that signing the Statute was only a tactical move.

[ 54 ] Presidency [ edit ] Main article: Presidency of Salvador Allende "The Chilean Path to Socialism" [ edit ] Allende in 1970 In his speech to the Chilean legislature following his election, Allende made clear his intention to move Chile from a capitalist to a socialist society: We are moving towards socialism, not from an academic love for a doctrinaire system, but encouraged by the strength of our people, who know that it is an inescapable demand if we are to overcome backwardness and who feel that a socialist regime is the only way available to modern nations who want to build rationally in freedom, independence and dignity. We are moving towards socialism because the people, through their vote, have freely rejected capitalism as a system which has resulted in a crudely unequal society, a society deformed by social injustice and degraded by the deterioration of the very foundations of human solidarity.

[ 55 ] Upon assuming the presidency, Allende began to carry out his platform of implementing a socialist program called La vía chilena al socialismo ("the Chilean path to socialism"). That included nationalization of large-scale industries (notably copper mining and banking), government administration of the healthcare system and of the educational system (with the help of a United States educator, Jane A. Hobson-Gonzalez from Kokomo, Indiana ), a free-milk program for schoolchildren and in shanty towns of Chile, and an expansion of the land seizure [ 56 ] and redistribution already begun under his predecessor President Eduardo Frei Montalva , [ 57 ] [ failed verification ] who had nationalized between one-fifth and one-quarter of all the properties liable for takeover.

[ 58 ] Allende also intended to improve the socio-economic welfare of Chile's poorest citizens; [ 59 ] a key element was to provide employment, either in the new nationalized enterprises or on public-work projects.

[ 59 ] Agrarian and literacy reforms [ edit ] The Allende government worked to transform Chilean popular culture through formal changes to school curriculum and through broader cultural education initiatives, such as state-sponsored music festivals and tours of Chilean folklorists and nueva canción musicians.

[ 60 ] Economic policy [ edit ] This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chile real wages between 1967 and 1977. Orange lines mark the beginning and end of Allende's presidency.

[ 61 ] Chilean presidents were allowed a maximum term of six years, which may explain Allende's haste to restructure the economy. Not only was a major restructuring program organized (the Vuskovic plan ), he also had to make it a success if a left-wing successor to Allende was going to be elected. In the first year of Allende's term, the short-term economic results of the economy minister Pedro Vuskovic 's expansive monetary policy were highly favorable: 12% industrial growth and an 8.6% increase in GDP, accompanied by major declines in inflation (down from 34.9% to 22.1%) and unemployment (down to 3.8%). By 1972, the Chilean escudo had an inflation rate of 140%. The average real GDP contracted between 1971 and 1973 at an annual rate of a 5.6% negative growth, and the government's fiscal deficit soared while foreign reserves declined.

[ 62 ] Unemployment rates had dropped from 6.3% in 1970 to 3.5% in 1972 before dropping again in 1973 to the lowest ever recorded.

[ 63 ] The combination of inflation and price controls, together with the disappearance of basic commodities from supermarket shelves, led to the rise of black markets in rice, beans, sugar, and flour.

[ 64 ] The Chilean economic situation was also somewhat exacerbated due to a US-backed campaign to fund worker strikes in certain sectors of the economy.

[ 65 ] The Allende government announced it would default on debts owed to international creditors and foreign governments. Allende also froze all prices while raising salaries. His implementation of the policies was strongly opposed by landowners, employers, businessmen and transporters associations, and some civil servants and professional unions. The rightist opposition was led by the National Party , the Catholic Church (which in 1973 was displeased with the direction of educational policy), [ 66 ] and eventually the Christian Democrats . There were growing tensions with foreign multinational corporations and the government of the United States.

Allende undertook the pioneering Project Cybersyn , a distributed decision support system for decentralized economic planning , developed by British cybernetics expert Stafford Beer . Based on the experimental viable system model and the neural network approach to organizational design, the Project consisted of four modules: a network of telex machines ( Cybernet ) in all state-run enterprises that would transmit and receive information with the government in Santiago . Information from the field would be fed into statistical modeling software ( Cyberstride ) that would monitor production indicators, such as raw material supplies or high rates of worker absenteeism, in "almost" real time, alerting the workers in the first case and, in abnormal situations, if those parameters fell outside acceptable ranges by a very large degree, also the central government. The information would also be input into an economic simulation software ( CHECO , for CHilean ECOnomic simulator ) which featured a Bayesian filtering and control setting that the government could use to forecast the possible outcome of economic decisions. Finally, a sophisticated operations room ( Opsroom ) would provide a space where managers could see relevant economic data, formulate feasible responses to emergencies, and transmit advice and directives to enterprises and factories in alarm situations by using the telex network.

[ 67 ] In conjunction with the system, the Cybersyn development team also planned the Cyberfolk device system, a closed television circuit connected to an interactive apparatus that would enable the citizenry to actively participate in economic and political decision-making.

[ citation needed ] Allende raised wages on a number of occasions throughout 1970 and 1971, but the wage hikes were negated by ongoing inflation of Chile's fiat currency . Although price rises had been high even under Frei (27% a year between 1967 and 1970), a basic basket of consumer goods rose by 120% from 190 to 421 escudos in one month alone, August 1972. From 1970 to 1972, while Allende was in government, exports fell 24% and imports rose 26%, with imports of food rising an estimated 149%.

[ 68 ] [ incomplete short citation ] Export income fell due to a hard-hit copper industry; the price of copper on international markets fell by almost a third, and post-nationalization copper production fell as well. Copper is Chile's single most important export, as more than half of Chile's export receipts were from that sole commodity.

[ 69 ] [ incomplete short citation ] The price of copper fell from a peak of $66 per ton in 1970 to only $48–49 in 1971 and 1972.

[ 70 ] [ incomplete short citation ] Chile was already dependent on food imports, and the decline in export earnings coincided with declines in domestic food production following Allende's agrarian reforms.

[ 71 ] The rate of inflation fell from 36.1% in 1970 to 22.1% in 1971, while average real wages rose by 22.3% during 1971.

[ D ] [ 72 ] Additionally, Allende government had reduced inflation to 14% in the first nine months of 1971.

[ 73 ] Foreign policy [ edit ] In 1971, Chile re-established diplomatic relations with Cuba, joining Mexico and Canada in rejecting a previously established Organization of American States convention prohibiting governments in the Western Hemisphere from establishing diplomatic relations with Cuba. Shortly afterward, Cuban president Fidel Castro made a month-long visit to Chile . Originally, the visit was supposed to be one week; however, Castro enjoyed Chile and one week led to another. Despite his attitude of socialist solidarity, Castro was reportedly critical of Allende's policies. Castro was quoted as saying that "Marxism is a revolution of production", whereas "Allende's was a revolution of consumption." [ 74 ] Socioeconomic and political tensions [ edit ] See also: Chile truckers' strike In October 1972, the first of what were to be a wave of strikes was led first by truckers, and later by small businessmen, some (mostly professional) unions and some student groups. Other than the inevitable damage to the economy, the chief effect of the 24-day strike was to induce Allende to bring the head of the army, general Carlos Prats , into the government as Interior Minister.

[ 64 ] Allende also instructed the government to commandeer trucks to keep the nation from coming to a halt. Government supporters also helped to mobilize trucks and buses, but violence served as a deterrent to full mobilization, even with police protection for the strike-breakers. Allende's actions were eventually declared unlawful by the Chilean appeals court and the government was ordered to return trucks to their owners.

[ 75 ] Throughout his presidency, racial tensions between the poor descendants of indigenous people, who supported Allende's reforms, and the white elite increased.

[ 76 ] Throughout his presidency, Allende remained at odds with the Chilean Congress, which was dominated by the Christian Democratic Party. In 1964, Eduardo Frei had promised a "Revolution in Liberty", a middle-class revolution that was funded by the United States government's Alliance for Progress .

[ 77 ] Frei carried out a series of progressive reforms, including land reform , an issue that had not been touched since Chile's independence in the early 19th century. According to historian Marian Schlotterbeck, this was "[John F.] Kennedy's vision –?stave off the threat of communist revolution by improving standards of living across the continent".

[ 78 ] The Christian Democrats had campaigned on a socialist platform in the 1970 elections but drifted away from those positions during Allende's presidency, and accused Allende of leading Chile toward a Cuban-style dictatorship and sought to overturn many of his more radical policies. They eventually formed a coalition with the National Party .

[ 79 ] Allende and his opponents in Congress repeatedly accused each other of undermining the Chilean Constitution and acting undemocratically. Allende's increasingly bold socialist policies (partly in response to pressure from some of the more radical members within his coalition), combined with his close contacts with Cuba, heightened fears in Washington. The Nixon administration continued exerting economic pressure on Chile via multilateral organizations and continued to back Allende's opponents in the Chilean Congress. Almost immediately after his election, Nixon directed CIA and US State Department officials to "put pressure" on the Allende government.

[ 80 ] His economic policies were used by economists Rudi Dornbusch and Sebastián Edwards to coin the term macroeconomic populism .

[ 81 ] In 1972, Chile's inflation stood at 150%.

[ 82 ] Foreign relations during Allende's presidency [ edit ] Salvador Allende took office in a difficult international context. Chile was aligned with the United States in 1970. Elsewhere in Latin America, Brazil , Argentina and Bolivia were ruled by conservative military dictatorships (soon to be joined by Uruguay ).

Colombia and Venezuela also had conservative, but democratically elected, governments. Only Cuba , Peru and Mexico viewed the Chilean socialist experiment with sympathy. Under Allende's presidency, Chile joined the Non-Aligned Movement , a position that was then almost unique in Latin America.

[ 83 ] Chile, which until then had been fussy about ideological boundaries, diversified its diplomatic and trade relations, regardless of the internal political regime of each country. The government established diplomatic relations with Cuba, Guyana , seven African countries ( Congo , Equatorial Guinea , Libya , Madagascar , Nigeria , Tanzania , and Zaire ), three European countries (Albania, East Germany and Hungary) and seven Asian countries (Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Cambodia, North Korea, China, Mongolia, South Vietnam and North Vietnam).

[ 83 ] It tried to promote Latin American integration. At the 1971 Latin American Economic and Social Council, the Chilean representative Gonzalo Martner García formulated four major proposals, summarized by the historian Jorge Magasich: "1) to ask the United States for a moratorium on external debt for a decade in order to allocate these sums to development policies; 2) to create a Latin American central bank to "invest Latin America's reserves, 70% of which are in the United States", to receive "the region's deposits and assets" and to coordinate the operations of the central banks in order to protect the region from financial turbulence; 3) Promote the creation of a global technology fund for development, fed by compulsory contributions of licenses, industrial processes and other funds for research, so as to limit the abuses associated with technological property; 4) Create a Latin American organisation for the development of science and technology appropriate to the region." [ 83 ] He began negotiations with Bolivia over the historical dispute between the two countries (Bolivia had lost access to the sea since the War of the Pacific between 1879 and 1884) and welcomed Bolivia's maritime request. Nevertheless, relations became tense again following a coup d'état by Bolivian General Hugo Banzer in August 1971. At the same time, Chile granted asylum to thousands of political exiles from Latin American countries.

[ 83 ] Salvador Allende openly rejected the influence of the Organization of American States (OAS), a body close to the United States government, and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which favored the interests of more developed countries. On the other hand, he was a fervent defender of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), which he considered to be more representative since it allowed economic and trade issues to be negotiated on an equal legal footing. In a speech to UNCTAD, he also warned of the policy of the United States, Japan and the European Economic Community to progressively eliminate obstacles to free trade . He said that "freeing up trade ... erases at a stroke the benefits that the Generalised System of Preferences brings to developing countries".

[ 83 ] Allende's Popular Unity government tried to maintain normal relations with the United States. When Chile nationalized its copper industry , the United States government cut off support and increased its support to the opposition. Forced to seek alternative sources of trade and finance, Chile gained commitments from the Soviet Union to invest some $400 million in Chile in the next six years. The United States Department of State put it at $115 million from Eastern Europe and $65 million from China, while Soviet and Chilean Popular Unity sources put it at total of $620 million from socialist countries. Much of the credit was never utilized, and the Soviets were not willing to subsidize Chile the same way they did for Cuba.

[ 84 ] Allende's government was disappointed that it received far less economic assistance from the Soviets than it hoped for. Trade between the two countries did not significantly increase and the credits were mainly linked to the purchase of Soviet equipment. Moreover, credits from the Soviet Union were much less than those provided to the People's Republic of China and countries of the Eastern Bloc . When Allende visited the Soviet Union in late 1972 in search of more aid and additional lines of credit after three years, he was turned down.

[ 85 ] United States involvement [ edit ] Main article: United States intervention in Chile The United States opposition to Allende started several years before he was elected President of Chile. Declassified documents show that from 1962 to 1964, the CIA spent $3 million on anti-Allende propaganda "to scare voters away from Allende's FRAP coalition" and spent a total of $2.6 million to finance the presidential campaign of Eduardo Frei .

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The possibility of Allende winning Chile's 1970 election was deemed a disaster by the Nixon administration that wanted to protect American geopolitical interests by preventing the spread of Communism during the Cold War .

[ 86 ] In September 1970, then United States president Richard Nixon informed the CIA that an Allende government in Chile would not be acceptable and authorized $10 million to stop Allende from coming to power or unseat him.

[ 87 ] A CIA document declared, "It is firm and continuing policy that Allende be overthrown by a coup." [ 88 ] Henry Kissinger 's 40 Committee and the CIA planned to impede Allende's investiture as President of Chile with covert efforts known as "Track I" and "Track II"; Track I sought to prevent Allende from assuming power via so-called "parliamentary trickery", while under the Track II initiative, the CIA tried to convince key Chilean military officers to carry out a coup.

[ 87 ] Some point to the involvement of the Defense Intelligence Agency agents that allegedly secured the missiles used to bombard La Moneda Palace .

[ 89 ] In fact, open US military aid to Chile continued during the Allende administration, and the national government was very much aware of that although there is no record that Allende himself believed that such assistance was anything but beneficial to Chile. During Richard Nixon 's presidency, United States officials attempted to prevent Allende's election by financing political parties aligned with opposition candidate Jorge Alessandri and supporting strikes in the mining and transportation sectors.

[ 90 ] After the 1970 election, the Track I operation attempted to incite Chile's outgoing president, Eduardo Frei Montalva , to persuade his party ( PDC ) to vote in Congress for Alessandri.

[ 91 ] Under the plan, Alessandri would resign his office immediately after assuming it and call new elections. Eduardo Frei would then be constitutionally able to run again (since the Chilean Constitution did not allow a president to hold two consecutive terms, but allowed multiple non-consecutive ones), and presumably easily defeat Allende. The Chilean Congress instead chose Allende as president, on the condition that he would sign a "Statute of Constitutional Guarantees" affirming that he would respect and obey the Chilean Constitution and that his reforms would not undermine any of its elements. Track II was aborted, as parallel initiatives already underway within the Chilean military rendered it moot.

[ 92 ] During the second term of office of Democratic President Bill Clinton , the CIA acknowledged having played a role in Chilean politics before the coup, but its degree of involvement is debated. The CIA was notified by its Chilean contacts of the impending coup two days in advance but contends it "played no direct role in" the coup.

[ 93 ] Allende in 1972 Much of the internal opposition to Allende's policies came from the business sector, and recently released United States government documents confirm that the United States indirectly [ 65 ] funded the truck drivers' strike, [ 94 ] which exacerbated the already chaotic economic situation before the coup. The most prominent United States corporations in Chile before Allende's presidency were the Anaconda and Kennecott copper companies and ITT Corporation , International Telephone and Telegraph. Both copper corporations aimed to expand privatized copper production in the city of Sewell in the Chilean Andes , where the world's largest underground copper mine "El Teniente", was located.

[ 95 ] At the end of 1968, according to United States Department of Commerce data, United States corporate holdings in Chile amounted to $964 million. Anaconda and Kennecott accounted for 28% of United States holdings, but ITT had by far the largest holding of any single corporation, with an investment of $200 million in Chile.

[ 95 ] In 1970, before Allende was elected, ITT owned 70% of Chitelco, the Chilean Telephone Company and funded El Mercurio , a Chilean right-wing newspaper. Documents released in 2000 by the CIA confirmed that before the elections of 1970, ITT gave $700,000 to Allende's conservative opponent, Jorge Alessandri, with help from the CIA on how to channel the money safely. ITT president Harold Geneen also offered $1 million to the CIA to help defeat Allende in the elections.

[ 96 ] After General Augusto Pinochet assumed power, United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told President Nixon that the United States "didn't do it" (referring to the coup) but "we helped them... created the conditions as great as possible".

[ 97 ] Recent documents declassified under the Clinton administration 's Chile Declassification Project show that the United States government and the CIA sought to overthrow Allende in 1970 immediately before he took office (" Project FUBELT "). Many documents regarding the United States intervention in Chile remain classified. Those that have been declassified showed that Nixon, Kissinger, and the United States government were aware of the coup and the plans to overthrow Allende's democratically elected government.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Relations with the Soviet Union [ edit ] Political and moral support came mostly through the Communist Party and unions of the Soviet Union. For instance, Allende received the Lenin Peace Prize from the Soviet Union in 1972. At the same time, there were some fundamental differences between Allende and Soviet political analysts, who believed that some violence or measures that those analysts "theoretically considered to be just", should have been used.

[ 100 ] Declarations from KGB General Nikolai Leonov , former Deputy Chief of the First Chief Directorate of the KGB, confirmed that the Soviet Union supported Allende's government economically, politically and militarily.

[ 100 ] Leonov stated in an interview at the Chilean Center of Public Studies (CEP) that the Soviet economic support included over $100 million in credit, three fishing ships (that distributed 17,000 tons of frozen fish to the population), factories (as help after the 1971 earthquake), 3,100 tractors, 74,000 tons of wheat and more than a million tins of condensed milk.

[ 100 ] In mid-1973, the Soviets approved the delivery of weapons (artillery and tanks) to the Chilean Army. When news of an attempt from the Army to depose Allende through a coup d'état reached Soviet officials, the shipment was redirected to another country.

[ 100 ] Allende is mentioned in a book written by the official historian of the British Intelligence MI5 , Christopher Andrew .

[ 101 ] According to SIS and Andrew, the book is based on the handwritten notes of KGB archivist defector Vasili Mitrokhin .

[ 102 ] Andrew alleged that the KGB said that Allende "was made to understand the necessity of reorganizing Chile's army and intelligence services, and of setting up a relationship between Chile's and the USSR's intelligence services." [ 103 ] The Soviets observed closely whether the alternative form of socialism could work, and they did not interfere with the Chileans' decisions.

Nikolai Leonov affirmed that whenever he tried to give advice to Latin American leaders, he was usually turned down by them, and he was told that they had their own understanding on how to conduct political business in their countries. Leonov added that the relationships of KGB agents with Latin American leaders did not involve intelligence because their intelligence target was the United States. Since many North Americans were living in the region, the Soviets were focusing in recruiting agents from the United States. Latin America was also a better region for KGB agents to get in touch with their informants from the CIA or other contacts from the United States than inside that country.

[ 100 ] Crisis [ edit ] Monument to Salvador Allende, Munchner Platz, Dresden On 29 June 1973, Colonel Roberto Souper surrounded the presidential palace, La Moneda , with his tank regiment but failed to depose the government.

[ 104 ] That failed coup d'état – known as the Tanquetazo ("tank putsch") – organised by the nationalist Patria y Libertad paramilitary group, was followed by a general strike at the end of July that included the copper miners of El Teniente.

[ citation needed ] In August 1973, a constitutional crisis occurred, and the Supreme Court of Chile publicly complained about the inability of the Allende government to enforce the law of the land. On 22 August, the Chamber of Deputies (with the Christian Democrats uniting with the National Party) accused the government of unconstitutional acts through Allende's refusal to promulgate constitutional amendments, already approved by the Chamber, which would have prevented his government from continuing his massive nationalization plan [ 105 ] and called upon the military to enforce constitutional order.

[ 106 ] For months, Allende had feared calling upon the Carabineros ("Carabineers", the national police force), suspecting them of disloyalty to his government. On 9 August, President Allende appointed General Carlos Prats as Minister of Defence . On 24 August 1973, General Prats was forced to resign both as defense minister and as the commander-in-chief of the army , embarrassed by both the Alejandrina Cox incident and a public protest in front of his house by the wives of his generals. General Augusto Pinochet replaced him as Army commander-in-chief the same day.

[ 106 ] Resolution by the Chamber of Deputies [ edit ] On 22 August 1973, the Christian Democrats and the National Party members of the Chamber of Deputies joined to vote 81 to 47 in favor of a resolution that made accusation of disregard by the government of the separation of powers and arrogating legislative and judicial prerogatives to the executive branch of government, among other alleged constitutional violations.

[ 107 ] The resolution asked the authorities to "put an immediate end" to "breach[es of] the Constitution ... with the goal of redirecting government activity toward the path of law and ensuring the Constitutional order of our Nation, and the essential underpinnings of democratic co-existence among Chileans." [ 108 ] The resolution declared that Allende's government sought "to conquer absolute power with the obvious purpose of subjecting all citizens to the strictest political and economic control by the state ... [with] the goal of establishing ... a totalitarian system" and claimed that the government had made "violations of the Constitution ... a permanent system of conduct".

[ 108 ] Specifically, the government of Allende was accused of ruling by decree and thwarting the normal legislative system; refusing to enforce judicial decisions against its partisans; not carrying out sentences and judicial resolutions that contravened its objectives; ignoring the decrees of the independent General Comptroller's Office; sundry media offenses, including usurping control of the National Television Network and applying economic pressure against those media organizations that were not unconditional supporters of the government; allowing its supporters to assemble with arms, and preventing the same by its right-wing opponents; supporting more than 1,500 illegal takeovers of farms; illegal repression of the El Teniente miners' strike; and illegally limiting emigration.

[ 108 ] Finally, the resolution condemned the creation and development of government-protected socialist armed groups, which were said to be "headed towards a confrontation with the armed forces". President Allende's efforts to re-organize the military and the police forces were characterized as "notorious attempts to use the armed and police forces for partisan ends, destroy their institutional hierarchy, and politically infiltrate their ranks".

[ 108 ] Allende's response [ edit ] The resolution was later used by Pinochet as a way to justify the coup, which occurred two weeks later.

[ 109 ] On 24 August 1973, two days after the resolution, Allende responded. He accused the opposition of trying to incite a military coup by encouraging the armed forces to disobey civilian authorities.

[ 110 ] He described the Congress's declaration as "destined to damage the country's prestige abroad and create internal confusion", and predicted: "It will facilitate the seditious intention of certain sectors." He observed that the declaration (passed 81–47 in the Chamber of Deputies) had not obtained the two-thirds Senate majority "constitutionally required" to convict the president of abuse of power , thus the Congress was "invoking the intervention of the armed forces and of Order against a democratically-elected government" and "subordinat[ing] political representation of national sovereignty to the armed institutions, which neither can nor ought to assume either political functions or the representation of the popular will." [ 111 ] Allende argued that he had obeyed constitutional means for including military men to the cabinet at the service of civic peace and national security, defending republican institutions against insurrection and terrorism. In contrast, he said that Congress was promoting a coup d’état or a civil war with a declaration full of affirmations that had already been refuted beforehand and which in substance and process (directly handing it to the ministers rather than directly handing it to the president) violated a dozen articles of the then-current constitution. He further argued that the legislature was usurping the government's executive function.

[ 111 ] Allende wrote: "Chilean democracy is a conquest by all of the people. It is neither the work nor the gift of the exploiting classes, and it will be defended by those who, with sacrifices accumulated over generations, have imposed it ... With a tranquil conscience ... I sustain that never before has Chile had a more democratic government than that over which I have the honor to preside ... I solemnly reiterate my decision to develop democracy and a state of law to their ultimate consequences...Congress has made itself a bastion against the transformations ... and has done everything it can to perturb the functioning of the finances and of the institutions, sterilizing all creative initiatives." Adding that economic and political means would be needed to relieve the country's current crisis, and that the Congress was obstructing said means; having already paralyzed the state, they sought to destroy it. He concluded by calling upon the workers and all democrats and patriots to join him in defending the Chilean constitution and the revolutionary process.

[ 111 ] Coup [ edit ] Main article: 1973 Chilean coup d'état In early September 1973, Allende floated the idea of resolving the constitutional crisis with a plebiscite .

[ E ] His speech outlining such a solution was scheduled for Tuesday, 11 September but he was never able to deliver it. On that same day, the Chilean military under Pinochet, aided by the United States and its CIA , staged a coup against Allende, [ 113 ] who was at the head of the first democratically elected Marxist government in Latin America.

[ 114 ] Historian Peter Winn described the 1973 coup as one of the most violent events in Chilean history.

[ 115 ] It led to a series of human rights abuses in Chile under Pinochet , who initiated a brutal and long-lasting campaign of political suppression through torture, murder, and exile, which significantly weakened leftist opposition to the military dictatorship of Chile , which ruled the country until 1990.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Due to the coup's occurrence on the same date as the 11 September attacks in the United States, it has sometimes been referred to as "the other 9/11".

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Death [ edit ] Main article: Death of Salvador Allende "Workers of my country, I have faith in Chile and its destiny. Other men will overcome this dark and bitter moment when treason seeks to prevail. Keep in mind that, much sooner than later, the great avenues will again be opened through which will pass free men to construct a better society. Long live Chile! Long live the people! Long live the workers!" —President Allende's farewell speech, 11 September 1973.

[ 18 ] Just before the capture of La Moneda (the Presidential Palace), with gunfire and explosions clearly audible in the background, Allende gave his farewell speech to Chileans on live radio, speaking of himself in the past tense, of his love for Chile and of his deep faith in its future. He stated that his commitment to Chile did not allow him to take an easy way out, and he would not be used as a propaganda tool by those he called "traitors" (he refused an offer of safe passage).

[ 121 ] Juan Seoane, Chief of President Allende's Bodyguard at the time of the events – and who was with Allende until moments before his death – declared in an interview reported by the University of Chile : [ 122 ] "Allende began to say goodbye to us one by one, he gave us a hug and told us ‘ Thank you for everything, comrade, thank you for everything '”, and then he said that he was going to leave last. He walked to the end of the line with his AK, turned around behind a wall, and then he shouted, ' Allende doesn't surrender …!'. The shot was heard as fifteen meters from where we were". (Reports in El Tiempo and other Latin-American media confirmed Allende´s last words).

[ 123 ] Shortly afterwards, the coup plotters announced that Allende had committed suicide. An official announcement declared that the weapon he had used was an automatic rifle. Before his death he had been photographed several times holding an AK-47 , a gift from Fidel Castro .

[ 124 ] He was found dead with that gun, according to contemporaneous statements made by officials in the Pinochet regime. In an interview with David Frost , the daughter of Allende's first cousin, Isabel Allende , said that, at a family lunch nine days before his death, Allende had said that he would either stay till the end of this term of presidency or he would be taken out feet first.

[ 125 ] Lingering doubts regarding the manner of Allende's death persisted throughout the period of the Pinochet regime . Many Chileans and independent observers refused to accept on faith the government's version of events amid speculation that Allende had been murdered by government agents. Pinochet had long left power and died when in 2011 a Chilean court opened a criminal investigation into the circumstances of Allende's death.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Statue of Allende in front of the Palacio de la Moneda . A portion of the statue's drapery, shown worn as a cape, is the national flag of Chile.

The ongoing criminal investigation led to a May 2011 court order that Allende's remains be exhumed and autopsied by an international team of experts.

[ 128 ] Results of the autopsy were officially released in mid-July 2011. The team of experts concluded that the former president had shot himself with an AK-47 assault rifle.

[ 129 ] In December 2011 the judge in charge of the investigation affirmed the experts' findings and ruled Allende's death a suicide.

[ 130 ] On 11 September 2012, the 39th anniversary of Allende's death, a Chilean appeals court unanimously upheld the trial court's ruling, officially closing the case.

[ 131 ] The Guardian reported that a scientific autopsy of the remains had confirmed that "Salvador Allende committed suicide during the 1973 coup that toppled his socialist government." [ 128 ] It went on to say: British ballistics expert David Prayer said Allende died of two shots fired from an assault rifle that was held between his legs and under his chin and was set to fire automatically. The bullets blew out the top of his head and killed him instantly. The forensics team's conclusion was unanimous. Spanish expert Francisco Etxeberria said: "We have absolutely no doubt" that Allende committed suicide.

[ 128 ] Isabel Allende Bussi , the daughter of Allende and a member of the Senate of Chile told the BBC that: "The report conclusions are consistent with what we already believed. When faced with extreme circumstances, he made the decision of taking his own life, instead of being humiliated." [ 132 ] The definitive and unanimous results produced by the 2011 Chilean judicial investigation appear to have laid to rest decades of nagging suspicions that Allende might have been assassinated by the Chilean Armed Forces. Public acceptance of the suicide theory had already been growing for much of the previous decade. In a post-junta Chile where restrictions on free speech were steadily eroding, independent and seemingly reliable witnesses began to tell their stories to the news media and to human rights researchers. The cumulative weight of the facts reported by those witnesses provided enough support for many previously unconfirmed details relating to Allende's death.

[ 133 ] Family [ edit ] Main article: Allende family Allende with his wife Hortensia Bussi in 1971.

Well-known relatives of Salvador Allende include his daughter Isabel Allende Bussi (a politician) and his cousin Isabel Allende Llona (a writer).

Memorials [ edit ] On the 30th anniversary of his death, an Allende Museum opened in Chile, and an Allende foundation has since managed his estate.

[ 134 ] South America [ edit ] Memorials to Allende include a statue in front of the Palacio de la Moneda . The placement of the statue was controversial; it was placed facing the eastern edge of the Plaza de la Ciudadanía , a plaza which contains memorials to a number of Chilean statesmen. However, the statue is not located in the plaza, but rather on a surrounding sidewalk facing an entrance to the plaza. His tomb is a major tourist attraction. Allende is buried in the general cemetery of Santiago .

[ 135 ] There is a square in São Paulo , Brazil , named after Allende. Also in Brazil , Rio De Janeiro has a BRT station named after him. In Nicaragua , the tourist port of Managua is named after him. The Salvador Allende Port is located near downtown Managua. The broken glasses of Allende were given to the Chilean National History Museum in 1996 by a woman who had found them in La Moneda in 1973.

[ 136 ] Europe [ edit ] The remains of Salvador Allende's glasses following his death, as displayed in the Chilean National History Museum In 1984, a memorial stone dedicated to him was erected in the Gajnice neighbourhood of Zagreb .

[ 137 ] There is a bronze bust of him accompanied by a memorial stone in the Donaupark in Vienna .

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] In Istanbul, a statue of Allende can be found side by side with Mustafa Kemal Atatürk in Ataşehir .

[ 140 ] European landmarks named after Allende include one of the major streets in the Karaburma neighborhood of Belgrade , an avenue linking the parishes of Caxias and Paço de Arcos in Oeiras, Portugal , a park in La Spezia, Italy, a bridge in Terni, Italy, and a street in Sokol District , Moscow, which was named after Allende soon after his death. A memorial plaque is also installed there. Further tributes include Salvador Allende Square [ fr ] in the 7th arrondissement of Paris , near the Chilean embassy, the Plaza de Salvador Allende square in Viladecans , near Barcelona , and the Salvador-Allende-Straße [ de ] avenue and a nearby bridge [ de ] in Berlin , [ 141 ] Streets in several other German cities, especially in former East Germany but also in the West, are named after Allende, as is a street in Szekszárd , Hungary, and Allende Park in Budapest .

[ 142 ] Allende Avenue (5th Avenue) in Harlow, Essex , was renamed to Zelenskyy Avenue in May 2023 in recognition of the president of Ukraine, Volodymyr Zelenskyy , during the Russian invasion of Ukraine .

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] North America [ edit ] In 2009, the Salvador Allende Monument, Montreal , was installed in Parc Jean-Drapeau . A residential street in Toronto has also been named after him.

[ 145 ] Africa [ edit ] There is a street named after Allende in the capital city of Maputo , Mozambique.

[ 146 ] Asia [ edit ] The Malaysian rock band Martin Vengadesan & The Stalemate Factor paid tribute with a folk song called The Final Hours Of Salvador Allende [ 147 ] which was released in 2018.

Postage stamps [ edit ] November 1973 [ 148 ] USSR postage stamp. Probably the first Allende stamp, released after the coup.

One of the first postage stamps to commemorate Salvador Allende, released after the 1973 coup in Chile , was the Soviet one. It was issued just two months after the event and had a circulation of 3.8 million. The issue was designed by the painter A. Kovrizhkin and bore the title "Salvador Allende, President of the Republic of Chile, Laureate of the Lenin Peace Prize, 1908 – 11.IX.1973".

[ 149 ] A stamp was released by Magyar Posta in Hungary in 1974 shortly after the 11 September, 1973 coup in Chile that ended the socialist government of Salvador Allende. The stamp bore an image of Allende that had become popular during his election campaign in 1970.

[ citation needed ] Two other stamps, both on the tenth anniversary of the coup, represent extreme reactions to the event.

Scott Cuba #2605 shows the burning presidential palace of La Moneda ("The Mint") and a picture of Allende. The caption refers to him as having "fallen in combat".

[ 150 ] In contrast, Chile , still under the military dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet at that time, issued Scott Chile #656, labeled "Ten Years of Liberty," celebrating the decade since the fall of Allende and the rise of the junta .

[ 150 ] Public perception [ edit ] Main article: Public perception of Salvador Allende Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Allende is seen as a significant historical figure in Chile. The former social-democratic president Ricardo Lagos honored Allende as a humanist and a statesman.

[ 134 ] Electoral History [ edit ] 1952 Presidential election [ edit ] Candidate Party Popular vote Congress vote Votes % Votes % Carlos Ibáñez del Campo Independent 446,439 46.79 132 91.67 Arturo Matte Larraín Liberal Party 265,357 27.81 12 8.33 Pedro Enrique Alfonso Barrios Radical Party 190,360 19.95 Salvador Allende Socialist Party 51,975 5.45 Total 954,131 100.00 144 100.00 Valid votes 954,131 99.69 144 82.76 Invalid/blank votes 2,971 0.31 30 17.24 Total votes 957,102 100.00 174 100.00 Registered voters/turnout 1,105,029 86.61 192 90.62 Source: Nohlen, Chilean Electoral Database 1958 Presidential election [ edit ] Candidate Party Popular vote Congress vote Votes % Votes % Jorge Alessandri Independent ( Liberal – Conservative ) 389,909 31.56 147 84.97 Salvador Allende Socialist Party 356,493 28.85 26 15.03 Eduardo Frei Montalva Christian Democratic Party 255,769 20.70 Luis Bossay Radical Party 192,077 15.55 Antonio Zamorano Independent 41,304 3.34 Total 1,235,552 100.00 173 100.00 Valid votes 1,235,552 98.82 173 92.51 Invalid/blank votes 14,798 1.18 14 7.49 Total votes 1,250,350 100.00 187 100.00 Registered voters/turnout 1,497,493 83.50 192 97.40 Source: Nohlen, Chilean Electoral Database 1964 Presidential election [ edit ] Candidate Party Votes % Eduardo Frei Montalva Christian Democratic Party 1,409,012 56.09 Salvador Allende Socialist Party 977,902 38.93 Julio Durán Radical Party 125,233 4.99 Total 2,512,147 100.00 Valid votes 2,512,147 99.27 Invalid/blank votes 18,550 0.73 Total votes 2,530,697 100.00 Registered voters/turnout 2,915,121 86.81 Source: Nohlen, Chilean Electoral Database 1970 Presidential election [ edit ] Candidate Party Popular vote Congress vote Votes % Votes % Salvador Allende Popular Unity 1,070,334 36.61 153 81.38 Jorge Alessandri Independent ( National Party ) 1,031,159 35.27 35 18.62 Radomiro Tomic Christian Democratic Party 821,801 28.11 Total 2,923,294 100.00 188 100.00 Valid votes 2,923,294 98.93 188 96.41 Invalid/blank votes 31,505 1.07 7 3.59 Total votes 2,954,799 100.00 195 100.00 Registered voters/turnout 3,539,747 83.47 200 97.50 Source: Nohlen, Chilean Election Database , Tricel [ 151 ] [ 152 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ US : / ɑː ˈ j ɛ n d eɪ , - d i / ah- YEND -ay, -⁠ee , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] UK : / æ ˈ -, aɪ ˈ ɛ n -/ [ 3 ] Latin American Spanish: [salβaˈðoɾ ɣiˈʝeɾmo aˈʝende ˈɣosens] ^ The precise matter of Allende's death is a subject of controversy. After decades of suspicions that Allende might have been assassinated by the Chilean Armed Forces, a Chilean court in 2011 authorized the exhumation and autopsy of Allende's remains. A team of international experts examined the remains and concluded that Allende had shot himself with an AK-47 assault rifle.

[ 23 ] ^ The Communist Party belonged to the moderate wing of the Unidad Popular coalition, while Allende's Socialist Party was split between two factions; the moderate vía pacífica and the radical vía insurreccional .

[ 47 ] ^ Quote from p. 195 – "Looking at the traditional macroeconomic variables, the first year of the UP Government achieved relatively spectacular results for the Chilean economy (see tables 7.7 and 7.8)".

^ Allende's personal adviser, Juan Garcés, escaped the siege on the Moneda Palace and fled to Europe, where he published testimonies about the last days of the administration: "On September 10, Allende had assembled his ministers in an extraordinary council to finalize the call announcing the plebiscite." [ 112 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Allende" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2019 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ "Allende Gossens" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ "Allende, Isabel" .

Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English .

Longman . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ Patsouras, Louis (2005).

Marx in Context . iUniverse. p. 265.

In Chile, where a large socialist movement was in place for decades, a socialist, Salvadore Allende, led a popular front electoral coalition to victory in 1970.

^ Medina, Eden (2014).

Cybernetic Revolutionaries: Technology and Politics in Allende's Chile . MIT Press. p. 39.

... in Allende's socialism.

^ "Profile of Salvador Allende" . BBC. 8 September 2003.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2017 . Retrieved 15 May 2009 .

Chile's Salvador Allende was murdered in a United States-backed coup on 11 September 1973 – three years earlier he had become Latin America's first democratically-elected Marxist president.

^ a b Cohen, Youssef (1994).

Radicals, Reformers, and Reactionaries: The Prisoner's Dilemma and the Collapse of Democracy in Latin America . Chicago, Illinois: University of Chicago Press. pp.

98 – 118 .

ISBN 978-0-2261-1271-8 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 – via Google Books.

^ a b Busky, Donald F. (2000).

Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

195 – 196 .

ISBN 978-0-275-96886-1 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 – via Google Books.

^ "Chile: The Bloody End of a Marxist Dream" .

Time . 24 September 1973.

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

Allende's downfall had implications that reached far beyond the borders of Chile. His had been the first democratically elected Marxist government in Latin America.

^ Mabry, Don (2003).

"Chile: Allende's Rise and Fall" .

Historical Text Archive . Archived from the original on 30 October 2006 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Ross, Jen (12 December 2006).

"Controversial legacy of former Chilean dictator" .

Christian Science Monitor .

ISSN 0882-7729 .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2008 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

Gen. Capitalist Augusto Pinochet, who overthrew Chile's democratically elected socialist government in a 1973 coup and ruled for 17 years, died Sunday without ever having been condemned for the human rights abuses committed during his rule.

^ Ayala, Fernando (31 October 2020).

"Salvador Allende and the Chilean way to socialism" .

Meer . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ "Chile: The Bloody End of a Marxist Dream" .

Time . 24 September 1973.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 5 August 2014 .

"Allende's downfall had implications that reached far beyond the borders of Chile. His had been the first democratically elected Marxist government in Latin America. ... Recently, Time Correspondent Rudolph Rauch visited a group of truckers camped near Santiago who were enjoying a lavish communal meal of steak, vegetables, wine and empanadas (meat pies). 'Where does the money for that come from?' he inquired. 'From the CIA,' the truckers answered laughingly. In Washington, the CIA denied the allegation." ^ Winn, Peter (2010). "Furies of the Andes". In Grandin & Joseph, Greg & Gilbert (ed.).

A Century of Revolution . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. pp.

239– 275.

^ Briscoe, David (20 September 2000).

"CIA Admits Involvement in Chile" .

ABC News . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Evans, Michael (10 August 2023).

"National Security Archive: Chile's Coup at 50: Kissinger Briefed Nixon on Failed 1970 CIA Plot to Block Allende Presidency" .

H-Net . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Wilkinson, Tracy (29 August 2023).

"Previously classified documents released by U.S. show knowledge of 1973 Chile coup" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ a b Salvador Allende's Last Speech ^ "Chilean court confirms Allende suicide - CNN.com" . CNN. 11 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Chile inquiry confirms President Allende killed himself" . Bbc.co.uk. 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Admite hija de Allende suicidio de su padre" .

El Universal (in Spanish). Mexico City. 17 August 2003. Archived from the original on 14 October 2012.

^ Davison, Phil (20 June 2009).

"Hortensia Bussi De Allende: Widow of Salvador Allende who helped lead opposition to Chile's military dictatorship" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 April 2010 .

^ "nacion.cl - Restos de Salvador Allende fueron exhumados" . Lanacion.cl. 23 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ Associated Press in Santiago (8 July 2016).

"Former Chilean army chief charged over 1973 killing of activists" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 31 July 2021 .

^ "Línea de Tiempo – Fundación Salvador Allende" . fundacionsalvadorallende.cl. Archived from the original on 1 January 2013 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ Hermes H. Benítez & Juan Gonzalo Rocha.

"Los verdaderos nombres de Allende" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 5 March 2016 . Retrieved 18 March 2014 .

^ "La senadora Allende se equivoca sobre el nacimiento de su padre" (in Spanish). El Mostrador.

Archived from the original on 18 March 2014 . Retrieved 18 March 2014 .

^ a b c d e f Patricio Guzmán , Salvador Allende (film documentary, 2004) ^ "José Ramón Allende Padin" .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2022 .

^ "El personaje de hoy: Salvador Allende" . 14 July 2012. Archived from the original on 26 February 2012 . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Item 0002 – Laura Gossens de Allende , catalogoafudec.udec.cl ^ Ancestros, infancia y juventud de Salvador Allende Gossens Archived 22 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine , interferencia.cl ^ a b c d "Cronología de Salvador Allende" .

Fundación Salvador Allende (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 1 January 2009 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 .

^ Tallentire, Mark (3 August 2010).

"A hundred years on, Everton face Everton for the first time" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2017 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ Waitzkin, Howard (2005).

"Commentary: Salvador Allende and the birth of Latin American social medicine" .

International Journal of Epidemiology .

34 (4): 739– 41.

doi : 10.1093/ije/dyh176 .

PMID 15860637 .

^ Porter, Dorothy (October 2006).

"How Did Social Medicine Evolve, and Where Is It Heading?" .

PLOS Medicine .

3 (10): e399.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030399 .

PMC 1621092 .

PMID 17076552 .

^ "Famous Freemasons Masonic Presidents" . Calodges.org. Archived from the original on 2 August 2008 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

^ "Unmasked defamatory libel on Salvador Allende" . 27 May 2005.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 28 September 2007 .

with link to thesis, on the Clarin's website (Spanish version available) ^ Salvador Allende by Hedda Garza ^ "Telegram protesting against the persecution of Jews in Germany" (PDF) (in Spanish). El Clarín de Chile's.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2012 . Retrieved 20 December 2005 .

^ Tedeschi, SK; Brown, TM; Fee, E (2003).

"Salvador Allende" .

Am J Public Health .

93 (12): 2014– 15.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.93.12.2014 .

PMC 1448142 .

PMID 14652324 .

^ a b Navia, Patricio; Soto Castro, Ignacia (2017).

"El efecto de Antonio Zamorano, el Cura de Catapilco, en la derrota de Salvador Allende en la elección presidencial de 1958" .

Historia (in Spanish).

50 (1).

^ a b "Chile 1964: CIA Covert Support in Frei Election Detailed" .

The National Security Archive .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 25 June 2015 .

^ a b "Memorandum for the 303 Committee:Final Report: March 1969 Chilean Congressional Election" .

U.S. Department of State Office of the Historian .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2015 . Retrieved 26 June 2015 .

^ "Foreign Relations of the United States, 1964–1968, Document 269" .

U.S. Department of State: Office of the Historian . United States Department of State.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2015 . Retrieved 28 June 2015 .

^ Gonzalo Rojas Sanchez; Columna Centenaria, 2008.

^ Angell, Alan (1993). "Chile since 1958". In Bethell, Leslie (ed.).

Chile since independence . Cambridge University Press. pp.

159– 60, 167.

ISBN 0-521-43987-6 .

^ Tutee , pp. 2–3.

^ Tutee , pp. 3–4.

^ Tutee , p. 6.

^ Tutee , p. 7.

^ Debray, Régis (1971).

The Chilean Revolution: Conversations with Allende . Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0-394-71726-5 .

^ Régis Debray (1972).

The Chilean Revolution: Conversations with Allende . New York: Vintage Books.

^ "Como Allende destruyo la democracia en Chile" (in Spanish). elcato.org.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2006 . Retrieved 31 December 2006 .

^ First speech to the Chilean parliament after his election ^ "Plan económico" (in Spanish). Medios Digitales de COPESA. Archived from the original on 7 March 2005 . Retrieved 20 February 2025 .

[...] se aceleró la reforma agraria expropiándose más de dos millones de hectáreas en 1971.

^ "La Unidad Popular" (in Spanish). icarito.latercera.cl. Archived from the original on 7 March 2005.

, archived 7 March 2005 on the Internet Archive ^ Collier, Simon; Sater, William F. (18 October 2004) [1996]. "Revolution in liberty, 1964-70".

A History of Chile, 1808-2002 . Cambridge Latin American Studies, ISSN 0068-6689, volume 82 (2, revised ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

313– 314.

ISBN 9780521534840 . Retrieved 13 February 2025 .

The reform law (Law 16.625) signed in July 1967 by Frey [...] made all farms of more than 80 'basic' [irrigated Central Valley land] hectares liable to expropriation, the owners being entitled to retain an 80-hectare 'reserve' and to compensation in the form of a small cash payment and long-term government bonds. [...] By the close of Frei's period, using the old and new laws, CORA [the Chilean Agrarian Reform Corporation [ es ] ] had expropriated more that 1,300 haciendas - between one fifth and one-quarter of all properties liable to takeover.

^ a b Peter, Winn (2009).

The Chilean Revolution . UNESP.

ISBN 9788571399952 . Retrieved 20 April 2016 .

^ Mularski, Jedrek.

Music, Politics, and Nationalism in Latin America: Chile During the Cold War Era . Amherst: Cambria Press.

ISBN 978-1-60497-888-9 .

^ Dornbusch, Rudiger; Edwards, Sebastián (1990). "Macroeconomic Populism".

Journal of Development Economics .

32 (2): 247– 77.

doi : 10.1016/0304-3878(90)90038-D .

^ Flores, 1997: source requires title/publisher ^ Medina, Eden (2014).

Cybernetic Revolutionaries Technology and Politics in Allende's Chile . MIT Press. p. 271.

^ a b "Comienzan los problemas" (in Spanish). Enciclopedia Escolar Icarito. Archived from the original on 22 September 2003.

. Archived on the Internet Archive , 22 September 2003 ^ a b United States Senate Report (1975). "Covert Action in Chile, 1963–1973". U.S. Government Printing Office. Washington, D.C.

^ "Declaración de la Asamblea Plenaria del Episcopado sobre la Escuela Nacional Unificada" (in Spanish). Conferencia Episcopal de Chile. 11 April 1973. Archived from the original on 16 February 2006 . Retrieved 21 September 2006 .

^ Eden Medina, "Designing Freedom, Regulating a Nation: Socialist Cybernetics in Allende's Chile" Archived 4 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Latin American Studies 38 (2006):571–606.

^ Figures are from November 1986, pp. 4–12, tables 1.1 & 1.7 ^ Hoogvelt, 1997 ^ Nove, 1986 ^ Tier, Mark, 1973, "Allende Erred", Nation Review (Melbourne, Australia), 12–18 October ^ "The Socialist-Populist Chilean Experience, 1970–1973" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2018 . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ Angell, Alan (1973).

"Problems in Allende's Chile" .

Current History .

64 (378): 57– 86.

doi : 10.1525/curh.1973.64.378.57 .

ISSN 0011-3530 .

JSTOR 45314075 .

S2CID 249804192 .

^ Rosenstein-Rodan, Paul (16 June 1974).

"Postscript: Allende's Big Failing: Incompetence" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 27 August 2022 .

^ Edy Kaufman, Crisis in Allende's Chile: New Perspectives , Praeger Publishers, New York, 1988. 266–67.

^ Richard Gott .

Latin America is preparing to settle accounts with its white settler elite .

The Guardian , 15 November 2006. Retrieved 22 December 2006.

^ Davies, Nathaniel (1985). "The 1970 Elections and Allende's First Year".

The Last Two Years of Salvador Allende (PDF) . Ithaca, NY; London: Cornell University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 0-8014-1791-0 .

^ Lilley, Sasha; Schlotterbeck, Marian (4 September 2020).

"Salvador Allende's Brief Experiment in Radical Democracy in Chile Began 50 Years Ago Today" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ "Chile – The Parties of the Center" .

Country Studies . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Still Hidden: A Full Record Of What the U.S. Did in Chile Archived 24 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Peter Kornbluh , The Washington Post , 24 October 1999; p. B01 ^ Dornbusch. Edwards, 1989 ^ "Pinochet's rule: Repression and economic success" .

BBC News . 7 January 2001.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2010 . Retrieved 12 May 2010 .

^ a b c d e Jorge Magasich-Airola, Historia de la Unidad Popular. 2020 ^ Nogee, Joseph L.; Sloan, John W. (1979).

"Allende's Chile and the Soviet Union: A Policy Lesson for Latin American Nations Seeking Autonomy" .

Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs .

21 (3): 339– 68.

doi : 10.2307/165728 .

ISSN 0022-1937 .

JSTOR 165728 .

^ Mujal-León, E. (1989).

The USSR and Latin America: A Developing Relationship . Unwin Hyman. p. 357.

ISBN 978-0-04-445165-5 .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ "Pawn or Player? Chile in the cold war" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2007.

^ a b Hinchey Report Archived 20 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine CIA Activities in Chile. 18 September 2000. Retrieved 18 November 2006.

^ Sigmund, Paul E. (1977).

The Overthrow of Allende and the Politics of Chile . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0822952879 .

^ Axelsson, Sun Chili, le Dossier Noir. (Chile: The Black File) Paris, France: Gallimard , 1974, p. 87 ^ "CIA Reveals Covert Acts in Chile" . Archived from the original on 7 August 2004 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ "CIA Activities in Chile" . cia.gov. Archived from the original on 12 June 2007 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ "Church Report. Covert Action in Chile 1963–1973" Archived 11 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine , 18 December 1975.

^ CIA Reveals Covert Acts In Chile , CBS News, 19 September 2000.

Archived 7 August 2004 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jonathan Franklin, Files show Chilean blood on US hands Archived 25 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian , 11 October 1999.

^ a b Moran, Theodore (1974).

Multinational Corporations and the Politics of Dependence: CoppeEncyclopedic r in Chile . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Brandt, Daniel (28 November 1998).

"U.S. Responsibility for the Coup in Chile" .

NameBase . Archived from the original on 8 September 2012 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 .

^ "The Kissinger Telcons: Kissinger Telcons on Chile, National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 123, edited by Peter Kornbluh, posted May 26, 2004" .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2007 . Retrieved 11 November 2005 .

This particular dialogue can be found at "Telcon: September 16, 1973, 11:50 am Kissinger Talking to Nixon" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 November 2006 . Retrieved 26 November 2006 .

^ "Allende and Chile: 'Bring Him Down' " . National Security Archive. 3 November 2020 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 – via The George Washington University.

^ "Chile's Coup at 50 Kissinger Briefed Nixon on Failed 1970 CIA Plot to Block Allende Presidency" . National Security Archive. 8 August 2023 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 – via The George Washington University.

^ a b c d e "Soviet intelligence in Latin America during the Cold War – Lectures by General Nikolai Leonov" . Centro de Estudios Publicos (Chile). 22 September 1999. Archived from the original on 28 February 2010.

^ "Just how intelligent?" .

The Guardian . 18 February 2003.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2019 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ Andrew, Christopher (2001).

The Sword and the Shield . Basic Books. p. 26.

ISBN 0-465-00312-5 .

^ Christopher Andrew and Vasili Mitrokhin How 'weak' Allende was left out in the cold by the KGB (excerpt from The Mitrokhin Archive Volume II), The Times (UK), 19 September 2005.

^ "Second coup attempt: El Tanquetazo (the tank attack)" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2004 . Retrieved 15 May 2009 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , originally on RebelYouth.ca. Unsigned, but with citations. Archived on Internet Archive 13 October 2004.

^ "historia de chile y controversia – Grupos en Geomundos" . geomundos.com.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2009 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ a b (in Spanish) Se desata la crisis Archived 2 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine , part of series "Icarito > Enciclopedia Virtual > Historia > Historia de Chile > Del gobierno militar a la democracia" on LaTercera.cl. Retrieved 22 September 2006.

^ Agouborde, María Victoria (23 August 2023).

"La Cámara de Diputados de Chile lee la resolución de 1973 que acusó de inconstitucional al Gobierno de Allende" .

El País Chile (in Spanish) . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ a b c d English translation on Wikisource.

^ Goldberg, Peter A. (1975).

"The Politics of the Allende Overthrow in Chile" .

Political Science Quarterly .

90 (1): 93– 116.

doi : 10.2307/2148700 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2148700 .

^ Affairs, United States Congress House Committee on Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Inter-American (1975).

United States and Chile During the Allende Years, 1970-1973: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, House of Representatives ...

U.S. Government Printing Office. p.

393 .

^ a b c (in Spanish) La respuesta del Presidente Allende on Wikisource.

English translation on Wikisource. Retrieved 22 September 2006.

^ Niedergang, Marcel (29 September 1973).

"LE JOUR MÊME DU COUP D'ÉTAT MILITAIRE Allende devait annoncer un plébiscite sur le maintien des institutions démocratiques" .

The Monde .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 March 2020 .

^ Pipes, Richard (2003).

Communism: A History . The Modern Library. p.

138 .

ISBN 0-8129-6864-6 .

^ "Chile: The Bloody End of a Marxist Dream" .

Time . 24 September 1973.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2014 . Retrieved 5 August 2014 .

24 September 1973. "Allende's downfall had implications that reached far beyond the borders of Chile. His had been the first democratically elected Marxist government in Latin America..." ^ Winn, Peter (2010).

"Furies of the Andes" . In Grandin & Joseph, Greg & Gilbert (ed.).

A Century of Revolution: Insurgent and Counterinsurgent Violence during Latin America's Long Cold War . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. p.

259 .

doi : 10.1215/9780822392859 .

ISBN 978-0-8223-9285-9 .

^ Michael Evans.

"National Security Archive Electronic Briefing Book No. 33" . Gwu.edu . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ Collins, Stephen (16 December 2000).

"Now open – Pinochet's torture chambers" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved 20 April 2010 .

^ Aguilera, Pilar; Fredes, Ricardo; Dorfman, Ariel (2003).

Chile: The Other September 11 . Melbourne: Ocean Press.

ISBN 1-876175-50-8 .

OCLC 55665455 .

^ François, David (2018).

Chile 1973, the Other 9/11: The Downfall of Salvador Allende . Solihull, West Midlands: Helion & Company.

ISBN 978-1-912174-95-9 .

OCLC 1001447543 .

^ Osborn, Catherine (10 September 2021).

"The Other 9/11" .

Foreign Policy .

In the run-up to the 20th anniversary of the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States this month, a leading Chilean university, the University of Concepción, held a series of panel discussions on their legacy. The program referred to the events as 'the other Sept. 11.' 'Other' because, in Chile, Sept. 11 is best known as the date of the country's own national tragedy: the 1973 U.S.-backed coup against leftist President Salvador Allende that ushered in over 16 years of military rule.

^ "Socialist Says Allende Once Spoke of Suicide" .

The New York Times . 12 September 1973.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 April 2010 .

^ Galende, Federico (2021), Los nombres extraviados de la historia .

University of Chile - Cultura, 9 Septiembre 2021.

https://uchile.cl/noticias/179757/los-nombres-extraviados-de-la-historia ^ El Tiempo (1921), La historia del golpe militar que partió la historia de Chile.

https://www.eltiempo.com/mundo/latinoamerica/chile-11-de-septiembre-47-anos-del-golpe-de-estado-a-salvador-allende-536438 ^ "The COHA Blog" . Archived from the original on 20 February 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ Frost, David (8 October 2013).

"Isabel Allende: 'Forever a foreigner' " .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Bonnefoy, Pascale (27 January 2011).

"Chilean Judge Orders Investigation Into Allende's Death" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ "Chile: court closes probe into ex-president Allende's death" .

BBC News . 7 January 2014 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ a b c "Chilean president Salvador Allende committed suicide, autopsy confirms" .

The Guardian . London. 19 July 2011.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ "nacion.cl – Restos de Salvador Allende fueron exhumados" . Lanacion.cl. 23 May 2011. Archived from the original on 18 December 2014 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Ministro cierra investigación sobre Allende: se suicidó – Terra Colombia" . Noticias.terra.com.co.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2020 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Chilean court confirms Allende suicide" . CNN. 11 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ "Chile inquiry confirms President Allende killed himself" .

BBC News . 19 July 2011.

Archived from the original on 15 September 2012 . Retrieved 12 September 2012 .

^ Gonzalez Camus, Ignacio, El día en que murió Allende ("The Day That Allende Died"), 1988, pp. 282ff.

^ a b Glüsing, Jens; Habbe, Christian (14 May 2005).

"Chilean Skeletons: Was Salvador Allende a Racist?" .

Der Spiegel .

ISSN 2195-1349 . Retrieved 30 October 2022 .

^ "Former Chilean president Allende remains buried for third time in private ceremony" .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2016 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ Morgado, José.

"El día que Teresa rescató los lentes de Allende en La Moneda" .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 February 2017 .

^ "U posjeti Gajnicama i Allendeu" .

Nepoznati Zagreb (in Croatian). 10 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2021 .

^ "Salvador-Allende-Büste kommt in den Donaupark" [Salvador Allende bust comes to the Donaupark].

Der Standard .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2020 .

^ "Salvador-Allende-Denkmal" [Salvador Allende memorial].

Vienna History Wiki . City of Vienna.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2020 .

^ "Kültür Envanteri – Mustafa Kemal Atatürk ve Salvador Allende Heykeli" . 15 June 2022.

^ "Google Maps" . Google Maps.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ "Allende Park – Közösségi Tervezés – Budapest Dialog" .

www.budapestdialog.hu .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

^ "Zelenskyy Avenue: Harlow road renamed after Ukraine president" .

BBC News . 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 .

^ "Agenda for Council on Thursday, 26th May, 2022, 7.30 pm" .

www.harlow.gov.uk . 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 .

^ "City of Toronto policy nearly foils plans for a Salvador Allende street" .

Toronto Star .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 May 2018 .

^ Gray, Ros (2020).

Cinemas of the Mozambican Revolution Anti-colonialism, Independence and Internationalism in Filmmaking, 1968–1991 . p. 116.

^ The Final Hours of Salvador Allende . Retrieved 29 March 2024 – via www.youtube.com.

^ "Salvador Allende" . Home.nestor.minsk.by . Retrieved 21 December 2014 .

^ Catalogue of Postage Stamps of the USSR 1918–1974, 'Soyuzpechat' Central Philatelic Agency [ ru ] of the Ministry of Communications of the USSR publisher, Moscow, 1976 ^ a b Jack Child, "The Politics and Semiotics of the Smallest Icons of Popular Culture: Latin American Postage Stamps", Latin American Research Review , Vol. 40, no. 1, February 2005.

^ "El Partido Socialista de Chile Tomo II" (PDF) .

Julio César Jobet (in Spanish). p. 120. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 October 2009 . Retrieved 5 June 2009 .

^ "B. El Congreso Nacional y la quiebra de un deber constitucional: el control del ejercicio constitucional de las funciones del presidente" .

Revista Chilena de Derecho (in Spanish).

1 (3/4): 491– 547. June–August 1974.

JSTOR 41605133 .

Sources [ edit ] Tutee, Bright (2020).

NCERT Solutions for Class 9 Social Science (Political Science) Chapter 1: What is Democracy? Why Democracy?

.

N.C.E.R.T.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 .

"Pinochet's rule: Repression and economic success". BBC News. 2001-01-07. Retrieved 2010-05-12.

Chile and the United States: Declassified Documents relating to the Military Coup, 1970–1976 Archived 28 November 1999 at the Wayback Machine , (From the United States National Security Archive ).

Thomas Karamessines (1970).

Operation Guide for the Conspiration in Chile Archived 1 November 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Washington, DC: United States National Security Council.

La Batalla de Chile – Cuba/Chile/França/Venezuela, 1975, 1977 e 1979. Director Patricio Guzmán. Duration: 272 minutes.

(in Spanish) García Márquez, Gabriel.

Chile, el golpe y los gringos. Crónica de una tragedia organizada , Manágua, Nicaragua: Radio La Primeirissima, 11 de setembro de 2006 Archived 6 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Kornbluh, Peter.

El Mercurio file, The.

, Columbia Journalism Review, Sep/Oct 2003 CIA Activities in Chile Archived 12 June 2007 at the Wayback Machine CIA response to the Hinchey amendment on www.cia.gov Further reading [ edit ] Comite central del Partido comunista de Cuba: Comisión de orientación revolucionaria.

Rencontre symbolique entre deux processus historiques [ i.e ., de Cuba et de Chile] . La Habana, Cuba: Éditions polituques, 1972.

Dorfman, Ariel , "Defending Allende", The New York Review of Books , vol. LXX, no. 14 (21 September 2023), pp. 73–77. "Ever since [Salvador Allende] had won the presidency [in 1970], forces from inside and outside [Chile] had been conspiring to destroy his attempt – the first in world history – to build a socialist state through nonviolent, democratic means." (p. 73.) Sebastián Hurtado-Torres. 2019. " The Chilean Moment in the Global Cold War: International Reactions to Salvador Allende's Victory in the Presidential Election of 1970.

" Journal of Cold War Studies .

Luis Garrido Soto. 2015.

La "vía chilena" al socialismo (1970–1973): Un itinerario geohistórico de la Unidad Popular en el sistema-mundo [1] . Santiago de Chile, Chile: Ediciones Universidad Alberto Hurtado.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Salvador Allende Wikiquote has quotations related to Salvador Allende .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Salvador Allende .

Salvador Allende Archive at marxists.org Photos of the public places named in homage to the President Allende all around the world Salvador Allende's "Last Words" . Spanish text with English translation. The transcript of the last radio broadcast of Chilean President Salvador Allende, made on 11 September 1973, at 9:10 am. MP3 audio available here Archived 30 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine .

Caso Pinochet . Nominally a page about the Pinochet case, the large collection of links includes Allende's dissertation and numerous documents (mostly PDFs) related to the dissertation and to the controversy about it, ranging from the Cesare Lombroso material discussed in Allende's dissertation to a collective telegram of protest over Kristallnacht signed by Allende (in Spanish) .

An Interview with Salvadore Allende: President of Chile , interviewed by Saul Landau , Dove Films, 1971, 32 min. (previously unreleased): Video (Spanish with English subtitles) in El Clarin de Chile . (Alternative location at Google Video ) 11 September 1973, When US-Backed Pinochet Forces Took Power in Chile – video report by Democracy Now!

Why Allende had to die , 2013 reprint of a story from March 1974, by Gabriel Garcia Marquez v t e Salvador Allende Life and politics Biography Presidential elections of 1952 / 1958 / 1964 / 1970 Presidency Tanquetazo 1973 coup d'état Death Policies Vuskovic plan Economic policy Nationalization of copper Schneider Doctrine Project Cybersyn Perceptions Project FUBELT Public image Schneider Doctrine Allies Carlos Prats Carlos Altamirano Orlando Letelier José Tohá Pedro Vuskovic Edgardo Enríquez Andre Gunder Frank Family Ramón Allende Padín Laura Allende Hortensia Bussi Beatriz Allende Isabel Allende (Bussi) Andrés Pascal Allende Isabel Allende Paula Frías Allende Maya Fernández Offices and distinctions Chamber of Deputies of Chile Preceded by Humberto Casali Monreal Member of the Chamber of Deputies for Quillota and Valparaíso 1937–1939 Succeeded by Vasco Valdebenito García Political offices Preceded by Miguel Etchebarne Minister of Public Health, Social Assistance and Welfare 1939–1942 Succeeded by Eduardo Escudero Preceded by Eduardo Frei Montalva President of Chile 1970–1973 Succeeded by Augusto Pinochet Party political offices Preceded by Marmaduke Grove Secretary of the Socialist Party of Chile 1943–1944 Succeeded by Bernardo Ibáñez Preceded by Bernardo Ibáñez Socialist nominee for President of Chile 1952 , 1958 , 1964 , 1970 Succeeded by Patricio Aylwin Senate of Chile Preceded by Luis Ambrosio Concha Senator for Valdivia, Osorno, Llanquihue, Chiloé, Aysén and Magallanes 1945–1953 Succeeded by Aniceto Rodríguez Arenas Preceded by Elías Lafertte Gaviño Senator for Tarapacá and Antofagasta 1953–1961 Succeeded by Raúl Ampuero Díaz Preceded by Carlos Alberto Martínez Senator for Aconcagua and Valparaíso 1961–1969 Succeeded by Hugo Ballesteros Reyes Preceded by Tomás Reyes President of the Senate of Chile 1966–1969 Succeeded by Tomás Pablo New constituency Senator for Chiloé, Aysén and Magallanes 1969–1970 Succeeded by Adonis Sepúlveda Acuña v t e Presidents of Chile Blanco Encalada Eyzaguirre Freire F. Pinto Vicuña Ovalle Ruiz-Tagle Ovalle Prieto Bulnes M. Montt Pérez Errázuriz Zañartu A. Pinto Santa María Balmaceda J. Montt Errázuriz Echaurren Riesco P. Montt Figueroa Barros Luco Sanfuentes Alessandri Palma Figueroa Ibáñez del Campo Montero Dávila Alessandri Palma Aguirre Cerda Méndez Ríos González Videla Ibáñez del Campo Alessandri Rodriguez Frei Montalva Allende Pinochet Aylwin Frei Ruiz-Tagle Lagos Bachelet Piñera Bachelet Piñera Boric List Timeline v t e Presidents of the Senate of Chile Pre-Republican Chile (1812–1833) Patria Vieja (1812–14) Vivar (1812–13) Henríquez (1813) Egaña (1813) Ruiz-Tagle (1813–14) Patria Nueva (1818–23) O'Higgins Period (1818–23) Eyzaguirre (1822–23) Ruiz-Tagle (1823) Organization of the Republic (1823–29) Elizondo (1826) Vial del Río (1823–24) Eyzaguirre (1824–25) Egaña (1825–27) Freire (1827) B. del Solar Marín (1827–28) Fariñas Ugalde (1827–28) Vicuña (1829) Chilean Civil War of 1829–1830 First Republic 1833 Constitution (1833–1925) Conservative Period (1831–61) Errázuriz Aldunate (1833–34) Cienfuegos (1834–35) Vial Santelices (1835–37) Benavente (1837) Elizondo (1837–39) J. del Solar Marín (1839–40) Gandarillas (1839–40) Benavente (1841–42) J. Urrutia Manzano (1842–43) Alcalde Bascuñán (1843–44) Formas (1844) Ortúzar Formas (1844–45) J. del Solar Marín (1845–46) Vial del Río (1846) Pinto (1846–51) Vial Formas (1851–52) Pérez (1852–53) Lazcano Mujica (1853–54) Subercaseaux Mercado (1854–55) Urmeneta (1855–56) Larraín (1856–57) Benavente (1857–58) Alcalde Bascuñán (1858–59) Cosuiño (1859–61) Liberal Period (1861–91) Correa de Saa (1861–63) Cosuiño (1863–64) Torres de Velasco (1864–65) Matte Messia (1865–66) Ossa Mercado (1865–67) Concha y Toro (1867–68) de Borja (1868–69) Errázuriz (1869–70) Correa de Saa (1870–71) Vicuña (1871–72) Borgoño (1872–73) Concha y Cerda (1873–75) Aldunate (1875–76) A. Reyes Cotapos (1876–77) Matte Messia (1877–78) Valdés (1878–79) Lastarria (1879–80) Vicuña Mackenna (1880–82) Vial Formas (1882–84) Martínez Cuadros (1984) Varas (1884–85) Altamirano (1885–86) A. Ibáñez (1886–87) Castillo Andueza (1887–88) Vicuña Guerrero (1888–89) Reyes Palazuelos (1889–90) Covarrubias (1890–91) A. Matte Pérez (1891) Parliamentary Period (1891–25) Silva (1891–92) Gandarillas (1892–93) Reyes Palazuelos (1893–94) S. Sanfuentes (1894–95) Reyes Palazuelos (1896) Barros Luco (1896–97) Lazcano (1897–98) Edwards (1898) J. Errázuriz Echaurren (1898–00) Blanco (1900–02) Valdés Cuevas (1902–03) Lazcano (1903–04) Rozas Garfias (1904–05) Puga (1905–06) Sanfuentes (1906–07) R. Matte (1907–08) Reyes Palazuelos (1908) Escobar (1908–09) Reyes Palazuelos (1909) Vergara Ruíz (1909) R. Matte (1909–12) Valdés Vergara (1912–13) Aldunate Solar (1913–14) Ochagavía (1914–15) Charme (1915–18) Tocornal (1918–19) Claro (1920–24) Yáñez (1924) Second Republic 1925 Constitution (1925–1973) Oyarzún (1925–30) Opaso (1930–32) Cabero (1932–33) I. Urrutia Manzano (1933–34) Marambio (1934–35) I. Urrutia Manzano (1935–36) Maza (1935–37) Cruchaga Tocornal (1937–41) Durán (1941–44) Opaso (1944) Urrejola (1944–45) Alessandri Palma (1945–49) Álvarez (1949) Alessandri Palma (1949–50) F. Alessandri Rodríguez (1950–58) Pérez de Arce (1958) Videla (1958–62) Zepeda (1962–65) Ahumada (1965) Reyes Vicuña (1965–66) Maurás (1966) Reyes Vicuña (1966) S. Allende (1966–69) Pablo (1969–71) Aylwin (1971–72) Palma (1972–73) Acuña (1973) Frei Montalva (1973) Pinochet dictatorship (1973–1990) Government Junta Third Republic 1980 Constitution Transition to democracy (1990–present) Valdés (1990–95) Diez (1995–96) Romero Pizarro (1996–97) Zaldívar (1997–04) H. Larraín (2004–05) Romero Pizarro (2005–06) Frei Ruiz-Tagle (2006–08) Zaldívar (2008–09) Novoa (2009–10) Pizarro (2010–11) Girardi (2011–12) Escalona (2012–13) Pizarro (2013–14) I. Allende (2014–15) Walker (2015–16) Lagos (2016–17) Zaldívar (2017–18) Montes (2018–19) Quintana (2019–20) Muñoz (2020–21) Provoste (2021–21) Rincón (2021–22) Elizalde (2022–23) Coloma Correa (2023–24) García Ruminot (2024–25) Ossandón (2025–) v t e 1973 Chilean coup d'état Background United States intervention in Chile Schneider Doctrine 1970 election Project FUBELT Presidency of Salvador Allende Carlos Prats Alejandrina Cox incident Carlos Altamirano Tanquetazo Participants Salvador Allende Augusto Pinochet José Toribio Merino Gustavo Leigh César Mendoza Aftermath Government Junta of Chile Miguel Enriquez Operation Condor Assassination of Carlos Prats Attempted assassination of Bernardo Leighton Assassination of Orlando Letelier Chile under Pinochet Chicago Boys Indictment and arrest of Pinochet Controversies Death of Salvador Allende Criticisms of Salvador Allende Human rights violations under Pinochet v t e Isabel Allende Books The House of the Spirits Of Love and Shadows The Porcelain Fat Lady Eva Luna The Stories of Eva Luna The Infinite Plan Paula Daughter of Fortune Portrait in Sepia City of the Beasts Kingdom of the Golden Dragon Zorro Inés of My Soul Forest of the Pygmies Island Beneath the Sea Maya's Notebook A Long Petal of the Sea Violeta Related Paula Frías Allende (daughter) Salvador Allende (first cousin once removed) v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland 2 Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Salvador_Allende&oldid=1301404623 " Categories : Salvador Allende 1908 births 1973 deaths 1973 suicides 20th-century Chilean physicians 20th-century presidents of Chile Allende family Candidates for President of Chile Chilean agnostics Chilean duellists Chilean Freemasons Chilean Marxists Chilean people of Basque descent Chilean people of Belgian descent Chilean politicians who died by suicide Democratic socialism in South America Popular Socialist Party (Chile) politicians Politicians from Santiago, Chile Ministers of health of Chile Deputies of the XXXVIII Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Presidents of the Senate of Chile Senators of the XL Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLI Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLII Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLIII Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLIV Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLV Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Senators of the XLVI Legislative Period of the National Congress of Chile Socialist Party of Chile politicians Leaders ousted by a coup Male suicides Marxist humanists Instituto Nacional General José Miguel Carrera alumni Eduardo de la Barra Lyceum alumni Recipients of the Lenin Peace Prize Recipients of the Order of the Companions of O. R. Tambo Heads of state who died by suicide Suicides by firearm in Chile National presidents who died in office University of Chile alumni Hidden categories: Pages with Latin American Spanish IPA CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from August 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2025 Articles with incomplete citations from October 2023 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 16:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Salvador Allende 101 languages Add topic

