Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 See also 3 Sources 4 References Toggle the table of contents Masawaiyh 17 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى پنجابی سرائیکی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Assyrian physician De consolatione medicinarum , 1475 Yuhanna ibn Masawaih (circa 777–857), ( Arabic : يوحنا بن ماسويه ), also written Ibn Masawaih , Masawaiyh , and in Latin Janus Damascenus , [ 1 ] or Mesue , Masuya , Mesue Major , Msuya , and Mesuë the Elder was a Persian [ 2 ] or Assyrian physician trained by Jabril ibn Bukhtishu [ 3 ] who was a member of the Church of the East .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] from the Academy of Gondishapur . According to The Canon of Medicine for Avicenna and 'Uyun al-Anba for the medieval Arab historian ibn Abi Usaybi'a , Masawaiyh's father was Assyrian and his mother a Slav .

[ 6 ] Life [ edit ] Mesue Born in 777 as the son of a pharmacist and physician from Gundeshapur , he came to Baghdad and studied under Jabril ibn Bukhtishu .

[ 7 ] He became director of a hospital in Baghdad , and was personal physician to four Abbasid caliphs . He composed medical treatises on several topics, including ophthalmology , fevers, leprosy, headache, melancholia, dietetics, the testing of physicians, and medical aphorisms . One of Masawaiyh's treatises concerns aromatics, entitled, On Simple Aromatic Substances .

It was reported that Ibn Masawayh regularly held an assembly where he consulted with patients and discussed subjects with his pupils. Ibn Masawayh attracted considerable audiences, having acquired a reputation for repartee .

He was also the teacher of Hunayn ibn Ishaq .

[ 7 ] He translated various Greek medical works into Syriac , but wrote his own work in Arabic .

[ 7 ] Apes were supplied to him by Caliph al-Mu'tasim for dissection .

[ 7 ] Many anatomical and medical writings are credited to him, notably the Disorder of the Eye ( Daghal al-ʿayn ), which is the earliest systematic treatise on ophthalmology extant in Arabic, and The Aphorisms , the Latin translation of which was very popular in the Middle Ages .

[ 7 ] He died in Samarra in 857.

See also [ edit ] Aegyptiacum Ophthalmology in medieval Islam Sources [ edit ] For his life and writings, see: Liber primus, seu methodus medicamenta purgantia simplicia . Bernuz, Caesaraugustae 1550 Digital edition by the University and State Library Düsseldorf De re medica . Rouillius / Rolletius, Lugduni 1550 (translated by Jacques Dubois) Digital edition by the University and State Library Düsseldorf J.-C. Vadet, "Ibn Masawayh" in, The Encyclopaedia of Islam, 2nd edition, ed. by H.A.R. Gibbs, B. Lewis, Ch. Pellat, C. Bosworth et al., 11 vols. (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1960-2002) vol. 3, pp. 872–873 Manfred Ullmann, Die Medizin im Islam, Handbuch der Orientalistik, Abteilung I, Ergänzungsband vi, Abschnitt 1 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970), pp. 112–115 Fuat Sezgin, Medizin-Pharmazie-Zoologie-Tierheilkunde bis ca 430 H., Geschichte des arabischen Schrifttums, Band 3 (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1970), pp. 231–236.

Elgood, Cyril (2010-10-31).

A Medical History of Persia and the Eastern Caliphate: From the Earliest Times Until the Year A.D. 1932 . Cambridge University Press. pp. 94–.

ISBN 978-1-108-01588-2 . Retrieved 23 May 2011 .

Withington, Edward Theodore (1894).

Medical history from the earliest times: a popular history of the healing art . The Scientific Press, Ltd. pp. 141– . Retrieved 23 May 2011 .

References [ edit ] ^ V.C. Medvei, The History of Clinical Endocrinology , p. 45.

^ Irwin, Robert, ed. (2010).

The new Cambridge history of Islam, Volume 4 (1. publ. ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 663.

ISBN 978-0-521-83824-5 .

^ Versteegh, Kees (2025). "Yūḥannā ibn Māsawayh". In Abdel Haleem, M. A. S.

; Shah, Mustafa (eds.).

The I. B. Tauris Biographical Dictionary of Islamic Civilization .

^ Beeston, Alfred Felix Landon (1983).

Arabic literature to the end of the Umayyad period . Cambridge University Press. p. 501.

ISBN 978-0-521-24015-4 . Retrieved 20 January 2011 .

^ "Compendium of Medical Texts by Mesue, with Additional Writings by Various Authors" .

World Digital Library . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

^ Dunlop, D. M. (1971).

Arab civilization to A.D. 1500, Part 1500 . the University of Michigan. p. 220.

ISBN 978-0-582-50273-4 .

^ a b c d e Sarton, George (1927).

Introduction to the History of Science, Volume I. From Homer to Omar Khayyam . Baltimore: Carnegie Institution of Washington. p. 574.

OCLC 874972552 .

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Masawaiyh&oldid=1304007678 " Categories : Greek–Syriac translators 770s births 857 deaths 9th-century Iranian physicians Medieval Iranian pharmacologists Medieval Assyrian physicians Physicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Translators of the medieval Islamic world Church of the East writers Church of the East Christians from the Abbasid Caliphate Court physicians Syriac writers 9th-century Arabic-language writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 11:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Masawaiyh 17 languages Add topic

