Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Murders 3 Aftermath 4 Investigation 5 Documentary 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Murder of the family of Robert Einstein 3 languages العربية Español Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°44′05″N 11°24′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.73472°N 11.40333°E ﻿ / 43.73472; 11.40333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1944 Nazi German killings in Italy "Robert Einstein" redirects here. For the American actor, see Bob Einstein .

The murder of the family of Robert Einstein , a cousin of Nobel Prize Laureate Albert Einstein , took place on 3 August 1944 in Rignano sull'Arno , Italy, during World War II .

[ 1 ] Shortly before their withdrawal from the area, German soldiers arrived at the Einstein residence, executed Robert's wife and two daughters, and set the house on fire. Robert, who was in hiding at the time, survived the events but committed suicide less than a year later, on July 13, 1945.

The perpetrators of the crime were never brought to justice, despite attempts in the early 2010s in both Germany and Italy to identify them. The events were also the subject of a German documentary featuring Einstein's nieces who witnessed the events in 1944.

Background [ edit ] Robert Einstein was born in 1884 in Munich , the son of Jakob Abraham Einstein. Robert was a cousin of Nobel Prize Laureate Albert Einstein , [ 2 ] as Hermann Einstein, Albert's father, was an older brother and business partner of Jakob Einstein, who persuaded his older brother to move their families and factory to Pavia , Italy.

[ 3 ] In 1944, Robert Einstein, who had lived in Italy for many decades, resided with his family in Rignano sull’Arno, 20 kilometres (12 mi) southeast of Florence , in the Villa Tenuta del Focardo. His family consisted of Cesarina, his wife, the daughter of a Protestant minister, his two daughters Luce and Cici, 27 and 18 years old respectively, and his adopted nieces Lorenza and Paola Mazzetti, who were the 17-year-old twin daughters of his late sister-in-law.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In August 1944, the British 8th Army was advancing towards Florence, eventually liberating the city on August 4. Einstein himself had gone into hiding with local partisans as he was concerned for his life because of his name and his Jewish background. However, he considered his family not to be in danger.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Murders [ edit ] On August 3, a group of German soldiers arrived at the villa in search of Einstein. When he was not to be found the soldiers began vandalising the place and interrogated the women individually. The soldiers conducted an ad-hoc tribunal and then shot Einstein's wife and daughters in the garden. His nieces remained locked in the upper part of the house, guarded by a young German soldier who had refused to participate in the murders and was visibly shaken by the events. After the murders the two surviving girls were locked in a shed and the villa itself set on fire.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Aftermath [ edit ] Einstein returned to the house when he saw the flames (other sources state that he returned the following day). Upon finding his wife and daughters dead, he attempted suicide but was unsuccessful. British troops soon arrived in the area and Einstein used his famous surname to request an investigation into the murders. A few days later a scrap of paper was found, alleging that Einstein's family was executed because they were Jewish (they were not), and because they were spies.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Einstein pushed for an investigation of the crime and even requested help from his cousin Albert. There was an Army JAG report of the incident and the investigation.

[ 6 ] Einstein committed suicide on July 13, 1945, his 32nd wedding anniversary, by overdosing on sleeping tablets. He is buried alongside his family in the cemetery at Badiuzza.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] His nieces Lorenza and Paola Mazzetti survived the war and were the subject of a German documentary in 2016.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Investigation [ edit ] In 2007, German authorities started an investigation into the events and interviewed Lorenza Mazzetti. Originally it was thought that the main instigator was still alive and living in Rhineland-Palatinate . In 2011 the case was the subject of an episode of Aktenzeichen XY… ungelöst , a German TV crime program, which aimed to find surviving eyewitnesses, especially the young German soldier who had refused to participate in the events. However, this effort was unsuccessful. Mazzetti visited Germany during the investigation and was convinced that she identified the main perpetrator of the crime after seeing a photo of him. The suspected perpetrator, known to the Simon Wiesenthal Center , is also suspected to have participated in a massacre of 184 civilians in Padule di Fucecchio on August 23, 1944 and lived in Kaufbeuren , Bavaria . A court in Rome passed a life sentence in absentia on the former soldier for this massacre, but Germany did not extradite him. The German authorities in Kempten , Bavaria, later also declared him unfit to stand trial.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Documentary [ edit ] The Mazzetti sisters, now dead, were the subject of a 2016 German documentary by the Bayerischer Rundfunk , titled Einsteins Nichten ( Einstein's Nieces ). As part of this documentary the sisters returned to the crime scene for the first time since the events.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Shachnai, Omer (21 February 2011).

"Better Late Than Never: Who Killed Einstein's Family?" .

ShalomLife . Archived from the original on 24 February 2011 . Retrieved 25 August 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Kellerhoff, Sven Felix (21 February 2011).

"Die ewige Suche nach dem Mörder der Einsteins" [The eternal search for the Einstein murderers].

Die Welt (in German) . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ Einstein, Albert (1987).

"The Collected Papers of Albert Einstein: The early years, 1879-1902" . Princeton University Press. p. xvi.

ISBN 9780691084756 .

^ a b c d e f g h Dosch, Stefan (23 August 2017).

"Einsteins Nichten: Die tragische Geschichte von zwei Schwestern" [Einstein's nieces: The tragic story of two sisters].

Augsburger Allgemeine (in German) . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ a b "Police hunt Einstein family murder witness" .

The Local . 19 November 2011 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ @hardboiledgregs, Greg DiPietro.

"The Leonard Group, Inc" .

The Leonard Group, Inc . Retrieved 2018-08-26 .

External links [ edit ] What happened at Villa il Focardo?

(in German) Das Drama ihres Lebens Interview with Lorenza and Paola Mazzetti 43°44′05″N 11°24′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.73472°N 11.40333°E ﻿ / 43.73472; 11.40333 Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung , 8. Juli 2025 v t e Nazi war crimes in Italy Massacres 1943 Boves Lake Maggiore Caiazzo Pisino Pietransieri 1944 Monchio, Susano and Costrignano Ardeatine Ameglia Fragheto Vallucciole Lipa Capistrello Guardistallo Piazza Tasso Piavola Sant'Anna di Stazzema San Terenzo Monti Padule di Fucecchio Vinca San Leonardo al Frigido Certosa di Farneta Marzabotto 1945 San Martino di Lupari Perpetrators Individuals Heinrich Andergassen Friedrich Boßhammer Eduard Crasemann Theodor Dannecker Anton Dostler Friedrich Engel Karl Hass Herbert Kappler Albert Kesselring Eberhard von Mackensen Kurt Mälzer Erich Priebke Walter Rauff Walter Reder Theo Saevecke Josef Scheungraber Michael Seifert Max Simon Gerhard Sommer Karl Titho Units Waffen-SS SS Division Leibstandarte SS Division Reichsführer-SS SS Volunteer Karstwehr Battalion Army 3rd Panzergrenadier Division 5th Mountain Division 15th Panzergrenadier Division 16th Panzer-Division 26th Panzer Division 29th Panzergrenadier Division 34th Infantry Division 42nd Jäger Division 44th Infantry Division 65th Infantry Division 71st Infantry Division 90th Panzergrenadier Division 92nd Infantry Division 94th Infantry Division 114th Jäger Division 148th Infantry Division 162nd Turkoman Division 232nd Infantry Division 278th Infantry Division 305th Infantry Division 334th Infantry Division 356th Infantry Division 362nd Infantry Division Luftwaffe 1st Parachute Division 1st Fallschirm-Panzer Division 2nd Parachute Division 4th Parachute Division 19th Luftwaffe Field Division 20th Luftwaffe Field Division SS Police SS Police Regiment Alpine Foothills SS Police Regiment Bozen SS Police Regiment Schlanders 12th SS Police Regiment 15th SS Police Regiment 20th SS Police Regiment Italian Republican Police Corps Italian Black Brigades 2nd Division "Littorio" 3rd Division "San Marco" 4th Division "Monterosa" Doctrine Bandenbekämpfung Victims Groups Italian Jews Libyan Jews Italian military internees Individuals Leonardo de Benedetti Einstein family Giovanni Fornasini Maurizio Giglio Roderick Stephen Hall Primo Levi Ettore Ovazza Camps Bolzano Borgo San Dalmazzo Fossoli Risiera di San Sabba Looting Biblioteca della Comunità Israelitica Kunsthistorisches Institut in Florenz Post-war Togliatti amnesty Palazzo Cesi-Gaddi war crimes archive Bilateral Compensation Agreement Jurisdictional Immunities of the State See also: The Holocaust in Italy v t e The Holocaust in Italy Part of The Holocaust Massacres and roundups Lake Maggiore Ghetto of Rome Ardeatine Victims and survivors Leonardo de Benedetti Einstein family Primo Levi Ettore Ovazza Liliana Segre Piero Terracina Major perpetrators Friedrich Boßhammer Karl Brunner Theodor Dannecker Odilo Globocnik Karl Hass Herbert Kappler Erich Priebke Martin Sandberger Theo Saevecke Karl Titho Karl Wolff Camps and prisons Bolzano Borgo San Dalmazzo Fossoli Risiera di San Sabba San Vittore Looting Biblioteca della Comunità Israelitica Area Italian Social Republic Alpine Foothills Adriatic Littora Rescuers Gino Bartali Giorgio Perlasca Anti-Semitic laws Italian Racial Laws Manifesto of Verona RSI Police Order No. 5 Commemoration Centro di Documentazione Ebraica Contemporanea Memoriale della Shoah Publications and films If This Is a Man The Periodic Table My Italian Secret: The Forgotten Heroes Related articles History of the Jews in Italy Axis war crimes in Italy Pope Pius XII and the raid on the Roman ghetto Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Murder_of_the_family_of_Robert_Einstein&oldid=1299503149 " Categories : Mass murder in 1944 1944 murders in Italy Nazi war crimes in Italy Einstein family August 1944 in Europe Italian people who died in the Holocaust Family murders 20th-century mass murder in Italy Arson in Italy Arson in the 1940s 1944 fires 1940s fires in Europe Residential building arson attacks in Europe Attacks on buildings and structures in Italy Attacks on buildings and structures in 1944 Extrajudicial killings by the Nazi regime People murdered in Tuscany Military history of Tuscany 20th century in Tuscany Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 20:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Murder of the family of Robert Einstein 3 languages Add topic

