Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Planning career 3 Footnotes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Raymond Unwin 13 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Malagasy مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English engineer, architect and town planner Sir Raymond Unwin Raymond Unwin, c. 1900 Born ( 1863-11-02 ) 2 November 1863 Rotherham , Yorkshire, England Died 29 June 1940 (1940-06-29) (aged 76) Lyme, Connecticut , US Nationality British Occupation(s) Engineer and town planner Known for Improvements in working class housing Sir Raymond Unwin (2 November 1863 – 29 June 1940) was a prominent and influential English engineer, architect and town planner , with an emphasis on improvements in working class housing.

Early years [ edit ] Raymond Unwin was born in Rotherham , Yorkshire and grew up in Oxford , after his father sold up his business and moved there to study. He was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford . In 1884 he returned to the North to become an apprentice engineer for Stavely Iron & Coal Company near Chesterfield .

Unwin had become interested in social issues at an early age and was inspired by the lectures and ideals of John Ruskin and William Morris . In 1885 he moved to Manchester and became secretary of Morris's local Socialist League . He wrote articles for the League's newspaper and spoke on street corners for its cause and for the Labour Church .  He also became a close friend of the socialist philosopher Edward Carpenter , whose Utopian community ideas led to his developing a small commune at Millthorpe near Sheffield .

In 1887 he returned to Staveley Iron as an engineer, working on development of mining townships and various other buildings, and joined the Sheffield Socialist Society .

In 1893 he married Richard Barry Parker 's sister Ethel, and formed a partnership in 1896 based in Buxton , Derbyshire. The partners preferred the simple vernacular style and made it their aim to improve housing standards for the working classes. They were also members of the Northern Art Worker's Guild and were close friends of Edgar Wood (1860–1935) the leading Arts and Crafts architect in the North of England and a founding member of the group.

Planning career [ edit ] In their various writings, including their book The Art of Building a Home (1901), Parker and Unwin aimed to popularise the Arts and Crafts Movement , and as a result of their success thousands of homes were built on their pattern in the early part of the 20th century.

A notable example of one of their earliest collaborations at Clayton, Staffordshire, is dated to 1899, and was originally called the Goodfellow House after the man who commissioned it. Parker and Unwin were involved in designing many of the interior fittings, which remain in the house to this day, and the initial layout of the large gardens. Goodfellow sold the house in 1926 to Colley Shorter who ran the nearby pottery works of Wilkinson's and Newport. He renamed it Chetwynd House and when he married his star designer Clarice Cliff in 1940, she moved into the house and lived there until 1972. It is her association that has made the house particularly famous since.

[ 1 ] In 1902 Parker and Unwin were asked to design a model village at New Earswick near York for Joseph and Benjamin Seebohm Rowntree , and the following year they were given the opportunity to take part in the creation of Letchworth (loosely based on the Utopian plan of Ebenezer Howard), when the First Garden City Company asked them to submit a plan.

In 1903 they were involved with the "Cottages Near a Town Exhibit" for the Northern Art Workers Guild of Manchester.  In 1904 after their plan was adopted they opened a second office at Baldock . In 1905 Henrietta Barnett asked them to plan the new garden suburb at Hampstead , now known as Hampstead Garden Suburb .

Unwin moved from Letchworth to Hampstead in 1906, and he lived here for the rest of his life at the farmstead Wyldes Farm .

[ 2 ] In 1907, Ealing Tenants Limited, a progressive cooperative in west London, appointed him to take forward the development of Brentham garden suburb.

[ 3 ] Unwin joined the Local Government Board in December 1914. In 1915 he was seconded to the Ministry of Munitions to design the villages of Gretna and Eastriggs and supervise others. From 1917 he had an influential role at the Tudor Walters Committee on working-class housing whose report was published in 1918, the year in which he was appointed Chief Architect to the newly formed Ministry of Health. That post had evolved into the Chief Technical Officer for Housing and Town Planning by the time of his retirement in November 1928.

His demonstration during the Great War of the principles of building homes rapidly and economically whilst maintaining satisfactory standards for gardens, family privacy and internal spaces, gave him great influence over the Tudor Walters Committee and hence, indirectly, over much inter-war public housing. This report marked Unwin's definitive break from the traditional 'garden city' concept, as it proposed that the new developments should be peripheral 'satellites' rather than fully-fledged garden cities.

[ 4 ] Unwin became technical adviser to the Greater London Regional Planning Committee in 1929 and largely wrote its two reports, the first published in that year and the second in 1933.

Unwin was President of the Royal Town Planning Institute (RTPI) from 1915 to 1916, President of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) from 1931 to 1933, was knighted in 1932 and consulted by United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on the New Deal in 1933. In 1936 he was appointed visiting Professor of Town Planning at Columbia University and in 1937 he received the RIBA Royal Gold Medal for architecture. He was awarded an honorary doctorate by Norwegian Institute of Technology in 1935 and by Harvard University in 1937.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Griffin Leonard. Clarice Cliff: The Fantastic Flowers of Clarice Cliff (Pavilion/Chrysalis 1998/2001 ^ Letchworth Garden City, "Architects and Planners of Letchworth Garden City" ^ Brentham Garden Suburbs, "Architects and Architecture" ^ Hall, Peter (2002).

Cities of Tomorrow . Oxford: Blackwell. p. 74.

ISBN 0-631-23252-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Raymond Unwin .

DSA Architect Biography Report: Parker & Unwin Andrew Saint, Unwin, Sir Raymond (1863–1940) , Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; online edn, Jan 2008 accessed 2 Nov 2010 The Town Extension Plan , 1912 Warburton lecture.

Pollack, Theo Mackey, "The Best Planning Book is a Century Old: A Look Back at Unwin's Town Planning in Practice ." New Urbs, The American Conservative , 12/15/2017.

Raymond Unwin Papers at the John Rylands Library , Manchester Town Planning in Practice Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Netherlands Greece Israel Artists ULAN Musée d'Orsay People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raymond_Unwin&oldid=1297033100 " Categories : English urban planners Columbia University faculty Members of the Fabian Society English civil engineers Civil servants in the Local Government Board Civil servants in the Ministry of Munitions Civil servants in the Ministry of Health (United Kingdom) Letchworth Socialist League (UK, 1885) members People from Rotherham 1863 births 1940 deaths Recipients of the Royal Gold Medal Presidents of the Royal Institute of British Architects Presidents of the Royal Town Planning Institute People educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raymond Unwin 13 languages Add topic

