Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Anatomy 2 Food source and ecology 3 Culinary Toggle Culinary subsection 3.1 North America 3.2 Asia 3.2.1 India 3.2.2 Japan 3.3 Europe 3.3.1 Great Britain 3.3.2 Italy 4 Religion 5 As currency 6 Species 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Clam 35 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Iñupiatun Italiano Jawa മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Simple English Sunda Tagalog Türkçe Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Common name for several kinds of bivalve mollusc For other uses, see Clam (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Clam" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A clam shell (species Spisula solidissima ) at Sandy Hook, New Jersey Clam is a common name for several kinds of bivalve mollusc . The word is often applied only to those that are deemed edible and live as infauna , spending most of their lives halfway buried in the sand of the sea floor or riverbeds . Clams have two shells of equal size connected by two adductor muscles and have a powerful burrowing foot.

[ 1 ] They live in both freshwater and marine environments; in salt water they prefer to burrow down into the mud and the turbidity of the water required varies with species and location; the greatest diversity of these is in North America .

[ 2 ] Clams in the culinary sense do not live attached to a substrate (whereas oysters and mussels do) and do not live near the bottom (whereas scallops do). In culinary usage, clams are commonly eaten marine bivalves, as in clam digging and the resulting soup, clam chowder . Many edible clams such as palourde clams are ovoid or triangular; [ 3 ] however, razor clams have an elongated parallel-sided shell, suggesting an old-fashioned straight razor.

[ 4 ] Some clams have life cycles of only one year, whilst at least one has been aged to more than 500 years.

[ 5 ] All clams have two calcareous shells or valves joined near a hinge with a flexible ligament and all are filter feeders .

Anatomy [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2022 ) Clam with its siphon out Littleneck clams, small hard clams , species Mercenaria mercenaria A clam's shell consists of two (usually equal) valves, which are connected by a hinge joint and a ligament that can be internal or external.

[ 6 ] The ligament provides tension to bring the valves apart, whilst one or two adductor muscles can contract to close the valves.  Clams also have kidneys, a heart, a mouth, a stomach, and a nervous system.  Many have a siphon .

[ 1 ] Food source and ecology [ edit ] Clams are shellfish that make up an important part of the web of life that keeps the seas functioning, both as filter feeders and as a food source for many different animals.

[ 7 ] Extant mammals that eat clams include both the Pacific and Atlantic species of walrus , all known subspecies of harbour seals in both the Atlantic and Pacific, most species of sea lions , including the California sea lion , bearded seals and even species of river otters that will consume the freshwater species found in Asia and North America.

[ 8 ] Birds of all kinds will also eat clams if they can catch them in the littoral zone : roseate spoonbills of North and South America, [ 9 ] the Eurasian oystercatcher , whooping crane [ 10 ] and common crane , the American flamingo of Florida and the Caribbean Sea, [ 11 ] and the common sandpiper are just a handful of the numerous birds that feast on clams all over the world. Most species of octopus have clams as a staple of their diet, up to and including the giants like the Giant Pacific octopus .

A clam dish Clams simmering in a white wine sauce Culinary [ edit ] Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on Clam Cultures around the world eat clams along with many other types of shellfish.

North America [ edit ] In culinary use, within the eastern coast of the United States and large swathes of the Maritimes of Canada, the term "clam" most often refers to the hard clam , Mercenaria mercenaria . It may also refer to a few other common edible species, such as the soft-shell clam , Mya arenaria , and the ocean quahog, Arctica islandica . Another species commercially exploited on the Atlantic Coast of the United States is the surf clam, Spisula solidissima .

Scallops are also used for food nationwide, but not cockles : they are more difficult to get than in Europe because of their habit of being further out in the tide than European species on the West Coast, and on the East Coast they are often found in salt marshes and mudflats where mosquitoes are abundant.

[ 12 ] There are several edible species in the Eastern United States: Americardia media , also known as the strawberry cockle, is found from Cape Hatteras down into the Caribbean Sea and all of Florida; Trachycardium muricatum has a similar range to the strawberry cockle; and Dinocardium robustum , which grows to be many times the size of the European cockle.

[ 13 ] Historically, they were caught on a small scale on the Outer Banks , barrier islands off North Carolina, and put in soups, steamed or pickled.

[ 14 ] Up and down the coast of the Eastern U.S., the bamboo clam , Ensis directus , is prized by Americans for making clam strips , although because of its nature of burrowing into the sand very close to the beach, it cannot be harvested by mechanical means without damaging the beaches.

[ 15 ] The bamboo clam is also notorious for having a very sharp edge of its shell, and when harvested by hand must be handled with great care.

On the U.S. West Coast, there are several species that have been consumed for thousands of years, evidenced by middens full of clamshells near the shore and their consumption by nations including the Chumash of California, the Nisqually of Washington state and the Tsawwassen of British Columbia .

[ 16 ] The butter clam, Saxidomus gigantea , [ 17 ] the Pacific razor clam, Siliqua patula , [ 18 ] gaper clams Tresus capax , [ 19 ] the geoduck clam, Panopea generosa [ 20 ] and the Pismo clam, Tivela stultorum [ 21 ] are all eaten as delicacies.

Clams can be eaten raw, steamed, boiled, baked or fried . They can also be made into clam chowder , clams casino , clam cakes , or stuffies , or they can be cooked using hot rocks and seaweed in a New England clam bake . On the West Coast, they are an ingredient in making cioppino and local variants of ceviche .

[ 22 ] Asia [ edit ] India [ edit ] Clams are eaten more in the coastal regions of India, especially in the Konkan, Kerala , Bengal and coastal regions of Karnataka , Tamil Nadu regions.

[ citation needed ] In Kerala , clams are used to make curries and fried with coconut. In the Malabar region it is known as "elambakka" and in middle kerala it is known as "kakka". Clam curry made with coconut is a dish from Malabar especially in the Thalassery region. On the southwestern coast of India , also known as the Konkan region of Maharashtra , clams are used in curries and side dishes, like Tisaryachi Ekshipi, which is clams with one shell on.

Beary Muslim households in the Mangalore region prepare a main dish with clams called Kowldo Pinde. In Udupi and Mangalore regions, it is called marvai in the local Tulu language . It is used to prepare many dishes like marvai sukka , marvai gassi , and marvai pundi .

[ citation needed ] Japan [ edit ] In Japan, clams are often an ingredient of mixed seafood dishes. They can also be made into hot pot , miso soup or tsukudani . The more commonly used varieties of clams in Japanese cooking are the Shijimi ( Corbicula japonica ), the Asari ( Venerupis philippinarum ) and the Hamaguri ( Meretrix lusoria ).

[ 23 ] Europe [ edit ] Great Britain [ edit ] The rocky terrain and pebbly shores of the seacoast that surrounds Great Britain provide ample habitat for shellfish including clams. Historically, British cuisine has been more heavily based on beef and dairy products than seafood, although there is evidence going back to before most recorded history of coastal shell middens near Weymouth and present day York.

[ 24 ] 70% of the seafood cultivated for aquaculture or commercial harvesting is exported to the continent, [ 25 ] though present-day younger populations are eating more of the catch than a generation ago.

[ citation needed ] Staple favourites of the British public and local scavengers include the razorfish, Ensis siliqua , a slightly smaller cousin of the bamboo clam of eastern North America.

[ 26 ] These can be found for sale in open-air markets like Billingsgate Market in London; they have a similar taste to their North American cousin.

[ 27 ] Cockles, specifically the common cockle , are a staple find on beaches in western Wales and further north in the Dee Estuary . The accidentally introduced hard-shell quahog is also found in British waters, mainly those near England, and does see some use in British cuisine. The Palourde clam by far is the most common native clam and it is both commercially harvested as well as locally collected, and Spisula solida , a relative of the Atlantic surf clam on the other side of the Atlantic, is seeing increased interest as a food source and aquaculture candidate; it is mainly found in the British Isles in Europe.

[ 28 ] Italy [ edit ] In Italy, clams are often an ingredient of mixed seafood dishes or are eaten together with pasta. The more commonly used varieties of clams in Italian cooking are the vongola ( Venerupis decussata ) , the cozza (Mytilus galloprovincialis) and the tellina ( Donax trunculus ) . Though dattero di mare (Lithophaga lithophaga) was once eaten, overfishing drove it to the verge of extinction (it takes 15 to 35 years to reach adult size and could only be harvested by smashing the calcarean rocks that form its habitat) and the Italian government has declared it an endangered species since 1998 and its harvest and sale are forbidden.

[ citation needed ] Religion [ edit ] In Islam, clams are considered halal in three Sunni sects , but not in Hanafi, as only fish are considered halal in Hanafi jurisprudence , not other aquatic animals. In Judaism, clams are not kosher .

As currency [ edit ] Some species of clam, particularly Mercenaria mercenaria , were in the past used by the Algonquians of Eastern North America to manufacture wampum , a type of sacred jewellery ; and to make shell money .

[ 29 ] Species [ edit ] One of the world's largest clam fossils (187 cm), a Sphenoceramus steenstrupi specimen from Greenland in the Geological Museum in Copenhagen .

Maxima clam , Tridacna maxima Edible: Ark clams , family Arcidae (most popular in Indonesia and Singapore ) Atlantic jackknife clam : Ensis directus Atlantic surf clam : Spisula solidissima Common cockle: Cerastoderma edule (Native to most of Europe, with very large populations in Ireland and Great Britain) Atlantic Giant Cockle: Dinocardium robustum Geoduck : Panopea abrupta or Panope generosa (largest burrowing clam in the world) Gould's razor shell, Solen strictus (popular in Korea, Japan, and Taiwan) Grooved carpet shell : Ruditapes decussatus Hard clam or Northern Quahog: Mercenaria mercenaria (Native to Eastern USA and Maritime Canada ) Lyrate Asiatic hard clam: Meretrix lyrata Manila clam: Venerupis philippinarum Ocean quahog : Arctica islandica Pacific razor clam : Siliqua patula Pipis, Plebidonax deltoides and Paphies australis Pismo clam: Tivela stultorum Pod razor clam: Ensis siliqua Spoot: Ensis magnus Soft clam: Mya arenaria Not usually considered edible: Nut clams or pointed nut clams, family Nuculidae Duck clams or trough shells , family Mactridae Marsh clams, family Corbiculidae File clams, family Limidae Giant clam : Tridacna gigas This clam is native to East Asia and is edible, but should be avoided because of slow reproduction.

Asian or Asiatic clam : genus Corbicula Peppery furrow shell : Scrobicularia plana See also [ edit ] Clam juice – Broth obtained from clams Clamshell (container) Clamshell design List of clam dishes – dishes and foods prepared using clams Mussel – Type of bivalve mollusc Shipworm – Family of molluscs Water purification – Process of removing impurities from water References [ edit ] ^ a b "Clam" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2016.

^ "Can You Eat Freshwater Clams in the Nature?" . 29 April 2019. Archived from the original on 28 July 2020.

- "Musseling in" . August 2012.

- "USFWS: America's Mussels" .

^ "Clams recipes" .

BBC Food . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

^ "Clam" .

Lexico . Oxford. Archived from the original on 25 February 2017.

^ Danielle Elliot (14 November 2013).

"Ming the Clam, World's Oldest Animal, Was Actually 507 Years Old" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on 20 November 2013 . Retrieved 15 November 2013 .

^ "An Introduction to Shell Structures" .

Marine Bivalve Shells of the British Isles . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ "Outreach & Education" (PDF) . NOAA Fisheries. 11 June 2020.

^ "River Otters" . West Sound Wildlife. Archived from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2020 .

- "Asian small-clawed otter" . Marwell Zoo . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ "Roseate Spoonbill" .

Birds of Ambergris Caye .

^ "Whooping Crane" .

National Geographic . 11 November 2010. Archived from the original on 25 May 2017.

^ "The Birds of Bonaire" .

Bonaire .

^ "Clams" .

Fishing & Shellfishing . Washington Department of Fish & Wildlife. Archived from the original on 16 March 2018 . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

- "Cockle" .

SeafoodSource . Diversified Communications. 23 January 2014.

^ "Atlantic Giant Cockle (Dinocardium robustum)" . College of Charleston . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ Smith, Prudence (1831).

Modern American Cookery ... With a list of family medical recipes, and a valuable miscellany . J. and J. Harper. p. 109 – via Google Books.

^ "dredging of clams" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2018 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ "Nisqually People and the River" . Yelm History Project. Archived from the original on 13 September 2022 . Retrieved 10 March 2018 .

- Sophia Cross (29 September 2017).

"What Did the Chumash Eat?" .

Classroom . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

- "Tsawwassen First Nation History and Timeline" . Tsawwassen First Nation. 10 November 2011. Archived from the original on 11 November 2018 . Retrieved 10 November 2018 .

^ Mark Yuasa (27 June 2015).

"Plenty of clams, oysters in Puget Sound and Hood Canal" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ Kelly, Mike (1 February 2018).

"Dig Those Razor Clams" .

North Coast Journal . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ Lackner, Bill.

"Oregon clam chowder" .

Coos Bay World . Retrieved 10 March 2018 .

^ Naomi Tomky (10 August 2018).

"All About Geoduck: The Life of a (Delicious) Oversized Mollusk" .

serious eats . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ Christopher Young (12 April 2013).

"Digging for Pismo clams at San Diego Beaches" .

San Diego Reader . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ Langdon Cook (4 April 2014).

"razor clams" . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ Kasai, Akihide; Toyohara, Haruhiko; Nakata, Akiko; Miura, Tsunehiro; Azuma, Nobuyuki (1 January 2006).

"Food sources for the bivalve Corbicula japonica in the foremost fishing lakes estimated from stable isotope analysis" .

Fisheries Science .

72 (1): 105– 114.

Bibcode : 2006FisSc..72..105K .

doi : 10.1111/j.1444-2906.2006.01123.x .

ISSN 1444-2906 .

S2CID 26905032 .

^ Thomas, Ken; Mannino, Marcello (1998).

"Mesolithic middens and molluscan ecology: A view from southern Britain" .

Archaeology International .

2 : 17.

doi : 10.5334/ai.0207 .

^ Louise Harkell (10 April 2021).

"Trade insights: More than 70% of UK seafood exports go to EU" .

undercurrent news . Retrieved 8 November 2021 .

^ "Razorfish" .

British Sea Fishing . 12 October 2012.

^ "Razor Clams on display in Billingsgate Fish Market, London" . Alamy.

^ Joaquim, Sandra; Matias, Domitília; Matias, Ana Margarete; Gonçalves, Rui; Chícharo, Luís; Gaspar, Miguel B. (2016).

"New species in aquaculture: Are the striped venus clam Chamelea gallina(Linnaeus, 1758) and the surf clam Spisula solida(Linnaeus 1758) potential candidates for diversification in shellfish aquaculture?" .

Aquaculture Research .

47 (4): 1327– 1340.

doi : 10.1111/are.12593 .

^ Kurlansky, Mark (2006), The Big Oyster: History on the Half Shell , Penguin Group , pp.

16, 30–31 , ISBN 978-0-345-47638-8 , OCLC 60550567 .

External links [ edit ] Look up clam in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikibooks Cookbook has a recipe/module on Clam Wikimedia Commons has media related to Clams .

"Deep In The Ocean A Clam That Acts Like A Plant" Science Daily March 2, 2007 Hardshell Clams v t e Commercial mollusks Marine gastropods Abalone Periwinkle Whelk Buccinum undatum Bullacta exarata Kelletia kelletii Kelletia lischkei Land and freshwater gastropods Helix pomatia Cornu aspersum Helix aperta Cepaea nemoralis Otala lactea Escargot Free-swimming marine bivalves Scallop Queen scallop Pecten maximus Pecten jacobaeus Argopecten irradians Placopecten magellanicus Infaunal bivalves Clam Atlantic surf clam Soft-shell clam Mercenaria mercenaria Austrovenus stutchburyi Saxidomus nuttalli Arctica islandica Cockle Geoduck Spisula solidissima Paphies ventricosa Paphies australis Tuatua Ruditapes largillierti Grooved carpet shell Sessile bivalves Oyster Mussel Pearl oyster Pinctada maxima Freshwater bivalves Freshwater pearl mussel Cephalopods Octopus Squid Cuttlefish Techniques Heliciculture Gathering by hand Clam digging Dredging Oyster farming Oyster boats Pearl farming Pearl diving Ama divers Trawling List of fishing topics by subject v t e Edible mollusks Bivalves Clams Atlantic jackknife Atlantic surf Geoduck Grooved carpet shell Hard clam Horse Mactra stultorum Blunt gaper Ocean quahog Pacific razor Venus California butterclam Senilia senilis Smooth clam Soft-shell Triangle shell Tuatua Japanese littleneck Razor clam Pod razor Ensis (razor genus) Paphies Cockles Common Blood Goolwa New Zealand Sydney Giant Atlantic Mussels Blue Mediterranean New Zealand green-lipped California Brown Asian/Philippine green Date Mytilidae (mussel family) Oysters Eastern Olympia Southern mud Colchester native Pacific Portuguese Windowpane Rock Sydney rock Ostra chilena /Bluff Gillardeau oysters Crassostrea ("true oyster" genus) Scallops Atlantic bay Great/king New Zealand Pecten jacobaeus Peruvian calico Yesso Placopecten magellanicus Gastropods Abalone White Red Black Green Pink Blacklip Greenlip Green ormer Pāua (group of four species) South African abalone Chilean Conches Queen Elegant Dog Limpets Black-foot opihi/Hawaiian Turtle/talc Yellow-foot opihi China Common European Rayed Mediterranean Ribbed Mediterranean Rustic Periwinkles Common Banded Littorina sitkana Whelks Channeled Common Kellet's Kelletia lischkei Knobbed Pear whelk Lightning Other snails Sea Mud-flat Korean mud Chorus giganteus Bailer Land Cornu aspersum Helix lucorum Helix pomatia Freshwater Apple Nerites Inkfish Cuttlefish Spineless Bottletail Octopus Common Atlantic white-spotted Big blue Pacific giant Southern red Mimic Amphioctopus fangsiao Squid New Zealand arrow Japanese flying Humboldt Neon flying Chitons Chiton magnificus Acanthopleura echinata Acanthopleura granulata Related topics Oyster farming Land snail farming Gastropod anatomy Bivalve anatomy Category v t e Meat Poultry Cassowary Chicken Duck Emu Goose Ostrich Pigeon Quail Rhea Turkey Livestock Alpaca Beef Beefalo Bison Buffalo Camel Cat Goat Dog Donkey Snails Frog Guinea pig Horse Lamb and mutton Llama Pork Veal Yak Żubroń Game Alligator Bat Bear Bushmeat Boar Crocodile Elephant Fox Iguana Kangaroo Monkey Mouse Pangolin Rat Hare Rabbit Snake Turtle Venison Dog Wolf Fish Anchovy Basa Bass Carp Catfish Cod Crappie Eel Flounder Grouper Haddock Halibut Herring Kingfish Mackerel Mahi Mahi Marlin Milkfish Orange roughy Pacific saury Perch Pike Pollock Salmon Sardine Shark Sole Swai Swordfish Tilapia Trout Tuna Walleye Shellfish and other seafood Abalone Calamari Chiton Clam Crab Crayfish Dolphin Lobster Mussel Octopus Oyster Scallop Seal Shrimp/prawn Sea cucumber Sea urchin Whale Sea squirt Jellyfish Insects Ants Black soldier fly maggots Cicada Crickets Flour Grasshoppers ( locust ) Mealworm Mezcal worm Silkworm Mopane worm Palm grub Cuts and preparation Aged Bacon Barbecued Biltong Braised Burger Charcuterie Chop Confit Corned Cured Cutlet Dried Dum Fermented Fillet / supreme Forcemeat Cretons Pâté Fried Frozen Ground Ham Jerky Kebab Kidney Liver Luncheon meat Marinated Meatball Meatloaf Offal Pickled Pemmican Poached Potted Rillettes Roasted Salt-cured Salumi Sausage Smoked Steak Stewed Tandoor Tartare List articles Meat dishes Beef Chicken Fish Goat Lamb Pork Ham Seafood Veal Steaks Meatball Smoked foods Sausage Other Countries by meat consumption Countries by meat production Food and drink prohibitions Meat substitutes Ethics and psychology Ethics of eating meat Carnism Animal rights Psychology of eating meat Meat paradox Alternatives Vegetarianism Semi-vegetarianism Pescetarianism Pollotarianism Plant-based diet Meat alternative Veganism Meat science Beef hormone controversy Drip loss Feed conversion ratio Preservation Tenderness Water holding capacity Meat industry Broker Branch house Butcher Cutter Environmental impact Factory farming Jobber Packing Slaughter Slaughterhouse Related subjects Arachnophagy Artificial marbling Cannibalism Case-ready meat Meat diaper Cultured meat Entomophagy Mystery meat Offal Non-vegetarian food in India Pink slime Raw meat Red meat Roadkill cuisine Warmed-over flavor White meat Food portal Category: Meat v t e Seafood Fish Anchovy Barramundi Billfish Carp Catfish Cod Eel Flatfish Flounder Herring Mackerel Salmon Sardine Shark Sturgeon Swordfish Tilapia Trout Tuna Whitebait Shellfish Abalone Cockles Conch Crab Crayfish Geoduck Krill Lobster Mussels Oysters Prawn/Shrimp Scallops Sea urchins Crustaceans Molluscs Other seafood Jellyfish Marine mammals Whale Octopus Sea cucumber Seaweed Squid Algae List of seafoods more...

Processed seafood Caviar Dried fish Canned fish Cod liver oil Cured fish Fermented fish Fish fillet Fish head Fish oil Fish sauce Fish paste Fish steak Fish stock Lutefisk Salted fish Salted squid Shark liver oil Shrimp paste Smoked fish Stockfish Surimi Roe more...

Seafood dishes List of seafood dishes List of crab dishes List of fish dishes List of raw fish dishes List of tuna dishes Bisque Chowder Fish and chips Fish pie Fish soup Fried fish Seafood boil Shark fin soup Sushi Sushi bake more...

Health hazards Ciguatera Fish diseases and parasites Mercury in fish Metagonimiasis Scombroid food poisoning Shellfish poisoning Advisory services Seafood mislabelling Sustainable seafood Sustainable seafood advisory lists and certification Animal welfare Declawing of crabs Eyestalk ablation Eating live seafood Goldfish swallowing Live fish trade Pain in fish Pain in crustaceans Shark finning Related topics Fish preservation Fish processing Gathering seafood by hand History of seafood History of sushi List of seafood companies Pescetarianism Raw bar Salmon cannery Seafood restaurant Food portal Category: Seafood Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐m98th
Cached time: 20250818035348
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.721 seconds
Real time usage: 0.868 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4664/1000000
Revision size: 22969/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 203826/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4316/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 165161/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.442/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20948360/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  679.688      1 -total
 34.83%  236.768      1 Template:Reflist
 15.20%  103.291      9 Template:Navbox
 14.39%   97.804     25 Template:Cite_web
 11.15%   75.777      4 Template:Lang
  8.99%   61.114      1 Template:Commercial_molluscs
  8.74%   59.398      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.94%   53.997      4 Template:Sister_project
  7.73%   52.507      4 Template:Side_box
  7.38%   50.174      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:55528:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818035348 and revision id 1306511852. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clam&oldid=1306511852 " Categories : Clams Mollusc common names Mollusc products Cuisine of New England Cuisine of the Southwestern United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from November 2021 Articles to be expanded from December 2022 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Articles containing Tulu-language text Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 03:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clam 35 languages Add topic

