Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The term 2 Historical background 3 Classical Marxism Toggle Classical Marxism subsection 3.1 Marx's dialectics 3.2 Engels's dialectics 4 Vladimir Lenin's contributions 5 Trotskyism 6 Western Marxism Toggle Western Marxism subsection 6.1 György Lukács's contributions 6.2 Slavoj Žižek's contributions 7 Marxism-Leninism Toggle Marxism-Leninism subsection 7.1 Joseph Stalin 7.2 Mao Zedong 7.3 Ho Chi Minh 8 As a heuristic in science and elsewhere 9 Philosophical evaluations Toggle Philosophical evaluations subsection 9.1 Of the term 9.2 Marxist rejection 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Dialectical materialism 62 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dialectical materialist ) Philosophy derived from the works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Dialectical materialism is a materialist theory based upon the writings of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels that has found widespread applications in a variety of philosophical disciplines ranging from philosophy of history to philosophy of science .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As a materialist philosophy, Marxist dialectics emphasizes the importance of real-world conditions and the presence of contradictions within and among social relations, such as social class , labour economics , and socioeconomic interactions.

[ 3 ] Within Marxism, a contradiction is a relationship in which two forces oppose each other, leading to mutual development.

[ 4 ] : 256 The first law of dialectics is about “the unity and conflict of opposites”. It explains that all things are made up of opposing forces, not purely "good" nor purely "bad", but that everything contains internal contradictions at varying levels of aspects we might call "good" or "bad", depending on the conditions and perspective. An example of this unity and conflict is the negative and positive particles that make up atoms.

[ 5 ] The second law of dialectics is ‘quantity into quality’ that small quantitative changes, such as increasing the heat of water by one degree at a time, at a certain point result in a qualitative change when the water turns into steam.

[ 5 ] The third law is the ‘negation of the negation’. In the history of life on Earth, photosynthetic organisms evolved first, and their byproduct—molecular oxygen—was toxic to life. At this point oxygen negated life. But when life evolved bacteria that utilized oxygen for its own metabolism, oxygen stopped being a toxin for a whole branch of organisms. This was the 'negation of the negation', and an example of something turning into its opposite.

[ 5 ] In contrast with the idealist perspective of Hegelian dialectics , the materialist perspective of Marxist dialectics emphasizes that contradictions in material phenomena could be resolved with dialectical analysis, from which is synthesized the solution that resolves the contradiction, whilst retaining the essence of the phenomena. Marx proposed that the most effective solution to the problems caused by contradiction was to address the contradiction and then rearrange the systems of social organization that are the root of the problem.

[ 6 ] Dialectical materialism recognises the evolution of the natural world, and thus the emergence of new qualities of being human and of human existence. Engels used the metaphysical insight that the higher level of human existence emerges from and is rooted in the lower level of human existence. He believed that the higher level of being is a new order with irreducible laws, and that evolution is governed by laws of development, which reflect the basic properties of matter in motion .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In the 20th century, the revolutionary Marxist Vladimir Lenin proposed his own interpretation of Marxist dialectics, which took an essential place among the views and doctrines of Leninism and was later propagated by his followers such as Leon Trotsky . Since the 1930s, a Marxist-Leninist reading of dialectical materialism introduced by such leaders of communist states as Joseph Stalin ( Soviet Union ) and Mao Zedong ( Maoist China) set forth the official formulations on dialectical materialism and historical materialism , which were taught in state systems of education. In the West, different approaches towards Marxist dialectics were proposed by such authors of Western Marxism as György Lukács and Slavoj Žižek .

The term [ edit ] The term dialectical materialism was coined in 1887 by Joseph Dietzgen , a socialist who corresponded with Marx, during and after the failed 1848 German Revolution .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Casual mention of the term "dialectical materialism" is also found in the biography Frederick Engels , by philosopher Karl Kautsky , [ 11 ] written in 1899. Marx himself had talked about the "materialist conception of history", which was later referred to as " historical materialism " by Engels. Engels "substantially developed materialist dialectics" in his incomplete 1883 work Dialectics of Nature .

[ 12 ] Georgi Plekhanov , the father of Russian Marxism, first used the term "dialectical materialism" in 1891 in his writings on Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel and Marx.

[ 13 ] Stalin further delineated and defined dialectical and historical materialism as the world outlook of Marxism–Leninism , and as a method to study society and its history.

[ 14 ] Historical background [ edit ] Marx and Engels each began their adulthood as Young Hegelians , one of several groups of intellectuals inspired by the philosopher Hegel.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Marx's doctoral thesis, The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature , was concerned with the atomism of Epicurus and Democritus , which is considered the foundation of materialist philosophy. Marx was also familiar with Lucretius 's theory of clinamen .

Marx and Engels both concluded that Hegelian philosophy , at least as interpreted by their former colleagues, was too abstract and was being misapplied in attempts to explain the social injustice in recently industrializing countries such as Germany , France , and the United Kingdom , which was a growing concern in the early 1840s, as exemplified by Dickensian inequity.

[ 16 ] In contrast to the conventional Hegelian dialectic of the day, which emphasized the idealist observation that human experience is dependent on the mind's perceptions, Marx developed Marxist dialectics , which emphasized the materialist view that the world of the concrete shapes socioeconomic interactions and that those in turn determine sociopolitical reality.

[ 15 ] Whereas some Hegelians blamed religious alienation (estrangement from the traditional comforts of religion) for societal ills , Marx and Engels concluded that alienation from economic and political autonomy , coupled with exploitation and poverty , was the real culprit.

[ 16 ] In keeping with dialectical ideas, Marx and Engels thus created an alternative theory, not only of why the world is the way it is but also of which actions people should take to make it the way it ought to be. In Theses on Feuerbach (1845), Marx wrote a famous quote, "The philosophers have only interpreted the world, in various ways. The point, however, is to change it." [ 15 ] Dialectical materialism is thus closely related to Marx's and Engels's historical materialism (and has sometimes been viewed as synonymous with it). Marx rejected Fichte 's language of " thesis, antithesis, synthesis ".

[ 17 ] Dialectical materialism is an aspect of the broader subject of materialism , which asserts the primacy of the material world: in short, matter precedes thought. Materialism is a realist philosophy of science , [ 18 ] which holds that the world is material; that all phenomena in the universe consist of "matter in motion," wherein all things are interdependent and interconnected and develop according to natural law ; that the world exists outside consciousness and independently of people's perception of it; that thought is a reflection of the material world in the brain, and that the world is in principle knowable.

Marx criticized classical materialism as another idealist philosophy—idealist because of its transhistorical understanding of material contexts. The Young Hegelian Ludwig Feuerbach had rejected Hegel's idealistic philosophy and advocated materialism.

[ 19 ] Despite being strongly influenced by Feuerbach, [ 19 ] Marx rejected Feuerbach's version of materialism ( anthropological materialism ) as inconsistent.

[ 20 ] The writings of Engels, especially Anti-Dühring (1878) and Dialectics of Nature (1875–82), were the source of the main doctrines of dialectical materialism.

[ 17 ] Classical Marxism [ edit ] Marx's dialectics [ edit ] Main article: Marxist dialectic The concept of dialectical materialism emerges from statements by Marx in the second edition postface to his magnum opus , Das Kapital . There Marx says he intends to use Hegelian dialectics but in revised form. He defends Hegel against those who view him as a "dead dog" and then says, "I openly avowed myself as the pupil of that mighty thinker Hegel".

[ 21 ] Marx credits Hegel with "being the first to present [dialectic's] form of working in a comprehensive and conscious manner". But he then criticizes Hegel for turning dialectics upside down: "With him it is standing on its head. It must be turned right side up again, if you would discover the rational kernel within the mystical shell.".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Marx's criticism of Hegel asserts that Hegel's dialectics go astray by dealing with ideas, with the human mind. Hegel's dialectic, Marx says, inappropriately concerns "the process of the human brain"; it focuses on ideas. Hegel's thought is in fact sometimes called dialectical idealism , and Hegel himself is counted among a number of other philosophers known as the German idealists . Marx, on the contrary, believed that dialectics should deal not with the mental world of ideas but with "the material world", the world of production and other economic activity.

[ 22 ] For Marx, a contradiction can be solved by a desperate struggle to change the social world. This was a very important transformation because it allowed him to move dialectics out of the contextual subject of philosophy and into the study of social relations based on the material world.

[ 24 ] For Marx, human history cannot be fitted into any neat a priori schema. He explicitly rejects the idea of Hegel's followers that history can be understood as "a person apart, a metaphysical subject of which real human individuals are but the bearers".

[ 25 ] To interpret history as though previous social formations have somehow been aiming themselves toward the present state of affairs is "to misunderstand the historical movement by which the successive generations transformed the results acquired by the generations that preceded them".

[ 26 ] Marx's rejection of this sort of teleology was one reason for his enthusiastic (though not entirely uncritical) reception of Charles Darwin 's theory of natural selection .

[ 27 ] For Marx, dialectics is not a formula for generating predetermined outcomes but is a method for the empirical study of social processes in terms of interrelations, development, and transformation. In his introduction to the Penguin edition of Marx's Capital , Ernest Mandel writes, "When the dialectical method is applied to the study of economic problems, economic phenomena are not viewed separately from each other, by bits and pieces, but in their inner connection as an integrated totality, structured around, and by, a basic predominant mode of production." [ 28 ] Marx's own writings are almost exclusively concerned with understanding human history in terms of systemic processes, based on modes of production (broadly speaking, the ways in which societies are organized to employ their technological powers to interact with their material surroundings). This is called historical materialism . More narrowly, within the framework of this general theory of history, most of Marx's writing is devoted to an analysis of the specific structure and development of the capitalist economy .

For his part, Engels applies a "dialectical" approach to the natural world in general, arguing that contemporary science is increasingly recognizing the necessity of viewing natural processes in terms of interconnectedness , development, and transformation. Some scholars have doubted that Engels' "dialectics of nature" is a legitimate extension of Marx's approach to social processes.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Other scholars have argued that despite Marx's insistence that humans are natural beings in an evolving, mutual relationship with the rest of nature, Marx's own writings pay inadequate attention to the ways in which human agency is constrained by such factors as biology, geography, and ecology.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Engels's dialectics [ edit ] Engels postulated three laws of dialectics from his reading of Hegel's Science of Logic .

[ 35 ] Engels elucidated these laws as the materialist dialectic in his work Dialectics of Nature : The law of the unity and conflict of opposites The law of the passage of quantitative changes into qualitative changes The law of the negation of the negation The first law, which originates with the ancient Ionian philosopher Heraclitus , [ 36 ] can be clarified through the following examples: For example, in biological evolution the formation of new forms of life occurs precisely through the unity and struggle of opposites in heredity and variability. In physical processes the nature of light was explained precisely by means of the unity and struggle of opposites appearing, for example, as corpuscular and wave properties; this, moreover, cleared the path for a “drama of ideas” in physical science, whereby the opposition and synthesis of corpuscular and wave theories characterized scientific progress. The most basic expression of the unity and struggle of opposites in the world of commodity capitalism is that of use value and value; the most highly developed oppositions in capitalism are the working class and the bourgeoisie, — The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (1979) , Unity and Struggle of Opposites – Web page The first law was seen by both Hegel and Vladimir Lenin as the central feature of a dialectical understanding: It is in this dialectic as it is here understood, that is, in the grasping of oppositions in their unity, or of the positive in the negative, that speculative thought consists. It is the most important aspect of dialectic.

— Hegel, Science of Logic , § 69, (p. 56 in the Miller edition) The splitting of a single whole and the cognition of its contradictory parts is the essence (one of the "essentials", one of the principal, if not the principal, characteristics or features) of dialectics. That is precisely how Hegel, too, puts the matter.

— Lenin's Collected Works: Volume 38 , p. 359: On the question of dialectics.

The second law Hegel took from Ancient Greek philosophers, notably the paradox of the heap , and explanation by Aristotle , [ 37 ] and it is equated with what scientists call phase transitions . It may be traced to the ancient Ionian philosophers, particularly Anaximenes [ 38 ] from whom Aristotle, Hegel, and Engels inherited the concept. For all these authors, one of the main illustrations is the phase transitions of water. There has also been an effort to apply this mechanism to social phenomena, whereby population increases result in changes in social structure. The law of the passage of quantitative changes into qualitative changes can also be applied to the process of social change and class conflict .

[ 39 ] The third law, "negation of the negation", originated with Hegel. Although Hegel coined the term "negation of the negation", it gained its fame from Marx's using it in Capital . There Marx wrote this: "The [death] knell of capitalist private property sounds. The expropriators are expropriated. The capitalist mode of appropriation, the result of the capitalist mode of production, produces capitalist private property. This is the first negation of individual private property ... But capitalist production begets, with the inexorability of a law of Nature, its own negation. It [this new negation] is the negation of negation." [ 40 ] Z. A. Jordan notes, "Engels made constant use of the metaphysical insight that the higher level of existence emerges from and has its roots in the lower; that the higher level constitutes a new order of being with its irreducible laws; and that this process of evolutionary advance is governed by laws of development which reflect basic properties of 'matter in motion as a whole'." [ 7 ] Engels writes that negation of negation is "A very simple process which is taking place everywhere and every day, which any child can understand".   Engels' assertion is amplified in Dialectics4kids.org, featured in the film Half Nelson , in which Ryan Gosling was nominated for an academy award, playing a classroom teacher expounding Engels’ dialectics.

-- Anti-Duhring , pg 148 International Publishers, 1966 Vladimir Lenin's contributions [ edit ] Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e After reading Hegel's Science of Logic in 1914, Lenin made some brief notes outlining three "elements" of logic.

[ 41 ] They are: The determination of the concept out of itself [the thing itself must be considered in its relations and in its development]; The contradictory nature of the thing itself (the other of itself), the contradictory forces and tendencies in each phenomenon; The union of analysis and synthesis.

Lenin develops these in a further series of notes, and appears to argue that "the transition of quantity into quality and vice versa" is an example of the unity and opposition of opposites expressed tentatively as "not only the unity of opposites but the transitions of every determination, quality, feature, side, property into every other [into its opposite?]." In his essay "On the Question of Dialectics", Lenin stated, "Development is the 'struggle' of opposites."
He stated, "The unity (coincidence, identity, equal action) of opposites is conditional, temporary, transitory, relative. The struggle of mutually exclusive opposites is absolute, just as development and motion are absolute." [ 42 ] In Materialism and Empiriocriticism (1908), Lenin explained dialectical materialism as three axes: (i) the materialist inversion of Hegelian dialectics, (ii) the historicity of ethical principles ordered to class struggle , and (iii) the convergence of " laws of evolution " in physics ( Helmholtz ), biology ( Darwin ), and in political economy (Marx). Hence, Lenin was philosophically positioned between historicist Marxism ( Labriola ) and determinist Marxism—a political position close to " social Darwinism " (Kautsky) [ citation needed ] . Moreover, late-century discoveries in physics ( x-rays , electrons ), and the beginning of quantum mechanics , philosophically challenged previous conceptions of matter and materialism, thus matter seemed to be disappearing. Lenin disagreed: 'Matter disappears' means that the limit within which we have hitherto known matter disappears, and that our knowledge is penetrating deeper; properties of matter are disappearing that formerly seemed absolute, immutable, and primary, and which are now revealed to be relative and characteristic only of certain states of matter. For the sole 'property' of matter, with whose recognition philosophical materialism is bound up, is the property of being an objective reality , of existing outside of the mind.

Lenin was developing the work of Engels, who said that "with each epoch-making discovery, even in the sphere of natural science , materialism has to change its form".

[ 43 ] One of Lenin's challenges was distancing materialism, as a viable philosophical outlook, from the "vulgar materialism" expressed in the statement "the brain secretes thought in the same way as the liver secretes bile" (attributed to 18th-century physician Pierre Jean Georges Cabanis ); "metaphysical materialism" (matter composed of immutable particles); and 19th-century "mechanical materialism" (matter as random molecules interacting per the laws of mechanics). The philosophic solution that Lenin (and Engels) proposed was "dialectical materialism", wherein matter is defined as objective reality , theoretically consistent with (new) developments occurring in the sciences.

Lenin reassessed Feuerbach's philosophy and concluded that it was in line with dialectical materialism.

[ 20 ] [ dubious – discuss ] Trotskyism [ edit ] In 1926, Trotsky said in a speech: It is the task of science and technology to make matter subject to man, together with space and time, which are inseparable from matter. True, there are certain idealist books—not of a clerical character, but philosophical ones—wherein you can read that time and space are categories of our minds, that they result from the requirements of our thinking, and that nothing actually corresponds to them in reality. But it is difficult to agree with this view. If any idealist philosopher, instead of arriving in time to catch the 9 pm train, should turn up two minutes late, he would see the tail of the departing train and would be convinced by his own eyes that time and space are inseparable from material reality. The task is to diminish this space, to overcome it, to economise time, to prolong human life, to register past time, to raise life to a higher level and enrich it. This is the reason for the struggle with space and time, at the basis of which lies the struggle to subject matter to man—matter, which constitutes the foundation not only of everything that really exists, but also of all imagination ... Every science is an accumulation of knowledge, based on experience relating to matter, to its properties; an accumulation of generalised understanding of how to subject this matter to the interests and needs of man.

[ 44 ] In his book In Defence of Marxism , Leon Trotsky defended the dialectical method of scientific socialism during the factional schisms within the American Trotskyist movement in the period 1939–40. Trotsky viewed dialectics as an essential method of analysis to discern class nature of the Soviet Union . Specifically, he described scientific socialism as "the conscious expression of the unconscious historical process; namely, the instinctive and elemental drive of the proletariat to reconstruct society on communist beginnings".

[ 45 ] Western Marxism [ edit ] György Lukács's contributions [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dialectical materialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) György Lukács , Minister of Culture in the brief Béla Kun government of the Hungarian Soviet Republic (1919), published History and Class Consciousness (1923), in which he defined dialectical materialism as the knowledge of society as a whole, knowledge which, in itself, was the class consciousness of the proletariat . In the first chapter "What is Orthodox Marxism?", Lukács defined orthodoxy as fidelity to the "Marxist method", not fidelity to "dogmas": Orthodox Marxism , therefore, does not imply the uncritical acceptance of the results of Marx's investigations. It is not the "belief" in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a "sacred" book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method. It is the scientific conviction that dialectical materialism is the road to truth and that its methods can be developed, expanded, and deepened, only along the lines laid down by its founders. (§1) In his later works and actions, Lukács became a leader of Democratic Marxism . He modified many of his formulations of his 1923 works and went on to develop a Marxist ontology and played an active role in democratic movements in Hungary in 1956 and the 1960s. He and his associates became sharply critical of the formulation of dialectical materialism in the Soviet Union that was exported to those countries under its control. In the 1960s, his associates became known as the Budapest School .

Lukács, in his philosophical criticism of Marxist revisionism , proposed an intellectual return to the Marxist method. So did Louis Althusser , who later defined Marxism and psychoanalysis as "conflictual sciences", [ 46 ] stating that political factions and revisionism are inherent to Marxist theory and political praxis, because dialectical materialism is the philosophic product of class struggle: For this reason, the task of orthodox Marxism, its victory over Revisionism and utopianism can never mean the defeat, once and for all, of false tendencies. It is an ever-renewed struggle against the insidious effects of bourgeois ideology on the thought of the proletariat. Marxist orthodoxy is no guardian of traditions, it is the eternally vigilant prophet proclaiming the relation between the tasks of the immediate present and the totality of the historical process. (§5) ...the premise of dialectical materialism is, we recall: 'It is not men's consciousness that determines their existence, but, on the contrary, their social existence that determines their consciousness'.... Only when the core of existence stands revealed as a social process can existence be seen as the product, albeit the hitherto unconscious product, of human activity. (§5) Philosophically aligned with Marx is the criticism of the individualist , bourgeois philosophy of the subject , which is founded upon the voluntary and conscious subject . Against said ideology is the primacy of social relations. Existence—and thus the world—is the product of human activity, but this can be seen only by accepting the primacy of social process on individual consciousness. This type of consciousness is an effect of ideological mystification .

At the 5th Congress of the Communist International (July 1924), Grigory Zinoviev formally denounced Lukács's heterodox definition of Orthodox Marxism as exclusively derived from fidelity to the "Marxist method", and not to Communist party dogmas; and denounced the philosophical developments of the German Marxist theorist Karl Korsch .

Slavoj Žižek's contributions [ edit ] Slavoj Žižek proposed a new approach towards dialectical materialism as a "radical attempt to ground subjectivity qua subjectivity into objectivity — not merely find the hidden 'objective reality' of thought." [ 47 ] In his approach, he refused "to rule out the reference to Stalin's Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) as a provocation," and his views have ambiguous relations to the writings of Engels and Stalin. "On the one hand, the birth of the Symbolic from the Real without the intermediary of a socially shared space bears a strong resemblance to the emergence of universal human history from matter in motion, histomat from diamat." On the other hand, Žižek believes that what makes his approach essentially materialist is the denial of totality as opposite to Stalinist dialectics which rely on considering history and society as totalities, unified wholes.

[ 48 ] For Zižek, ' the Other ' (whether the Symbolic Order, or a political regime) never 'exists' as the fully consistent whole that subjects imagine, as they shape their identities in relation to it. This means that society, history and culture ultimately always depend for their illusory 'existence' as apparent wholes on the (unconscious) beliefs of subjects in them. This truth is registered in a series of 'material' inconsistencies: the way ideologies have to posit enemies 'supposed to enjoy' our difficulties, and to rest at their heart on sublime Ideas like 'the Nation', which no one can directly say what their content is. Thus, Žižek's 'dialectical materialism' is ultimately the doctrine that 'the Other does not exist'.

[ 48 ] Marxism-Leninism [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Joseph Stalin [ edit ] In the 1930s, Stalin and his associates formulated a version of dialectical and historical materialism that became the "official" Soviet interpretation of Marxism. It was codified in Stalin's work, Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938), and popularized in textbooks used for compulsory education within the Soviet Union and throughout the Eastern Bloc .

Mao Zedong [ edit ] In On Contradiction (1937), Mao Zedong outlined a version of dialectical materialism that subsumed two of Engels's three principal laws of dialectics, "the transformation of quantity into quality" and "the negation of the negation" as sub-laws (and not principal laws of their own) of the first law, "the unity and interpenetration of opposites".

Ho Chi Minh [ edit ] In his 1947 article New Life , Ho Chi Minh described the dialectical relationship between the old and the new in building society, stating: [ 49 ] Not everything old must be abandoned. We do not have to reinvent everything. What is old but bad must be abandoned. What is old but troublesome must be corrected appropriately. What is old but good must be further developed. What is new but good must be done.

As a heuristic in science and elsewhere [ edit ] Historian of science Loren Graham has detailed at length the role played by dialectical materialism in the Soviet Union in disciplines throughout the natural and social sciences . He has concluded that, despite the Lysenko period in genetics and constraints on free inquiry imposed by political authorities, dialectical materialism had a positive influence on the work of many Soviet scientists.

[ 50 ] Some evolutionary biologists , such as Richard Lewontin and Stephen Jay Gould , have tried to employ dialectical materialism in their approach. They view dialectics as playing a precautionary heuristic role in their work. Lewontin's perspective offers the following idea: Dialectical materialism is not, and never has been, a programmatic method for solving particular physical problems. Rather, a dialectical analysis provides an overview and a set of warning signs against particular forms of dogmatism and narrowness of thought. It tells us, "Remember that history may leave an important trace. Remember that being and becoming are dual aspects of nature. Remember that conditions change and that the conditions necessary to the initiation of some process may be destroyed by the process itself. Remember to pay attention to real objects in time and space and not lose them in utterly idealized abstractions. Remember that the qualitative effects of context and interaction may be lost when phenomena are isolated". And above all else, "Remember that all the other caveats are only reminders and warning signs whose application to different circumstances of the real world is contingent." [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Gould shared similar views regarding a heuristic role for dialectical materialism. He wrote that: ...dialectical thinking should be taken more seriously by Western scholars, not discarded because some nations of the second world have constructed a cardboard version as an official political doctrine.

[ 53 ] ...when presented as guidelines for a philosophy of change, not as dogmatic precepts true by fiat, the three classical laws of dialectics embody a holistic vision that views change as interaction among components of complete systems and sees the components themselves not as a priori entities, but as both products and inputs to the system. Thus, the law of "interpenetrating opposites" records the inextricable interdependence of components: the "transformation of quantity to quality" defends a systems-based view of change that translates incremental inputs into alterations of state, and the "negation of negation" describes the direction given to history because complex systems cannot revert exactly to previous states.

[ 54 ] This heuristic was also applied to the theory of punctuated equilibrium proposed by Gould and Niles Eldredge . They wrote that "history, as Hegel said, moves upward in a spiral of negations", and that "punctuated equilibria is a model for discontinuous tempos of change (in) the process of speciation and the deployment of species in geological time." [ 55 ] They noted that "the law of transformation of quantity into quality... holds that a new quality emerges in a leap as the slow accumulation of quantitative changes, long resisted by a stable system, finally forces it rapidly from one state into another", a phenomenon described in some disciplines as a paradigm shift . Apart from the commonly cited example of water turning to steam with increased temperature, Gould and Eldredge noted another analogy in information theory , "with its jargon of equilibrium, steady state, and homeostasis maintained by negative feedback ", and "extremely rapid transitions that occur with positive feedback ".

[ 56 ] Lewontin, Gould, and Eldredge were thus more interested in dialectical materialism as a heuristic than a dogmatic form of 'truth' or a statement of their politics. Nevertheless, they found a readiness for critics to "seize upon" key statements [ 57 ] and portray punctuated equilibrium, and exercises associated with it, such as public exhibitions, as a "Marxist plot".

[ 58 ] The Communist Party 's official interpretation of Marxism , dialectical materialism, fit Alexander Oparin 's studies on the origins of life as 'a flow, an exchange, a dialectical unity'. This notion was re-enforced by Oparin's association with Lysenko .

[ 59 ] In 1972, China's Cultural Revolution slowed down and scientific research restarted.

Astrophysicist and cosmologist Fang Lizhi found an opportunity to read some recent astrophysics papers in western journals, and soon wrote his first paper on cosmology, "A Cosmological Solution in Scalar-tensor Theory with Mass and Blackbody Radiation", which was published on the journal Wu Li (Physics), Vol. 1, 163 (1972). This was the first modern cosmological research paper in mainland China. Fang assembled a group of young faculty members of USTC around him to conduct astrophysics research.At the time, conducting research on relativity theory and cosmology in China was very risky politically, because these theories were considered to be "idealistic" theories in contradiction with the dialectical materialism theory, which is the official philosophy of the Communist Party. According to the dialectical materialism philosophy, both time and space must be infinite, while the Big Bang theory allows the possibility of the finiteness of space and time. During the Cultural Revolution, campaigns were waged against Albert Einstein and his theory of general relativity in Beijing and Shanghai. Once Fang published his theory, some of the critics of relativity, especially a group based in Shanghai, prepared to attack Fang politically. However, by this time the "leftist" line was declining in the Chinese academia. Professor Dai Wensai, the most well-known Chinese astronomer at the time and chair of the Astronomy Department of Nanjing University , also supported Fang. Many of the members of the "Theory of Relativity Criticism Group" changed to study the theory and conduct research in it. Subsequently, Fang was regarded as the father of cosmological research in China.

[ 60 ] Philosophical evaluations [ edit ] Philosopher Allen Wood argued that, in its form as an official Soviet philosophy , dialectical materialism was doomed to be superficial because "creativity or critical thinking" was impossible in an authoritarian environment. Nevertheless, he considered the basic aims and principles of dialectical materialism to be in harmony with rational scientific thought.

[ 17 ] [ 61 ] Economist and philosopher Ludwig von Mises wrote a critique of Marxist materialism which he published as a part of his 1957 work Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution .

H. B. Acton described Marxism as "a philosophical farrago".

[ 62 ] Max Eastman argued that dialectical materialism lacks a psychological basis.

[ 63 ] Leszek Kołakowski criticized the laws of dialectics in Main Currents of Marxism , arguing that they consist partly of truisms with no specific Marxist content, partly of philosophical dogmas, partly of nonsense, and partly of statements that could be any of these things depending on how they are interpreted.

[ 64 ] Of the term [ edit ] Joseph Needham , an influential historian of science and a Christian who nonetheless was an adherent of dialectical materialism, suggested that a more appropriate term might be "dialectical organicism ".

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Marxist rejection [ edit ] Though a minority position, some Marxists have called into question the adequacy of dialectical materialism as a label for Marxist philosophy. For instance, Z.A. Jordan argued that "Engels is the founder of dialectical materialism," denying that he and Marx shared a common philosophy.

[ 1 ] Though less categorical in his separation of Engels from Marx, John Holloway writes that "Engels’ understanding of the dialectic method is an extremely diluted one." According to this argument, while Marx's writings afforded human subjectivity a role in the revolutionary process, Engels's aspirations to scientific validity led to an "exclusion of subjectivity: ‘scientific’ is identified with ‘objective’." [ 67 ] Anti-communist , formerly Marxist humanist , Leszek Kołakowski argued that dialectical materialism was not truly Marxist.

[ 61 ] See also [ edit ] Books Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Dialectical Materialism and Historical Materialism Concepts Classical Marxism Critique of political economy Dialectical monism Marxist philosophy of nature Methodological naturalism Orthodox Marxism Parametric determinism Philosophical realism Philosophy in the Soviet Union People Alexander Spirkin Fidel Castro Ludovico Geymonat Maurice Cornforth Shulamith Firestone Teodor Oizerman References [ edit ] ^ a b Jordan, Z. A. (1967).

The Evolution of Dialectical Materialism . London: Macmillan.

^ Thomas, Paul (2008).

Marxism and Scientific Socialism: From Engels to Althusser . London: Routledge .

^ “dialectical materialism”, The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought Third Edition (0000) Allan Bullock and Stephen Tromblet, Eds. p. 222.

^ Ministry of Education and Training (Vietnam) (2023).

Curriculum of the Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism . Vol. 1. Translated by Nguyen, Luna. Banyan House Publishing.

ISBN 9798987931608 .

^ a b c Schlegel-O'Brien, Kieran (15 March 2024).

"Matter in motion: Dialectical philosophy's role in science" .

Advanced Science News . Retrieved 7 July 2025 .

^ Cornforth, Maurice.

Dialectical Materialism: An Introduction . Aakar Books.

^ a b Jordan, p. 167.

^ Maasch, Bennett (2021).

Dialectical Materialism: The Role Of Dialectical Materialism In The Development Of Natural Science .

^ Pascal Charbonnat, Histoire des philosophies matérialistes , Syllepse, 2007, p. 477.

^ Beamish, Rob (2007). "dialectical materialism". In Ritzer, George (ed.).

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology . Massachusetts: Blackwell Publishing. pp.

1050– 1051.

^ "Karl Kautsky: Frederick Engels (1887)" . Marxists.org. 23 November 2003.

^ Marx/Engels Collected Works . Vol. 25. 1987. p. xxv.

^ See Plekhanov, "For the Sixtieth Anniversary of Hegel's Death" (1891). See also Plekhanov, Essays on the History of Materialism (1893) and Plekhanov, The Development of the Monist View of History (1895).

^ Stalin, Josef .

1938: Dialectical and Historical Materialism . Retrieved 15 December 2021 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b c Sperber, Jonathan (2013).

Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century Life .

W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 9780871403544 – via Google Books .

^ a b c Hunt, Tristram (2009), Marx's General: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels , Metropolitan/Henry Holt & Co, ISBN 9780805080254 , OCLC 263983621 .

^ a b c Wood, Allen (2005). Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp.

212 –3.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

^ Bhaskar 1979 ^ a b "Feuerbach, Ludwig" at marxists.org. Accessed 18 April 2016.

^ a b Nicholas Churchich, Marxism and Alienation , Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1990, p. 57: "Although Marx has rejected Feuerbach's abstract materialism," Lenin says that Feuerbach's views "are consistently materialist," implying that Feuerbach's conception of causality is entirely in line with dialectical materialism." ^ Karl Marx, Capital: A Critique of Political Economy , ed. Frederick Engels (New York: Modern Library, no date, first published 1906), p. 25.

^ a b Marx, p. 25.

^ Peterson, John (2018).

The Revolutionary Philosophy of Marxism . Wellred Books.

^ "Dialectics on the authority of Karl Marx" .

Times of India Blog . 23 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1956), p. 107.

^ Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy (London: Martin Lawrence, [1936]), p. 102.

^ Taylor, Angus (1989). "The Significance of Darwinian Theory for Marx and Engels".

Philosophy of the Social Sciences .

19 (4): 409– 423.

doi : 10.1177/004839318901900401 .

S2CID 148748256 .

^ Ernest Mandel, Introduction to Karl Marx, Capital , Vol. 1 (Harmondsworth, U.K.: Penguin, 1976), p. 18.

^ Jordan (1967).

^ Alfred Schmidt, The Concept of Nature in Marx (London: NLB, 1971).

^ Thomas, Paul (1976). "Marx and Science".

Political Studies .

24 (1): 1– 23.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1976.tb00090.x .

S2CID 146430364 .

^ Terrell Carver, Engels: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003).

^ Sebastiano Timpanaro, On Materialism (London: NLB, 1975).

^ Ted Benton, ed., The Greening of Marxism (New York: Guilford Press, 1996).

^ Engels, F. (7th ed., 1973).

Dialectics of nature (Translator, Clements Dutt). New York: International Publishers. (Original work published 1940). See also Dialectics of Nature ^ cf. for instance.

'The Doctrine of Flux and the Unity of Opposites' in the 'Heraclitus' entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich .

Science of Logic . 718ff, (p. 335 in the Miller edition; see also pp. 368–70).

The sudden conversion into a change of quality of a change which was apparently merely quantitative had already attracted the attention of the ancients who illustrated in popular examples the contradiction arising from ignorance of this fact; they are familiar under the names of 'the bald' and 'the heap'. These elenchi are, according to Aristotle's explanation, the ways in which one is compelled to say the opposite of what one had previously asserted...

^ cf. a fascination with transitions between rarefaction and condensation . Guthrie, W. K. C. "The Milesians: Anaximenes".

A History of Greek Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1962. 116.

^ Carneiro, R. L. (2000).

"The transition from quantity to quality: A neglected causal mechanism in accounting for social evolution" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

97 (23): 12926– 12931.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.240462397 .

PMC 18866 .

PMID 11050189 .

^ Marx, Capital , ch. 32, 837.

^ "Lenin's Summary of Hegel's Dialectics (Lenin's Collected Works Vol. 38, pp. 221–222)" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 9 August 2012 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1915).

On the Question of Dialectics – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Engels, Friedrich .

Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy . Retrieved 9 August 2012 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Novack, George.

Trotsky's Views On Dialectical Materialism .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2004 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Trotsky, Leon (25 March 2019).

In Defence of Marxism . Wellred Publications. pp. 31, 68– 70, 138.

ISBN 978-1-913026-03-5 .

^ Louis Althusser , "Marx and Freud", in Writings on Psychoanalysis , Stock/IMEC, 1993 (French edition) ^ https://zizekstudies.org/index.php/IJZS/article/viewFile/942/964 [ bare URL ] ^ a b Sharpe, Matthew (14 March 2010).

Zizek and Politics: A Critical Introduction .

ISBN 978-0-7486-4222-9 .

^ Ministry of Education and Training (Vietnam) (2023).

Curriculum of the Basic Principles of Marxism-Leninism . Vol. 1. Translated by Nguyen, Luna. Banyan House Punlishing. p. 203.

ISBN 9798987931608 .

^ Graham, Loren R. (1987).

Science, Philosophy, and Human Behavior in the Soviet Union . New York: Columbia University Press .

^ Beatty, J. (2009).

"Lewontin, Richard" . In Ruse, Michael; Travis, Joseph (eds.).

Evolution: The First Four Billion Years . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . p.

685 .

ISBN 978-0-674-03175-3 .

^ Allen, Collin; Allen, Garland; Amundson, Ron; Baer, Charles F.; Arnold, Steven J.; Barahona, Ana (2009).

Evolution: The First Four Billion Years .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-03175-3 – via Google Books .

^ Gould, Stephen Jay (1990). "Nurturing Nature".

An Urchin in the Storm: Essays About Books and Ideas . London: Penguin Books . p. 153.

^ Gould, S. J. (1990), p. 154.

^ Gould, Stephen Jay ; Eldredge, Niles (1977).

"Punctuated equilibria: the tempo and mode of evolution reconsidered" (PDF) .

Paleobiology .

3 (2): 115–151 [145].

Bibcode : 1977Pbio....3..115G .

doi : 10.1017/s0094837300005224 .

S2CID 83492071 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 June 2014 . Retrieved 4 October 2009 .

^ Gould & Eldredge 1977 , p. 146.

^ Gould, Stephen Jay (1995).

"The Pattern of Life's History" . In Brockman, J. (ed.).

The Third Culture . New York: Simon & Schuster . p.

60 .

ISBN 978-0-684-80359-3 .

^ Gould, Stephen Jay (2002).

The Structure of Evolutionary Theory . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-00613-3 .

In his account of one ad hominem absurdity, Gould states on p. 984 "I swear that I do not exaggerate" regarding the accusations of a Marxist plot.

^ Schopf, J. William (2001).

Cradle of Life: The Discovery of Earth's Earliest Fossils .

Princeton University Press . p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-691-08864-8 .

^ Hu, Danian (2004). "Organized criticism of Einstein and relativity in China, 1949–1989".

Historical Studies in the Physical and Biological Sciences .

34 (2): 311– 338.

doi : 10.1525/hsps.2004.34.2.311 .

JSTOR 10.1525/hsps.2004.34.2.311 .

^ a b Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . New York: W. W. Norton and Company . p. 909.

ISBN 9780393329438 .

^ Acton, H.B. (1955).

The Illusion of the Epoch . Indianapolis: Liberty Fund Inc. p. 257.

ISBN 9780865973947 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Oehler, Hugo (1941).

Dialectical Materialism . Chicago: Demos Press.

p. 12.

^ Kołakowski 2005 , pp. xix–xxi, 796, 909, 994, 1096, 1129–1140, 1171–1172.

^ Needham, Joseph (1976).

Moulds of Understanding . London: George Allen & Unwin . p. 278.

^ Žižek, Slavoj (2013).

Less Than Nothing . New York: Verso Books . p. 44.

ISBN 9781844678976 .

^ Holloway, John (2002).

Changing the World Without Taking Power . Pluto Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Afanasyev, V. G.

(1987).

Dialectical Materialism (rev. ed.). New York: International Publishers.

ISBN 0-7178-0656-1 .

Afanasyev, V. (1968).

Marxist Philosophy: A Popular Outline (3rd rev. ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

53– 176.

OCLC 37681 .

Althusser, Louis (2005) [1969]. "On the Materialist Dialectic".

For Marx . Verso. pp.

161– 218, 168.

ISBN 1-84467-052-X .

Bitsakis, Eftichios (1973).

Physique contemporaine et matérialisme dialectique (in French). Éditions Sociales.

OCLC 299919186 .

Charbonnat, Pascal (2007).

Histoire des philosophies matérialistes (in French). Syllepse.

ISBN 978-2849501245 .

Cornforth, Maurice (1978).

Materialism and the Dialectical Method . New York: International Publishers.

ISBN 0-7178-0326-0 .

Friedrich Engels (1973) [1886].

Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

OCLC 914909091 .

Friedrich Engels (1954) [1877].

Anti-Dühring: Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science . Moscow: Foreign Language Publishing House.

OCLC 5270512 .

Friedrich Engels (1986).

Dialectics of Nature . Translated by Clemens Dutt. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Ghosh, Shibdas .

Science of Marxism is the Scientific dialectical methodology .

Ghosh, Shibdas.

"Some Aspects of Marxism and Dialectical Materialism" .

Ghosh, Shibdas.

"On Theory of Knowledge, Dialectical Materialism, and the Revolutionary Life" .

Gollobin, Ira (1986).

Dialectical Materialism: Its Laws, Categories, and Practice . New York: Petras Press.

ISBN 978-0961456818 .

Grant, Ted ; Woods, Alan (1995).

Reason in Revolt, Marxist Philosophy and Modern Science . London: Wellred.

ISBN 978-1-900007-00-9 .

Grant, Ted; Woods, Alan (2003).

Dialectical Philosophy and Modern Science . Reason in Revolt. Vol. 2 (American ed.). Algora Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-87586-158-6 .

Hollitscher, Walter (March 1953).

"Dialectical Materialism and the Physicist" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

9 (2): 54– 57.

Bibcode : 1953BuAtS...9b..54H .

doi : 10.1080/00963402.1953.11457380 .

Krapivin, Vassily (1985).

What Is Dialectical Materialism?

. Translated by Galina Sdobnikova. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

LCCN 85217441 .

Adoratsky, Vladimir (1934).

Dialectical Materialism: The Theoretical Foundation of Marxism-Leninism . New York: International Publishers.

Ioan, Petru (1990).

Logic and Dialectics: Confrontations, Connexions, Clarifications . Iaşi: Alexandru Ioan Cuza University Press.

OCLC 52980907 .

Jameson, Fredric (2009).

Valences of the Dialectic . London and New York: Verso.

ISBN 978-1859848777 .

Jordan, Z. A. (1969). "The Origins of Dialectical Materialism".

The Evolution of Dialectical Materialism . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780312272654 .

Dafermos, M. (2021). "Rethinking the relationship between Marx's Capital and Hegel's Science of Logic: The tradition of creative Soviet Marxism".

Class & Capital .

46 : 77– 93.

doi : 10.1177/03098168211029003 .

Lefebvre, Henri (2009).

Dialectical Materialism . Translated by John Sturrock. Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-0-8166-5618-9 .

Lenin, V. I.

(1987) [1909].

Materialism And Empirio-criticism: Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Lenin, V. I. (1976).

"On the Question of Dialectics" .

Collected Works . Vol. 38 (4th ed.). Progress Publishers. pp.

357– 361.

György Lukács (1967).

History and Class Consciousness . Translated by Rodney Livingstone. Merlin Press.

Oizerman, T. I.

; Creighton, H. Campbell (1988).

The Main Trends in Philosophy: A Theoretical Analysis of the History of Philosophy . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

ISBN 978-5-01-000506-1 . Retrieved 30 October 2010 .

First published in 1971, as "Главные философские направления" – The author traces the struggle between materialism and idealism on the basis of the dialectical-materialist conception of the history of philosophy . The book was in 1979 awarded the Plekhanov prize under the decision of the USSR Academy of Sciences.

Oizerman, Theodore (1982).

Dialectical Materialism and the History of Philosophy . Translated by Dmitri Beliavsky (English ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers.

ISBN 0714717568 .

Ollman, Bertell (2003).

Dance of the Dialectic: Steps in Marx's Method . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0252071188 .

Ollman, Bertell (2008). Tony Smith (ed.).

Dialectics for the New Century . England: Palgrave Macmillan.

doi : 10.1057/9780230583818 .

ISBN 978-0-230-53531-2 .

Pannekoek, Anton (Fall 1942).

"Materialism And Historical Materialism" .

New Essays: A Quarterly Devoted to the Study of Modern Society .

6 (2). International Council Correspondence: 9–25.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 May 2024.

Fedoseyev, Pyotr Nikolayevich ; et al. (1977).

Philosophy in the USSR: Problems of Dialectical Materialism . Translated by Robert Daglish. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

OCLC 3567211 .

Stalin, Joseph (1972).

Dialectical and Historical Materialism . New York: International Publishers.

OCLC 702609903 .

Évariste Sanchez-Palencia (2012).

Promenade dialectique dans les sciences (in French). Hermann.

ISBN 978-2705682729 .

Spirkin, Alexander (1983).

Dialectical Materialism . Translated by Robert Daglish. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

OCLC 255226192 .

Spirkin, Alexander (1990).

Fundamentals of Philosophy . Translated by Sergei Syrovatkin. Moscow: Progress Publishers .

ISBN 5-01-002582-5 .

Tucker, Robert (9 May 2024).

Philosophy and Myth in Karl Marx (3rd ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 978-0765806444 .

Boguslavsky, B.M.; et al. (1978).

ABC of Dialectical and Historical Materialism . Translated by Lenina Ilitskaya. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

ISBN 978-0828501880 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐v5csq
Cached time: 20250815203500
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.288 seconds
Real time usage: 1.554 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7711/1000000
Revision size: 64722/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 302244/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10742/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 292274/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.804/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13089963/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1272.084      1 -total
 35.15%  447.149     64 Template:Cite_book
 28.20%  358.721      1 Template:Reflist
 15.04%  191.362      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.79%  124.482      1 Template:Marxism_sidebar
  7.48%   95.110      5 Template:Blockquote
  6.10%   77.598      1 Template:Short_description
  5.87%   74.662      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.60%   58.526      1 Template:Sidebar
  4.51%   57.404      2 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:44379567:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815203500 and revision id 1305189581. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dialectical_materialism&oldid=1305189581 " Categories : Dialectic Dialectical materialism Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Marxist theory Materialism and Marxism Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2024 Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dialectical materialism 62 languages Add topic

