Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Lossiemouth 1.2 Discovering socialism in London 2 Active politics 3 Party Leadership 4 In Opposition Toggle In Opposition subsection 4.1 1920–1923 4.2 Election of 1923 5 Prime Minister (1924) Toggle Prime Minister (1924) subsection 5.1 First term: January–October 1924 5.2 Foreign affairs 5.3 Zinoviev letter 6 In Opposition (1924–1929) 7 Prime Minister (1929–1935) Toggle Prime Minister (1929–1935) subsection 7.1 Second term (1929–1931) 7.2 Great Depression 7.3 National government (1931–1935) 7.3.1 Formation of the National Government 7.3.2 1931 general election 7.4 Premiership of the National Government (1931–1935) 7.5 Retirement 8 Last years and death (1935–1937) 9 Personal life 10 Reputation 11 Cultural depictions 12 Honours 13 References 14 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 14.1 Historiography 14.2 Primary sources 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Ramsay MacDonald 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Aymar aru বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prime Minister of the United Kingdom (1924; 1929–1935) "Prime Minister MacDonald" redirects here. For the first prime minister of Canada, see John A. Macdonald .

The Right Honourable Ramsay MacDonald FRS Portrait by Walter Stoneman , 1923 Prime Minister of the United Kingdom In office 5 June 1929 – 7 June 1935 Monarch George V Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin In office 22 January 1924 – 4 November 1924 Monarch George V Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin Leader of the Opposition In office 4 November 1924 – 5 June 1929 Monarch George V Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin In office 21 November 1922 – 22 January 1924 Monarch George V Prime Minister Bonar Law Stanley Baldwin Preceded by H. H. Asquith Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin Leader of the Labour Party In office 22 November 1922 – 1 September 1931 Deputy J. R. Clynes Preceded by J. R. Clynes Succeeded by Arthur Henderson In office 6 February 1911 – 5 August 1914 Chief Whip George Roberts Arthur Henderson Preceded by George Barnes Succeeded by Arthur Henderson Lord President of the Council In office 7 June 1935 – 28 May 1937 Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by The Viscount Halifax Leader of the House of Commons In office 5 June 1929 – 7 June 1935 Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin In office 22 January – 3 November 1924 Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs In office 22 January – 3 November 1924 Preceded by The Marquess Curzon Succeeded by Austen Chamberlain Parliamentary offices Member of Parliament for the Combined Scottish Universities In office 31 January 1936 – 9 November 1937 Preceded by Noel Skelton Succeeded by Sir John Anderson Member of Parliament for Seaham In office 30 May 1929 – 25 October 1935 Preceded by Sidney Webb Succeeded by Manny Shinwell Member of Parliament for Aberavon In office 15 November 1922 – 10 May 1929 Preceded by Jack Edwards Succeeded by William Cove Member of Parliament for Leicester In office 8 February 1906 – 25 November 1918 Serving with Henry Broadhurst Franklin Thomasson Eliot Crawshay-Williams Sir Gordon Hewart Preceded by John Rolleston Henry Broadhurst Succeeded by Constituency abolished Personal details Born James McDonald Ramsay ( 1866-10-12 ) 12 October 1866 Lossiemouth , Elginshire , Scotland Died 9 November 1937 (1937-11-09) (aged 71) Aboard MV Reina del Pacifico , North Atlantic Ocean Resting place Holy Trinity Church, Spynie Political party Labour (until 1931) National Labour (from 1931) Spouse Margaret Gladstone ​ ​ ( m.

1896 ; died 1911 ) ​ Children 6, including Malcolm , Ishbel , Sheila Alma mater Birkbeck, University of London Profession Politician Signature Ramsay MacDonald's voice A speech by Ramsay MacDonald campaigning for the Labour Party whilst in opposition (recorded 1926) James Ramsay MacDonald ( né James McDonald Ramsay ; 12 October 1866 – 9 November 1937) was a British statesman [ 1 ] and politician who served as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom . The first two of his governments belonged to the Labour Party , where he led a minority Labour government for nine months in 1924 and again between 1929 and 1931 . In 1931, MacDonald was expelled from the Labour Party, after he formed a National Government dominated by the Conservative Party and supported by only a few Labour members, his premiership of which lasted until 1935.

MacDonald, along with Keir Hardie and Arthur Henderson , was one of the three principal founders of the Labour Party in 1900. He was chairman of the Labour MPs before 1914 and, after an eclipse in his career caused by his opposition to the First World War, he was Leader of the Labour Party from 1922. The second Labour Government (1929–1931) was dominated by the Great Depression . He formed the National Government to carry out spending cuts to defend the gold standard , but it had to be abandoned after the Invergordon Mutiny , and he called a general election in 1931 seeking a "doctor's mandate" to fix the economy.

The National coalition won an overwhelming landslide and the Labour Party was reduced to a rump of around 50 seats in the House of Commons. His health deteriorated and he stood down as Prime Minister in 1935, remaining as Lord President of the Council until retiring in 1937. He died later that year.

MacDonald's speeches, pamphlets and books made him an important theoretician. Historian John Shepherd states that "MacDonald's natural gifts of an imposing presence, handsome features and a persuasive oratory delivered with an arresting Highlands accent made him the iconic Labour leader". After 1931, MacDonald was repeatedly and bitterly denounced by the Labour movement as a traitor to its cause. Since the 1960s, some historians have defended his reputation, emphasising his earlier role in building up the Labour Party, dealing with the Great Depression , and as a forerunner of the political realignments of the 1990s and 2000s.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] Lossiemouth [ edit ] MacDonald was born at Gregory Place, Lossiemouth , Moray , Scotland, the illegitimate son of John MacDonald, a farm labourer, and Anne Ramsay, a housemaid.

[ 3 ] Registered at birth as James McDonald (sic) Ramsay, he was known as Jaimie MacDonald. Illegitimacy could be a serious handicap in 19th-century Presbyterian Scotland, but in the north and northeast farming communities this was less of a problem; in 1868, a report of the Royal Commission on the Employment of Children, Young Persons and Women in Agriculture noted that the illegitimacy rate was around 15%—nearly every sixth person was born out of wedlock.

[ 4 ] MacDonald's mother had worked as a domestic servant at Claydale farm, near Alves , where his father was also employed. They were to have been married, but the wedding never took place, either because the couple quarrelled and chose not to marry, or because Anne's mother, Isabella Ramsay, stepped in to prevent her daughter from marrying a man she deemed unsuitable.

[ 5 ] Bloody Sunday Ramsay MacDonald received an elementary education at the Free Church of Scotland school in Lossiemouth from 1872 to 1875, and then at Drainie Parish School. He left school at the end of the summer term in 1881, at the age of 15, and began work on a nearby farm. In December 1881, he was appointed a pupil teacher at Drainie parish school.

[ 6 ] In 1885, he moved to Bristol to take up a position as an assistant to Mordaunt Crofton, a clergyman who was attempting to establish a Boys' and Young Men's Guild at St Stephen's Church .

[ 7 ] In Bristol Ramsay MacDonald joined the Democratic Federation, a Radical organisation, which changed its name a few months later to the Social Democratic Federation (SDF).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He remained in the group when it left the SDF to become the Bristol Socialist Society . In early 1886 he moved to London.

[ 10 ] Discovering socialism in London [ edit ] Following a short period of work addressing envelopes at the National Cyclists' Union in Fleet Street , he found himself unemployed and forced to live on the small amount of money he had saved from his time in Bristol. MacDonald eventually found employment as an invoice clerk in the warehouse of Cooper, Box and Co.

[ 11 ] During this time he was deepening his socialist credentials, and engaged himself energetically in C. L. Fitzgerald 's Socialist Union which, unlike the SDF, aimed to progress socialist ideals through the parliamentary system.

[ 12 ] MacDonald witnessed the Bloody Sunday of 13 November 1887 in Trafalgar Square , and in response, had a pamphlet published by the Pall Mall Gazette , titled Remember Trafalgar Square: Tory Terrorism in 1887 .

[ 13 ] MacDonald retained an interest in Scottish politics .

Gladstone 's first Irish Home Rule Bill inspired the setting-up of a Scottish Home Rule Association in Edinburgh. On 6 March 1888, MacDonald took part in a meeting of London-based Scots, who, upon his motion, formed the London General Committee of the Scottish Home Rule Association.

[ 14 ] For a while he supported home rule for Scotland, but found little support among London's Scots.

[ 15 ] However, MacDonald never lost his interest in Scottish politics and home rule, and in Socialism: critical and constructive , published in 1921, he wrote: "The Anglification of Scotland has been proceeding apace to the damage of its education, its music, its literature, its genius, and the generation that is growing up under this influence is uprooted from its past." [ 16 ] Politics in the 1880s was still of less importance to MacDonald than furthering his education. In 1886–87, MacDonald studied botany , agriculture , mathematics , and physics at the Birkbeck Literary and Scientific Institution (now Birkbeck, University of London) but his health suddenly failed him due to exhaustion one week before his examinations, which put an end to any thought of a scientific career.

[ 17 ] He would however, later be appointed a Governor of the institution in 1895, and continued to have a great fondness for the mission of Birkbeck into his later years.

[ 18 ] In 1888, MacDonald took employment as private secretary to Thomas Lough who was a tea merchant and a Radical politician.

[ 19 ] Lough was elected as the Liberal Member of Parliament (MP) for West Islington , in 1892. Many doors now opened to MacDonald: he had access to the National Liberal Club as well as the editorial offices of Liberal and Radical newspapers; he made himself known to various London Radical clubs among Radical and labour politicians; and he gained valuable experience in the workings of electioneering. At the same time he left Lough's employment to branch out as a freelance journalist. Elsewhere, as a member of the Fabian Society for some time, MacDonald toured and lectured on its behalf at the London School of Economics and elsewhere.

[ 20 ] Active politics [ edit ] The Trades Union Congress (TUC) had created the Labour Electoral Association (LEA) and entered into an unsatisfactory alliance with the Liberal Party in 1886.

[ 21 ] In 1892, MacDonald was in Dover to give support to the candidate for the LEA in the general election , who was well beaten. MacDonald impressed the local press [ 22 ] [ pages needed ] and the Association and was adopted as its candidate, announcing that his candidature would be under a Labour Party banner.

[ 23 ] [ page needed ] He denied the Labour Party was a wing of the Liberal Party but saw merit in a working political relationship. In May 1894, the local Southampton Liberal Association was trying to find a labour-minded candidate for the constituency. Two others joined MacDonald to address the Liberal Council: one was offered but turned down the invitation, while MacDonald failed to secure the nomination despite strong support among Liberals.

[ 24 ] In 1893, Keir Hardie had formed the Independent Labour Party (ILP) which had established itself as a mass movement. In May 1894 MacDonald applied for membership and was accepted. He was officially adopted as the ILP candidate for one of the Southampton seats on 17 July 1894 [ 25 ] [ page needed ] but was heavily defeated at the election of 1895. MacDonald stood for Parliament again in 1900 for one of the two Leicester seats; he lost, and was accused of splitting the Liberal vote to allow the Conservative candidate to win.

[ 26 ] That same year he became Secretary of the Labour Representation Committee (LRC), the forerunner of the Labour Party, allegedly in part because many delegates confused him with prominent London trade unionist Jimmie MacDonald when they voted for "Mr. James R. MacDonald".

[ 27 ] MacDonald retained membership of the ILP; while it was not a Marxist organisation it was more rigorously socialist than the Labour Party would prove to be, and ILP members would operate as a " ginger group " within the Labour Party for many years.

[ 28 ] As Party Secretary, MacDonald negotiated an agreement with the leading Liberal politician Herbert Gladstone (son of the late Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone ), which allowed Labour to contest a number of working class seats without Liberal opposition, [ 29 ] thus giving Labour its first breakthrough into the House of Commons .  He married Margaret Ethel Gladstone , who was unrelated to the Gladstones of the Liberal Party, in 1896. Although not wealthy, Margaret MacDonald was comfortably well off, [ 30 ] and this allowed them to indulge in foreign travel, visiting Canada and the United States in 1897, South Africa in 1902, Australia and New Zealand in 1906 and India several times.

Macdonald (third from left) in 1906, with other leading figures in the party It was during this period that MacDonald and his wife began a long friendship with the social investigator and reforming civil servant Clara Collet [ 31 ] [ 32 ] with whom he discussed women's issues.  She was an influence on MacDonald and other politicians in their attitudes towards women's rights.  In 1901, he was elected to the London County Council for Finsbury Central as a joint Labour– Progressive Party candidate, but he was disqualified from the register in 1904 due to his absences abroad.

[ 33 ] [ incomplete short citation ] In 1906, the LRC changed its name to the " Labour Party ", amalgamating with the ILP.

[ 34 ] In that same year, 29 Labour MPs were elected, including MacDonald, for Leicester , [ 35 ] [ page needed ] who then became one of the leaders of the Parliamentary Labour Party . These Labour MPs undoubtedly owed their election to the ' Gladstone–MacDonald pact ' between the Liberals and Labour, a minor party supporting the Liberal governments of Henry Campbell-Bannerman and H. H. Asquith . MacDonald became the leader of the left-wing of the party, arguing that Labour must seek to displace the Liberals as the main party of the left.

[ 36 ] [ incomplete short citation ] Party Leadership [ edit ] Ramsay MacDonald by Solomon Joseph Solomon , 1911 Hoist with his own petard.

Mr. Ramsay MacDonald ( Champion of Independent Labour ). "Of course I'm all for peaceful picketing—on principle. But it must be applied to the proper parties." Cartoon from Punch 20 June 1917 In 1911 MacDonald became "Chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party", the leader of the party. He was the chief intellectual leader of the party, paying little attention to class warfare and much more to the emergence of a powerful state as it exemplified the Darwinian evolution of an ever more complex society.  He was an Orthodox Edwardian progressive, keen on intellectual discussion, and averse to agitation.

[ 37 ] Within a short period, his wife became ill with blood poisoning and died. This deeply and permanently affected MacDonald.

[ 38 ] MacDonald had always taken a keen interest in foreign affairs and knew from his visit to South Africa, just after the Boer War had ended, what the effects of modern conflict would be. Although the Parliamentary Labour Party generally held an anti-war opinion, when war was declared in August 1914 , patriotism came to the fore.

[ 39 ] After the Foreign Secretary, Sir Edward Grey , warned the House of Commons on 3 August that war with Germany was likely, MacDonald responded by declaring that "this country ought to have remained neutral".

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In the Labour Leader he claimed that the real cause of the war was the "policy of the balance of power through alliance".

[ 42 ] The Party supported the government in its request for £100,000,000 of war credits and, as MacDonald could not, he resigned from the party Chairmanship.

Arthur Henderson became the new leader, while MacDonald took the party Treasurer's post.

[ 43 ] Despite his opposition to the war, MacDonald visited the Western Front in December 1914 with the approval of Lord Kitchener . MacDonald and General Seely set off for the front at Ypres and soon found themselves in the thick of an action in which both behaved with the utmost coolness. Later, MacDonald was received by the Commander-in-Chief at St Omer and made an extensive tour of the front. Returning home, he paid a public tribute to the courage of the French troops, but said nothing then or later of having been under fire himself.

[ 44 ] During the early part of the war, he was extremely unpopular and was accused of treason and cowardice. Former Liberal Party MP and publisher Horatio Bottomley attacked him through his magazine John Bull in September 1915, by publishing an article carrying details of MacDonald's birth and his so-called deceit in not disclosing his real name.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] His illegitimacy was no secret and he had not seemed to have suffered by it, but, according to the journal he had, by using a false name, gained access to parliament falsely and should suffer heavy penalties and have his election declared void. MacDonald received much internal support, but how the disclosures were made public had affected him.

[ 47 ] He wrote in his diary: ...I spent hours of terrible mental pain. Letters of sympathy began to pour in upon me. ... Never before did I know that I had been registered under the name of Ramsay, and cannot understand it now. From my earliest years, my name has been entered in lists, like the school register, etc. as MacDonald.

Election poster produced for the 1923 election In August 1916 the Moray Golf Club passed a resolution declaring that MacDonald's anti-war activities "had endangered the character and interests of the club" and that he had forfeited his right to membership.

[ 48 ] In January 1917 MacDonald published National Defence , in which he argued that open diplomacy and disarmament were necessary to prevent future wars.

[ 49 ] As the war dragged on, his reputation recovered but he still lost his seat in the 1918 " Coupon Election ", which saw the Liberal David Lloyd George 's coalition government win a large majority. The election campaign in Leicester West focused on MacDonald's opposition to the war, with MacDonald writing after his defeat: "I have become a kind of mythological demon in the minds of the people".

[ 50 ] MacDonald denounced the Treaty of Versailles : "We are beholding an act of madness unparalleled in history".

[ 51 ] In Opposition [ edit ] 1920–1923 [ edit ] MacDonald stood for Parliament in the 1921 Woolwich East by-election and lost. His opponent, Captain Robert Gee , had been awarded the Victoria Cross at Cambrai ; MacDonald tried to counter this by having ex-soldiers appear on his platforms. MacDonald also promised to pressure the government into converting the Woolwich Arsenal to civilian use.

[ 52 ] Horatio Bottomley intervened in the by-election, opposing MacDonald's election because of his anti-war record.

[ 53 ] Bottomley's influence may have been decisive in MacDonald's failure to be elected as there were under 700 votes difference between Gee and MacDonald.

[ 54 ] In 1922, MacDonald was returned to the House as MP for Aberavon in Wales , with a vote of 14,318 against 11,111 and 5,328 for his main opponents. His rehabilitation was complete; the Labour New Leader magazine opined that his election was, "enough in itself to transform our position in the House. We have once more a voice which must be heard".

[ 55 ] By now, the party was reunited and MacDonald was re-elected as Leader . Historian Kenneth O. Morgan examines his newfound stature: as dissolution set in with the Lloyd George coalition in 1921–22, and unemployment mounted,  MacDonald stood out as the leader of a new kind of broad-based left. His opposition to the war had given him a new charisma. More than anyone else in public life, he symbolised peace and internationalism, decency and social change.... [He] had become The voice of conscience.

[ 56 ] At the 1922 election , Labour replaced the Liberals as the main opposition party to the Conservative government of Stanley Baldwin , making MacDonald Leader of the Opposition . By now, he had moved away from the Labour left and abandoned the socialism of his youth: he strongly opposed the wave of radicalism that swept through the labour movement in the wake of the Russian Revolution of 1917 and became a determined enemy of Communism. Unlike the French Section of the Workers' International and the Social Democratic Party of Germany , the Labour Party did not split and the Communist Party of Great Britain remained small and isolated.

In 1922, MacDonald visited Palestine .

[ 57 ] In a later account of his visit, he contrasted Zionist pioneers with 'the rich plutocratic Jew'.

[ 57 ] MacDonald believed the latter "was the true economic materialist. He is the person whose views upon life make one anti-Semitic. He has no country, no kindred. Whether as a sweater or a financier, he is an exploiter of everything he can squeeze. He is behind every evil that Governments do, and his political authority, always exercised in the dark, is greater than that of Parliamentary majorities. He is the keenest of brains and the bluntest of consciences. He detests Zionism because it revives the idealism of his race, and has political implications which threaten his economic interests." [ 57 ] MacDonald became noted for "woolly" rhetoric such as the occasion at the Labour Party Conference of 1930 at Llandudno when he appeared to imply unemployment could be solved by encouraging the jobless to return to the fields "where they till and they grow and they sow and they harvest". Equally, there were times when it was unclear what his policies were. There was already some unease in the party about what he would do if Labour was able to form a government.

[ 58 ] Election of 1923 [ edit ] At the 1923 election , the Conservatives had lost their majority, and when they lost a vote of confidence in the House in January 1924, King George V called on MacDonald to form a minority Labour government, with the tacit support of the Liberals under Asquith from the corner benches. On 22 January 1924, [ 59 ] he took office as the first Labour Prime Minister, [ 60 ] the first from a working-class background [ 60 ] and one of the very few without a university education .

[ 61 ] Prime Minister (1924) [ edit ] First term: January–October 1924 [ edit ] Further information: First MacDonald ministry MacDonald with ministers of his first government, January 1924 Time cover, 18 August 1924 MacDonald had never held office but demonstrated energy, executive ability, and political astuteness. He consulted widely within his party, making the Liberal Lord Haldane the Lord Chancellor , and Philip Snowden Chancellor of the Exchequer . He took the foreign office himself.

[ 59 ] Besides himself, ten other cabinet members came from working-class origins, a dramatic breakthrough in British history.

[ 62 ] His first priority was to undo the perceived damage caused by the 1919 Treaty of Versailles , by settling the reparations issue and coming to terms with Germany . King George V noted in his diary, "He wishes to do the right thing.... Today, 23 years ago, dear Grandmama [ Queen Victoria ] died. I wonder what she would have thought of a Labour Government!" [ 63 ] While there were no major labour strikes during his term, MacDonald acted swiftly to end those that did erupt. When the Labour Party executive criticised the government, he replied that "public doles, Poplarism [local defiance of the national government], strikes for increased wages, limitation of output, not only are not Socialism, but may mislead the spirit and policy of the Socialist movement".

[ 64 ] The Government lasted only nine months and did not have a majority in either House of the Parliament, but it was still able to support the unemployed with the extension of benefits and amendments to the Insurance Acts.

[ 65 ] In a personal triumph for John Wheatley , Minister for Health, a Housing Act was passed, which greatly expanded municipal housing for low-paid workers.

[ 66 ] Several other reforms were carried out during MacDonald's first premiership in areas such as education, [ 67 ] social security, [ 68 ] [ 69 ] agriculture, [ 70 ] [ 71 ] and taxation.

[ 72 ] Foreign affairs [ edit ] Further information: International relations (1919–1939) , History of the foreign relations of the United Kingdom , and Interwar Britain MacDonald had long been a leading spokesman for internationalism in the Labour movement; at first, he verged on pacifism. He founded the Union of Democratic Control in early 1914 to promote international socialist aims, but it was overwhelmed by the war. His 1917 book, National Defence , revealed his own long-term vision for peace. Although disappointed at the harsh terms of the Versailles Treaty, he supported the League of Nations – but, by 1930, he felt that the internal cohesion of the British Empire and a strong, independent British defence programme might turn out to be the wisest British government policy.

[ 73 ] MacDonald moved in March 1924 to end construction work on the Singapore military base, despite strong opposition from the Admiralty . He believed the building of the base would endanger the disarmament conference ; the First Sea Lord Lord Beatty considered the absence of such a base as dangerously imperilling British trade and territories East of Aden and could mean the security of the British Empire in the Far East being dependent on the goodwill of Japan .

[ 74 ] In June 1924, MacDonald convened a conference in London of the wartime Allies and achieved an agreement on a new plan for settling the reparations issue and French-Belgian occupation of the Ruhr . German delegates joined the meeting, and the London Settlement was signed. It was followed by an Anglo-German commercial treaty. Another major triumph for MacDonald was the conference held in London in July and August 1924 to deal with the implementation of the Dawes Plan .

[ 75 ] MacDonald, who accepted the popular view of the economist John Maynard Keynes of German reparations as impossible to pay, pressured French Premier Édouard Herriot until many concessions were made to Germany, including the evacuation of the Ruhr .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Ramsay MacDonald and Christian Rakovsky , Head of the Soviet diplomatic delegation. February 1924.

A British onlooker commented, "The London Conference was for the French 'man in the street' one long Calvary ... as he saw M. Herriot abandoning one by one the cherished possessions of French preponderance on the Reparations Commission, the right of sanctions in the event of German default, the economic occupation of the Ruhr, the French-Belgian railroad Régie, and finally, the military occupation of the Ruhr within a year." [ 77 ] MacDonald was proud of what had been achieved, which was the pinnacle of his short-lived administration's achievements.

[ 78 ] In September, he made a speech to the League of Nations Assembly in Geneva , the main thrust of which was for general European disarmament, which was received with great acclaim.

[ 79 ] MacDonald recognised the Soviet Union and MacDonald informed Parliament in February 1924 that negotiations would begin to negotiate a treaty with the Soviet Union.

[ 80 ] The treaty was to cover Anglo-Soviet trade and the repayment of the British bondholders, who had lent billions to the pre-revolutionary Russian government and been rejected by the Bolsheviks. There were, in fact, two proposed treaties: one would cover commercial matters, and the other would cover a fairly vague future discussion on the problem of the bondholders. If the treaties were signed, the British government would conclude a further treaty and guarantee a loan to the Bolsheviks.  The treaties were popular neither with the Conservatives nor with the Liberals, who, in September, criticised the loan so vehemently that negotiation with them seemed impossible.

[ 81 ] However, the government's fate was determined by the " Campbell Case ", the abrogation of prosecuting the left-wing newspaper the Workers' Weekly for inciting servicemen to mutiny. The Conservatives put down a censure motion, to which the Liberals added an amendment. MacDonald's Cabinet resolved to treat both motions as matters of confidence . The Liberal amendment was carried, and the King granted MacDonald a dissolution of Parliament the following day.  The issues that dominated the election campaign were the Campbell Case and the Russian treaties, which soon combined into the single issue of the Bolshevik threat.

[ 82 ] Zinoviev letter [ edit ] Main article: Zinoviev letter On 25 October 1924, just four days before the election, the Daily Mail reported that a letter had come into its possession which purported to be a letter sent from Grigory Zinoviev , the President of the Communist International , to the British representative on the Comintern Executive . The letter was dated 15 September and so before the dissolution of parliament : it stated that it was imperative for the agreed treaties between Britain and the Bolsheviks to be ratified urgently. The letter said that those Labour members who could apply pressure on the government should do so. It went on to say that a resolution of the relationship between the two countries would "assist in the revolutionising of the international and British proletariat ... make it possible for us to extend and develop the ideas of Leninism in England and the Colonies".

The government had received the letter before its publication in the newspapers. It had protested to the Bolsheviks' London chargé d'affaires and had already decided to make public the contents of the letter with details of the official protest but it had not been swift-footed enough.

[ 83 ] Historians mostly agree the Zinoviev letter was a forgery, but it closely reflected attitudes current in the Comintern.

In Opposition (1924–1929) [ edit ] Further information: Second Baldwin ministry Speech by Ramsay MacDonald published by Lansbury's Labour Weekly A speech by Ramsay MacDonald campaigning for the Labour Party whilst in opposition Problems playing this file? See media help .

On 29 October 1924, the 1924 United Kingdom general election was held and the Conservative Party under Stanley Baldwin was returned decisively, gaining 155 seats for a total of 413 members of parliament.  This was a landslide victory against the Liberals, who lost 118 seats (leaving them with only 40); their vote fell by over a million.

For Labour the result was a defeat not a disaster, holding on to 151 seats and losing 40.  The real significance of the election was that the Liberal Party, which Labour had displaced as the second-largest political party in 1922, was now clearly the third party.  Labour had put up more candidates than in 1923, and its total vote increased, suggesting that the Zinoviev letter had little effect.  But for years many Labourites blamed their defeat on the Letter, through misunderstanding the political forces at work.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Prime Minister (1929–1935) [ edit ] Further information: Second MacDonald ministry Second term (1929–1931) [ edit ] The strong majority held by the Conservatives gave Baldwin a full term during which the government had to deal with the 1926 General Strike . Unemployment remained high but relatively stable at just over 10% and, apart from 1926, strikes were at a low level.

[ 86 ] At the May 1929 election , Labour won 288 seats to the Conservatives' 260, with 59 Liberals under Lloyd George holding the balance of power. MacDonald was increasingly out of touch with his supposedly safe Welsh seat at Aberavon ; he largely ignored the district, and had little time or energy to help with its increasingly difficult problems regarding coal disputes, strikes, unemployment and poverty. The miners expected a wealthy man who would fund party operations, but he had no money. He disagreed with the increasingly radical activism of party leaders in the district, as well as the permanent agent, and the South Wales Mineworkers' Federation . He moved to Seaham Harbour in County Durham , a safer seat, to avoid a highly embarrassing defeat.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] MacDonald at Tomb of Unknown Soldier, Washington, DC, 9 October 1929 Baldwin resigned and MacDonald again formed a minority government, with intermittent Liberal support. This time, MacDonald knew he had to concentrate on domestic matters.

Arthur Henderson became Foreign Secretary, with Snowden again at the Exchequer.

JH Thomas became Lord Privy Seal with a mandate to tackle unemployment, assisted by the young radical Oswald Mosley .

Margaret Bondfield was appointed as Minister of Labour , becoming the first-ever woman cabinet minister.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] MacDonald's second government was in a stronger parliamentary position than his first, and was able to introduce a number of progressive reforms.

[ 91 ] In 1930, for instance, it was able to raise unemployment pay , pass an act to improve wages and conditions in the coal industry (i.e. the issues behind the General Strike ) and pass the Housing Act 1930 which focused on slum clearances . However, an attempt by the Education Minister Charles Trevelyan to introduce an act to raise the school-leaving age to 15 was defeated by opposition from Roman Catholic Labour MPs, who feared that the costs would lead to increasing local authority control over faith schools.

[ 66 ] In international affairs, he also convened the Round Table conferences in London with the political leaders of India, at which he offered them responsible government , but not independence or even Dominion status. In April 1930 he negotiated the London Naval Treaty , limiting naval armaments, with France, Italy, Japan, and the United States.

[ 66 ] MacDonald c.

1929 Great Depression [ edit ] Main article: Great Depression in the United Kingdom MacDonald's government had no effective response to the economic crisis which followed the Stock Market Crash of 1929 .

Philip Snowden was a rigid exponent of orthodox finance and would not permit any deficit spending to stimulate the economy, despite the urgings of Oswald Mosley , David Lloyd George and the economist John Maynard Keynes . Mosley put forward a memorandum in January 1930, calling for the public control of imports and banking as well as an increase in pensions to boost spending power. When this was repeatedly turned down, Mosley resigned from the government in February 1931 and formed the New Party . He later converted to fascism .

By the end of 1930, unemployment had doubled to over two and a half million.

[ 92 ] The government struggled to cope with the crisis and found itself attempting to reconcile two contradictory aims: achieving a balanced budget to maintain sterling on the gold standard , and maintaining assistance to the poor and unemployed, at a time when tax revenues were falling. During 1931, the economic situation deteriorated, and pressure from orthodox economists for sharp cuts in government spending increased. Under pressure from its Liberal allies, as well as the Conservative opposition who feared that the budget was unbalanced, Snowden appointed a committee headed by Sir George May to review the state of public finances. The May Report of July 1931, urged large public-sector wage cuts and large cuts in public spending, notably in payments to the unemployed, to avoid a budget deficit.

[ 93 ] National government (1931–1935) [ edit ] Further information: National Government (1931) Formation of the National Government [ edit ] Although there was a narrow majority in the Cabinet for drastic reductions in spending, the minority included senior ministers such as Arthur Henderson who made it clear they would resign rather than acquiesce in the cuts. With this unworkable split, on 24 August 1931, MacDonald submitted his resignation and then agreed, on the urging of King George V , to form a National Government with the Conservatives and Liberals. With Henderson taking the lead, MacDonald, Snowden, and Thomas were quickly expelled from the Labour Party.

[ 94 ] They responded by forming a new National Labour Organisation , which provided a nominal party base for the expelled MPs, but received little support in the country or the unions. Great anger in the labour movement greeted MacDonald's move. Riots took place in protest in Glasgow and Manchester . Many in the Labour Party viewed this as a cynical move by MacDonald to rescue his career, and accused him of 'betrayal'. MacDonald, however, argued that the sacrifice was for the common good.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] 1931 general election [ edit ] In the 1931 general election , the National Government won 554 seats, comprising 473 Conservatives, 13 National Labour, 68 Liberals ( Liberal National and Liberal) and various others, while Labour, now led by Arthur Henderson won only 52 and the Lloyd George Liberals four.  Henderson and his deputy J. R. Clynes both lost their seats in Labour's worst-ever rout. Labour's disastrous performance at the 1931 election greatly increased the bitterness felt by MacDonald's former colleagues towards him. MacDonald was genuinely upset to see the Labour Party so badly defeated at the election. He had regarded the National Government as a temporary measure, and had hoped to return to the Labour Party.

[ 92 ] Premiership of the National Government (1931–1935) [ edit ] Further information: National Government (1931–1935) The National Government's huge majority left MacDonald with the largest mandate ever won by a British Prime Minister at a democratic election, but MacDonald had only a small following of National Labour men in Parliament. He was ageing rapidly, and was increasingly a figurehead. In control of domestic policy were Conservatives Stanley Baldwin as Lord President and Neville Chamberlain the chancellor of the exchequer, together with National Liberal Walter Runciman at the Board of Trade .

[ 97 ] MacDonald, Chamberlain and Runciman devised a compromise tariff policy, which stopped short of protectionism while ending free trade and, at the 1932 Ottawa Conference , cementing commercial relations within the Commonwealth.

[ 98 ] Besides his preference for a cohesive British Empire and a protective tariff , he felt an independent British defence programme would be the wisest policy. However, budget pressures and a strong popular pacifist sentiment forced a reduction in the military and naval budgets.

[ 99 ] MacDonald involved himself heavily in foreign policy.  Assisted by the National Liberal leader and Foreign Secretary John Simon , he continued to lead British delegations to international conferences, including the Geneva Disarmament Conference and the Lausanne Conference in 1932, and the Stresa Conference in 1935.

[ 100 ] He went to Rome in March 1933 to facilitate Nazi Germany 's return to the concert of European powers and to continue the policy of appeasement.

[ 101 ] On 16 August 1932 he granted the Communal Award upon India, partitioning it into separate electorates for Hindus , Muslims , Sikhs and Untouchables .  Most important of all, he presided at the World Economic Conference in London in June 1933.  Nearly every nation was represented, but no agreement was possible. The American president torpedoed the conference with a bombshell message that the US would not stabilise the depreciating dollar.  The failure marked the end of international economic cooperation for another decade.

[ 102 ] MacDonald was deeply affected by the anger and bitterness caused by the fall of the Labour government. He continued to regard himself as a true Labour man, but the rupturing of virtually all his old friendships left him an isolated figure. One of the only other leading Labour figures to join the government, Philip Snowden, was a firm believer in free trade and resigned from the government in 1932 following the introduction of tariffs after the Ottawa agreement .

[ 103 ] [ incomplete short citation ] Retirement [ edit ] By 1933 MacDonald's health was so poor that his doctor Thomas Horder had to personally supervise his trip to Geneva. By 1934 MacDonald's mental and physical health declined further, and he became an increasingly ineffective leader as the international situation grew more threatening. His speeches in the House of Commons and at international meetings became incoherent. One observer noted how "Things ... got to the stage where nobody knew what the Prime Minister was going to say in the House of Commons, and, when he did say it, nobody understood it". Newspapers did not report MacDonald denying to reporters that he was seriously ill because he only had "loss of memory".

[ 66 ] [ 27 ] His pacifism, which had been widely admired in the 1920s, led Winston Churchill and others to accuse him of failure to stand up to the threat of Adolf Hitler . His government began the negotiations for the Anglo-German Naval Agreement .

In these years he was irritated by the attacks of Lucy, Lady Houston , the strongly nationalistic proprietor of the Saturday Review . Lady Houston believed that MacDonald was under the control of the Soviets and amused the nation by giving MacDonald such epithets as the 'Spider of Lossiemouth,' and hanging a large sign in electric lights from the rigging of her luxury yacht, the SY Liberty . According to some versions, it read 'Down with Ramsay MacDonald,' and to others 'To Hell with Ramsay MacDonald.' Lady Houston also sent agents to disrupt his election campaigns. In 2020 new research revealed how she purchased three letters, supposedly written by Ramsay MacDonald to Soviet officials but actually the work of an American forger. In 1935 Lady Houston stated that she intended to publish them but eventually handed them over to Special Branch , and MacDonald's solicitors entered a legal battle with her.

[ 104 ] [ page needed ] MacDonald was aware of his fading powers, and in 1935 he agreed to a timetable with Baldwin to stand down as Prime Minister after King George V's Silver Jubilee celebrations in May 1935. He resigned on 7 June in favour of Baldwin, and remained in the cabinet, taking the largely honorary post of Lord President vacated by Baldwin.

[ 66 ] Last years and death (1935–1937) [ edit ] At the November 1935 election MacDonald was defeated at Seaham by Emanuel Shinwell , but he was re-elected to Parliament at a by-election in January 1936 for the Combined Scottish Universities seat . After Hitler's re-militarisation of the Rhineland in 1936, MacDonald declared that he was "pleased" that the Treaty of Versailles was "vanishing", expressing his hope that the French had been taught a "severe lesson".

[ 105 ] MacDonald was one of the signatories to the Anglo-Egyptian Treaty of 1936 .

[ 106 ] His health was failing. King George V died a week before voting began in the Scottish by-election, and MacDonald deeply mourned his death, [ 107 ] [ 108 ] paying tribute to him in his diary as "a gracious and kingly friend whom I have served with all my heart".

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] There had been genuine affection between the two and the king is said to have regarded MacDonald as his favourite prime minister.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Following the king's death MacDonald's physical and mental health collapsed.

A sea voyage (with his youngest daughter Sheila ) was recommended to restore MacDonald's health, but he died of heart failure on board the liner MV Reina del Pacifico , on 9 November 1937, aged 71.

[ 111 ] MacDonald's body was transferred to the Royal Navy at Bermuda for return to Plymouth . All of the Bermuda-based cruisers of the America and West Indies Station were away from Bermuda at that time except for HMS Orion and HMS Apollo . As Apollo was undergoing a refit at the dockyard, it would have fallen to Orion to deliver MacDonald's body, but as she was temporary flagship since HMS York had departed on 27 October for Trinidad (due to civil unrest there) she could not leave the station and Apollo was consequently hurried through her refit instead.

Orion was tasked with the memorial service for Macdonald. His body was taken aboard the Royal Navy tug Sandboy from the Reina del Pacifico and landed on Front Street in Hamilton along with the Royal Naval Dockyard Chaplain, the Orion 's Chaplain, an honour guard, sentries and coffin bearers. MacDonald's coffin was borne on a gun carriage to the Church of England 's Cathedral of the Most Holy Trinity , in a procession that included the ship's company of Orion and a detachment of the Sherwood Foresters (Nottinghamshire and Derbyshire Regiment) , serving in the Bermuda Garrison . At the cathedral, Arthur Browne , the Bishop of Bermuda , conducted the memorial service, which was followed by a lying in state . Thousands visited to pay their respects. MacDonald's body and his daughter departed Bermuda the following day aboard Apollo , arriving at Plymouth on 25 November. His funeral was in Westminster Abbey on 26 November, followed by a private cremation service at Golders Green . After cremation, his ashes were taken to Lossiemouth, where a service commenced in his house, The Hillocks, followed by a procession to Holy Trinity Church, Spynie , where they were buried alongside his wife Margaret and their son David in his native Moray .

[ 66 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Personal life [ edit ] MacDonald c.

1900s Ramsay MacDonald married Margaret Ethel Gladstone (no relation to Prime Minister William Gladstone) in 1896. The marriage was a very happy one, and they had six children, including Malcolm MacDonald (1901–1981), who had a distinguished career as a politician, colonial governor and diplomat, and Ishbel (1903–1982) and Sheila MacDonald , who were both very close to their father.

[ 114 ] Another son, Alister Gladstone MacDonald (1898–1993) was a conscientious objector in the First World War , serving in the Friends' Ambulance Unit ; he became a prominent architect who worked on promoting the planning policies of his father's government, and specialised in cinema design.

[ 115 ] MacDonald was devastated by Margaret's death from blood poisoning in 1911, and had few significant personal relationships after that time, apart from with Ishbel, who acted as his consort while he was Prime Minister and cared for him for the rest of his life. Following his wife's death, MacDonald commenced a relationship with Lady Margaret Sackville .

[ 116 ] In the 1920s and 1930s he was frequently entertained by the society hostess Lady Londonderry , which was much disapproved of in the Labour Party since her husband was a Conservative cabinet minister.

[ 117 ] [ incomplete short citation ] MacDonald was born into a religious family, and was originally quite devout in his own beliefs. Raised in the Presbyterian church, he later joined the Free Church of Scotland as an adult "but neither creeds or ritual attracted him".

[ 118 ] Subsequently, he became interested in the Unitarian movement during his time in London, and led Unitarian worship sessions. MacDonald was a passionate and prolific Unitarian preacher leading more than 500 services.

[ 119 ] Unitarianism led him to the Ethical movement , and he attended services at the South Place Ethical Society (now Conway Hall ).

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] He became intensely involved in the Union of Ethical Societies (today known as Humanists UK ), and friends with its founder, Stanton Coit , writing regularly in Coit's Ethical World publication.

[ 123 ] On more than one occasion he took the Chair at the annual meeting of the Union of Ethical Societies. His motives are evidenced in the manifesto of the Society of Ethical Propagandists to which Macdonald was a signatory (including Coit). The manifesto stated that Ethical societies "are founded upon a conviction that the good life is desirable for its own sake, and rests upon no supernatural sanction".

[ 124 ] MacDonald's unpopularity in the country following his stance against Britain's involvement in the First World War spilled over into his private life. In 1916, he was expelled from Moray Golf Club in Lossiemouth for being deemed to bring the club into disrepute because of his pacifist views.

[ 47 ] The manner of his expulsion was regretted by some members but an attempt to re-instate him by a vote in 1924 failed. However, a Special General Meeting held in 1929 finally voted for his reinstatement. By this time, MacDonald was Prime Minister for the second time. He felt the initial expulsion very deeply and refused to take up the final offer of membership, which he had framed and mounted.

[ 125 ] He ultimately became a member of nearby Spey Bay Golf Club where he gifted the Club Championship trophy that is still used to this day.

[ 126 ] Reputation [ edit ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e For half a century, MacDonald was demonised by the Labour Party as a turncoat who consorted with the enemy and drove the Labour Party to its nadir. Later, however, scholarly opinion raised his status as an important founder and leader of the Labour Party, and a man who held Britain together during its darkest economic times.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] MacDonald's expulsion from Labour along with his National Labour Organisation's coalition with the Conservatives, combined with the decline in his physical and mental powers after 1931, left him a discredited figure. The downfall of the Labour government in 1931, his National coalition with the Conservatives and the electoral defeat were blamed on him, and few spoke on his behalf.

[ 129 ] MacNeill Weir , MacDonald's former parliamentary private secretary, published the first major biography The Tragedy of Ramsay MacDonald in 1938. Weir demonised MacDonald for obnoxious careerism, class betrayal and treachery.

[ 130 ] Clement Attlee in his autobiography As it Happened (1954) called MacDonald's decision to abandon the Labour government in 1931 "the greatest betrayal in the political history of the country".

[ 131 ] The coming of war in 1939 led to a search for the politicians who had appeased Hitler and failed to prepare Britain; MacDonald was grouped among the " Guilty Men ".

[ 132 ] By the 1960s, while union activists maintained their hostile attitude, scholars wrote with more appreciation of his challenges and successes.

[ 133 ] Finally in 1977 he received a long scholarly biography that historians have judged to be "definitive".

[ 134 ] Labour MP David Marquand , a trained historian, wrote Ramsay MacDonald with the stated intention of giving MacDonald his due for his work in founding and building the Labour Party, and in trying to preserve peace in the years between the two world wars. He argued also to place MacDonald's fateful decision in 1931 in the context of the crisis of the times and the limited choices open to him. Marquand praised the prime minister's decision to place national interests before that of party in 1931. He also emphasised MacDonald's lasting intellectual contribution to socialism and his pivotal role in transforming Labour from an outside protest group to an inside party of government.

[ 135 ] Similarly, scholarly analysis of the economic decisions taken in the inter-war period, such as the return to the Gold Standard in 1925 and MacDonald's desperate efforts to defend it in 1931, has changed.  Thus Robert Skidelsky , in his classic 1967 account of the 1929–31 government, Politicians and the Slump , compared the orthodox policies advocated by leading politicians of both parties unfavourably with the more radical, proto-Keynesian measures proposed by David Lloyd George and Oswald Mosley; subsequently, in the preface to the 1994 edition Skidelsky argued that recent experience of currency crises and capital flight made it hard to be critical of politicians who wanted to achieve stability by cutting so-called "labour costs" and defending the value of the currency.

[ 136 ] In 2004 Marquand advanced a similar argument: In the harsher world of the 1980s and 1990s it was no longer obvious that Keynes was right in 1931 and the bankers wrong.  Pre-Keynesian orthodoxy had come in from the cold. Politicians and the public had learned anew that confidence crises feed on themselves; that currencies can collapse; that the public credit can be exhausted; that a plummeting currency can be even more painful than deflationary expenditure cuts; and that governments which try to defy the foreign exchange markets are apt to get their—and their countries'—fingers burnt.  Against that background, MacDonald's response to the 1931 crisis increasingly seemed not just honourable and consistent, but right ... he was the unacknowledged precursor of the Blairs , the Schröders , and the Clintons of the 1990s and 2000s.

[ 137 ] Cultural depictions [ edit ] Further information: Cultural depictions of British prime ministers § Ramsay MacDonald Honours [ edit ] In 1930, MacDonald was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) under Statute 12 .

[ 138 ] He was awarded honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD) degrees by the universities of Wales , Glasgow , Edinburgh , Oxford and McGill and George Washington University .

[ 139 ] References [ edit ] ^ "James Ramsay MacDonald" .

^ Shepherd 2007 , pp. 31–.

^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 4–5.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 6.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 5.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 12.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 15.

^ Bryher, Samual: An Account of the Labour and Socialist Movement in Bristol , 1929 ^ Elton 1939 , p. 44.

^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 9, 17.

^ Tracey, Herbert: J. Ramsay MacDonald , 1924, p. 29 ^ Marquand 1977 , p. 20.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 21.

^ Morgan, J. Ramsay MacDonald (1987) p. 17 ^ Marquand 1977 , p. 23.

^ MacDonald, James Ramsay (1921).

Socialism: critical and constructive . Cassell's social economics series. Cassell and Company Ltd.

^ Elton 1939 , pp. 56–57.

^ "Letter from Ramsay McDonald to Birkbeck College – Birkbeck, University of London" .

Google Arts & Culture . Retrieved 11 April 2020 .

^ Conor Cruise O' Brien, Parnell and his Party , 1957, p. 275 ^ Marquand 1977 , p. 22.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 31.

^ Dover Express , 17 June 1892; 12 August 1892 ^ Dover Express , 7 October 1892 ^ Marquand 1977 , p. 35.

^ Southampton Times , 21 July 1894 ^ Marquand 1977 , p. 73.

^ a b Gunther, John (1940).

Inside Europe . New York: Harper & Brothers. pp. 335, 337– 340.

^ Jennings 1962 , p. 457.

^ Mackintosh, John P. (Ed.): British Prime Ministers in the twentieth Century , London, 1977, p. 157 ^ MacDonald Papers, P.R.O. 3/95 ^ McDonald, Deborah, Clara Collet 1860–1948: An Educated Working Woman ; Routledge: 2004 ^ Diary of Clara Collet: Warwick Modern Records Office ^ Morgan 1987 , p. 30.

^ Clegg, H.A;, Fox, Alan; Thompson, A.F.: A History of British Trade Unions since 1889 , 1964, vol I, p. 388 ^ Leicester Pioneer , 20 January 1906 ^ Morgan 1987 , p. 40.

^ Kenneth Morgan (1987) pp 42–43 ^ Thompson, Laurence: The Enthusiasts, (1971), p. 173 ^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 77, 168.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 168.

^ "HC Deb 03 August 1914 vol 65 c. 1831" .

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 169.

^ MacKintosh, John P (Ed.): British Prime Ministers in the Twentieth Century , (1977), p. 159.

^ Elton 1939 , pp. 269–271.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 189.

^ Symons, Julian, Horatio Bottomley , Cressett Press, London, 1955, pp. 168–169 ^ a b Marquand 1977 , pp. 190, 191.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 192.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 205.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 236.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 250.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 273.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 274.

^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 274–275.

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 283.

^ Kenneth Morgan (1987) pp. 44–45 ^ a b c David Cesarani. "Anti-Zionism in Britain, 1922–2002: Continuities and Discontinuities" The Journal of Israeli History 25.1 (2006): 141 ^ Neilson, Keith; Otte, T.G. (2008).

The Permanent Under-Secretary for Foreign Affairs, 1854–1946 . New York: Routledge. p. 175.

ISBN 978-1134231393 .

^ a b Bennett, Gill (22 January 2014).

"What's the context? 22 January 1924: Britain's first Labour government takes office – History of government – What's the context? series" .

history.blog.gov.uk .

The National Archives of the United Kingdom . Retrieved 20 January 2021 .

Ramsay MacDonald took office as both Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary of a minority government on 22 January 1924.

^ a b "Scotland Back in the Day: Remembering the first working-class PM, Ramsay MacDonald, 150 years after his birth" , The National.

^ "Ramsay MacDonald" , Spartacus Educational, John Simkin, September 1997 (updated February 2016).

^ Taylor 1965 , p. 209.

^ Sir Harold Nicolson, King George V: His life and reign (1952) ^ Taylor 1965 , pp. 213–214.

^ The British labour government in contemporary opinion / by Marjorie Ruth Clark, 1925, P.22-26 ^ a b c d e f Morgan, Kevin. (2006) MacDonald (20 British Prime Ministers of the 20th Century) , Haus Publishing, ISBN 1904950612 ^ Policy & Progress In Secondary Education 1902-1942 by John Graves, 1943, P.122 ^ The First British Labour Government – What did it Achieve?

By Vittorio Trevitt, Published by History Today on the 17th of June 2024 ^ Social Policies for Old Age A Review of Social Provision for Old Age in Great Britain By B. E. Shenfield, 2013, P.92 ^ Agriculture in England A Survey of Farming , 1870-1947 By Jonathan Brown, 1987, P.83 ^ The Glasgow Herald 8 Jul 1929 ^ In Defense of Public Debt By Barry J. Eichengreen, Asmaa El-Ganainy, Rui Esteves, Kris James Mitchener, 2021, P.114 ^ Keith Robbins, "Labour Foreign Policy and International Socialism: MacDonald and the League of Nations," in Robbins, Politicians, Diplomacy and War (2003) pp. 239–272 ^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 315–317.

^ a b Marks, Sally (1978). "The Myths of Reparations".

Central European History .

11 (3): 231– 255.

doi : 10.1017/s0008938900018707 .

S2CID 144072556 .

^ Steiner, Zara (2005).

The lights that failed : European international history, 1919–1933 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0191518812 .

OCLC 86068902 .

^ Marks, "The Myths of Reparations", p. 249 ^ Marquand 1977 , pp. 329–351.

^ Limam: The First Labour Government , 1924, p. 173 ^ Curtis Keeble (1990).

Britain and the Soviet Union 1917–89 . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 117.

ISBN 978-1349206438 .

^ Lyman, The First Labour Government, 1924 pp. 195–204 ^ A.J.P. Taylor (1965).

English History, 1914–1945 . Clarendon Press. pp.

217– 20, 225– 226.

ISBN 978-0198217152 .

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 382.

^ Taylor 1965 , pp. 219–220, 226–227.

^ C. L. Mowat (1955).

Britain Between the Wars, 1918–1940 . Taylor & Francis. pp.

188– 194.

^ "A Century of Change: Trends in UK statistics since 1900," Research Paper 99/111, 1999, House of Commons Library ^ "Mr. W. G. Covr, M.P., May Not Stand Again at Wellingborough" .

Northampton Mercury . 17 August 1928 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 – via British Newspaper Archive .

^ Chris Howard, "Ramsay MacDonald and Aberavon, 1922–29," Llafur: Journal of Welsh Labour History 7#1 (1996) pp. 68–77 ^ John Shepherd, The Second Labour Government: A reappraisal (2012).

^ "The New Ministry" .

Hartlepool Mail . 8 June 1929 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 – via British Newspaper Archive .

^ The record of the second Labour government [1929-1931] . The Labour Party. 1935 – via Babel Hathi Trust.

^ a b Davies, A.J. (1996) To Build A New Jerusalem: The British Labour Party from Keir Hardie to Tony Blair , Abacus, ISBN 0349108099 ^ C. L. Mowat , Britain between the Wars, 1918–1940 (1955) pp. 379–401 ^ Andrew Thorpe, "Arthur Henderson and the British political crisis of 1931." Historical Journal 31#1 (1988): 117–139.

^ Martin Pugh Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party (2010) pp. 212–216 ^ Reginald Bassett, 1931 Political Crisis (MacMillan, 1958) defends MacDonald.

^ Harford Montgomery Hyde (1973).

Baldwin; the unexpected Prime Minister . Hart-Davis MacGibbon. p.

345 .

ISBN 978-0246640932 .

^ Wrench, David (2000). " 'Very Peculiar Circumstances': Walter Runciman and the National Government, 1931–3".

Twentieth Century British History .

11 (1): 61– 82.

doi : 10.1093/tcbh/11.1.61 .

^ Taylor 1965 , pp. 359–370.

^ Kevin Morgan (2006).

Ramsay MacDonald . Haus Publishing. p. 79.

ISBN 978-1904950615 .

^ Aage Trommer, "MacDonald in Geneva in March 1933: A study in Britain's European policy." Scandinavian Journal of History 1#1–4 (1976): 293–312.

^ Taylor 1965 , pp. 334–335.

^ Morgan 1987 , p. 213.

^ Crompton, Teresa (2020).

Adventuress, the Life and Loves of Lucy, Lady Houston . The History Press.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Stevenson, David (1998).

"France at the Paris Peace Conference: Addressing the Dilemmas of Security" . In Robert W. D. Boyce (ed.).

French Foreign and Defence Policy, 1918–1940: The Decline and Fall of a Great Power . London: Routledge. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0415150392 .

^ "Historic Anglo-Egyptian treaty signed in London – archive, 1936" .

Guardian . 27 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 August 2021 .

^ a b Marquand 1977 , p.

784 "George V's death in January 1936, had been a heavy blow to MacDonald; it is clear from his diary that he must have taken some time to recover from it." ^ a b Morgan 1987 , p. 234.

^ Berkeley, Humphry (1978).

The myth that will not die: the formation of the National Government 1931 . Croom Helm. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0856647734 .

^ Watkins, Alan (2 September 1978). "History without heroes".

The Spectator . Vol. 241. F.C. Westley. p. 20.

^ Marquand, David.

"MacDonald, (James) Ramsay" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Retrieved 9 February 2025 .

^ "Ramsay MacDonald's Last Homecoming: Bermuda to Lossiemouth".

The Illustrated London News . London. 4 December 1937.

^ H.M.S. Orion 1937–1939 . Flood & Son, Ltd, The Borough Press, Lowestoft: Royal Navy (HMS Orion). 1939. p. 26.

^ Lyon, Peter (23 September 2004).

"MacDonald, Malcolm John (1901–1981), politician and diplomatist" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 1 (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/31388 .

ISBN 978-0-19-861412-8 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ David Goold (2008).

"Alister Gladstone MacDonald (or Alistair Gladstone MacDonald)" . Dictionary of Scottish Architects . Retrieved 9 May 2010 .

^ Fenton, Ben (2 November 2006).

"Secret love affair of Labour Prime Minister and Lady Margaret is revealed 80 years on" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 9 May 2010 .

^ Morgan 1987 , p. 124.

^ Elton 1939 , p. 38.

^ Tom McReady (2015) Blessed is the Peacemaker: The Religious Vision of Ramsay MacDonald .

Richmond and Putney Unitarian Church .

^ Marquand 1977 , p. 24.

^ Turner, Jacqueline (2018).

The Labour Church: Religion and Politics in Britain 1890–1914 . I.B.Tauris & Co Ltd.

^ Hunt, James D. (2005).

An American Looks at Gandhi: Essays in Satyagraha, Civil Rights, and Peace . Promilla & Co Publishers Ltd.

^ Roger E Backhouse; Tamotsu Nishizawa, eds. (2010).

No Wealth But Life: Welfare Economics and the Welfare State in Britain, 1880–1945 . Cambridge University Press. p.

118 .

ISBN 978-0521197861 .

[ dead link ] ^ Elton 1939 , p. 94.

^ McConnachie, John.

The Moray Golf Club at Lossiemouth , 1988 ^ "Spey Bay Golf Club" .

Moray Speyside Golf . 2020 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 .

^ Shepherd 2007 , pp. 31–33.

^ Owen, Nicholas (2007). "MacDonald's Parties: The Labour Party and the 'Aristocratic Embrace' 1922–31".

Twentieth Century British History .

18 (1): 1– 53.

doi : 10.1093/tcbh/hwl043 .

^ Marquand 2004 , p. 700.

^ Martin 2003 , pp. 836–837.

^ Clement Attlee, As it Happened . Heinemann: 1954 ^ Oxford Dictionary of National Biography ^ Martin 2003 , pp. 836–837; Shepherd 2007 , pp. 31–33.

^ David Dutton (2008).

Liberals in Schism: A History of the National Liberal Party . I.B. Tauris. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0857737113 .

^ Martin 2003 , p. 837.

^ Robert Skidelsky (1994).

Politicians and the slump: The Labour Government of 1929–1931 . Papermac.

ISBN 978-0333605929 .

^ Marquand 2004 .

^ Gregory, R. A. (1939). "James Ramsay MacDonald. 1866–1937".

Obituary Notices of Fellows of the Royal Society .

2 (7): 475– 482.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1939.0007 .

^ "MacDonald, Rt Hon. James Ramsay, (12 October 1866 – 9 November 1937), JP Morayshire; MP (Lab.) Aberavon Division of Glamorganshire, 1922–29, Seaham Division Co. Durham, 1929–31, (Nat. Lab.) 1931–35, Scottish Universities since 1936".

MacDonald, Rt Hon. James Ramsay . Oxford University Press. 1 December 2007.

doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.U213229 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) Bibliography [ edit ] Barker, Rodney. "Political Myth: Ramsay MacDonald and the Labour Party." History 61.201 (1976): 46–56.

online Byrne, Christopher, Nick Randall, and Kevin Theakston. "Disjunctive Leadership in Interwar Britain: Stanley Baldwin, Ramsay MacDonald, and Neville Chamberlain." in Disjunctive Prime Ministerial Leadership in British Politics (Palgrave Pivot, Cham, 2020) pp. 17–49.

Carlton, David.

MacDonald versus Henderson: The Foreign Policy of the Second Labour Government (2014).

Eccleshall, Robert, and Graham Walker, eds.

Biographical Dictionary of British Prime Ministers (1998) pp. 281–288.

online Elton, Lord (1939).

The Life of James Ramsay MacDonald (1866–1919 . Collins.

ISBN 978-1406730456 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Heppell, Timothy, and Kevin Theakston, eds.

How Labour Governments Fall: From Ramsay MacDonald to Gordon Brown (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013).

Hinks, John Ramsay MacDonald: the Leicester years (1906–1918) , Leicester, 1996 Howard, Christopher. "MacDonald, Henderson, and the Outbreak of War, 1914." Historical Journal 20.4 (1977): 871–891.

online Howell, David MacDonald's Party. Labour Identities and Crisis, 1922–1931 , Oxford: OUP 2002; ISBN 0198203047 Jennings, Ivor (1962).

Party Politics: Volume 3, The Stuff of Politics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521054348 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Kitching, Carolyn J. "Prime minister and foreign secretary: the dual role of James Ramsay MacDonald in 1924." Review of International Studies 37#3 (2011): 1403–1422.

online Lloyd, Trevor. "Ramsay MacDonald: Socialist or Gentleman?." Canadian Journal of History/Annales Canadiennes d'Histoire 15#3 (1980) online Archived 8 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

Lyman, Richard W.

The First Labour Government, 1924 (Chapman & Hall, 1957).

online free to borrow Lyman, Richard W. "James Ramsay MacDonald and the Leadership of the Labour Party, 1918–22." Journal of British Studies 2#1 (1962): 132–160.

online Martin, David E. (2003). "MacDonald, (James) Ramsay". In Loades, David (ed.).

Reader's Guide to British History . Vol. 2.

McKibbin, Ross I. "James Ramsay MacDonald and the Problem of the Independence of the Labour Party, 1910–1914." Journal of Modern History 42#2 (1970): 216–235.

in JSTOR Marquand, David (1977).

Ramsay MacDonald . London: Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 0224012959 .

; 902pp Marquand, David (2004). "MacDonald, (James) Ramsay (1866–1937)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/34704 ; (Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) online edn, Oct 2009 accessed 9 Sept 2012 Morgan, Austen (1987).

J. Ramsay MacDonald . Manchester: Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0719021688 .

Morgan, Kenneth O.

Labour People: Leaders and Lieutenants Hardy to Kinnock (1987) pp. 39–53.

online free to borrow Morgan, Kevin.

Ramsay MacDonald (2006) online free to borrow Mowat, C. L.

"Ramsay MacDonald and the Labour Party," in Essays in Labour History 1886–1923, edited by Asa Briggs, and John Saville, (1971) Mowat, Charles L. "The Fall of the Labour Government in Great Britain, August, 1931," Huntington Library Quarterly 7#4 (1944), pp. 353–386 JSTOR 3815737 Mowat, Charles Loch.

Britain between the Wars: 1918–1945 (1955) PP 413–79 Owen, Nicholas (2007). "MacDonald's Parties: The Labour Party and the 'Aristocratic Embrace' 1922–31".

Twentieth Century British History .

18 (1): 1– 53.

doi : 10.1093/tcbh/hwl043 .

Phillips, Gordon: The Rise of the Labour Party 1893–1931 , (Routledge 1992).

Riddell,  Neil.

Labour in Crisis: The Second Labour Government, 1929–31 (1999).

Robbins, Keith (1994).

Politicians, Diplomacy and War in Modern British History . A&C Black. pp.

239– 272.

ISBN 978-0826460479 .

Rosen, Greg (ed.) Dictionary of Labour Biography , London: Politicos Publishing 2001; ISBN 978-1902301181 Rosen, Greg (ed.) Old Labour to New. The Dreams That Inspired, the Battles That Divided (London: Politicos Publishing 2005; ISBN 978-1842750452 ).

Sacks, Benjamin.

J. Ramsay MacDonald in Thought and Action (University of New Mexico Press, 1952), favourable biography by American scholar Shepherd, John and Keith Laybourn .

Britain's First Labour Government (2006).

Shepherd, John.

The Second Labour Government: A reappraisal (2012).

Skidelsky, Robert.

Politicians and the Slump: The Labour Government of 1929–1931 (1967).

Smart, Nick.

The National Government. 1931–40 (Macmillan 1999) ISBN 0-333-69131-8 Stewart, John. "Ramsay MacDonald, the Labour Party, and child welfare, 1900–1914." Twentieth Century British History 4.2 (1993): 105–125.

Taylor, A. J. P. (1965).

English History: 1914–1945 .

Thorpe, Andrew. "Arthur Henderson and the British political crisis of 1931." Historical Journal 31#1 (1988): 117–139, On the expulsion of MacDonald from the Labour Party.

Thorpe, Andrew Britain in the 1930s. The Deceptive Decade (Blackwell 1992; ISBN 0631174117 ) Ward, Stephen R.

James Ramsay MacDonald: Low Born among the High Brows (1990).

Weir, L. MacNeill.

The Tragedy of Ramsay MacDonald: A Political Biography (1938). Highly influential and extremely negative account by a former aide.

online Williamson, Philip: National Crisis and National Government. British Politics, the Economy and the Empire, 1926–1932 , Cambridge: CUP 1992; ISBN 0521361370 Wrigley, Chris. "James Ramsay MacDonald 1922–1931," in Leading Labour: From Keir Hardie to Tony Blair, edited by Kevin Jefferys, (1999) Historiography [ edit ] Callaghan, John, et al. eds.

Interpreting the Labour Party: Approaches to Labour Politics and History (2003) online Loades, David, ed.

Reader's Guide to British History (2003) 2:836–837.

Shepherd, John (November 2007). "The Lad from Lossiemouth".

History Today . Vol. 57, no. 11. pp.

31– 33.

Primary sources [ edit ] Barker, Bernard (ed.) Ramsay MacDonald's Political Writings (Allen Lane, 1972).

Cox, Jane A Singular Marriage: A Labour Love Story in Letters and Diaries (of Ramsay and Margaret MacDonald), London: Harrap 1988; ISBN 978-0245546761 MacDonald, Ramsay The Socialist Movement (1911) online; free copy MacDonald, Ramsay Socialism and Society (1914) online MacDonald, Ramsay.

Labour and Peace , Labour Party 1912 MacDonald, Ramsay.

Parliament and Revolution , Labour Party 1919 MacDonald, Ramsay.

Parliament and revolution (1920) online MacDonald, Ramsay.

Foreign Policy of the Labour Party, Labour Party 1923 MacDonald, Ramsay.

Margaret Ethel MacDonald (1924) online MacDonald, Ramsay.

Socialism: critical and constructive (1924) online External links [ edit ] Ramsay MacDonald at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Ramsay MacDonald Ramsay MacDonald – 1924 First Labour Government – UK Parliament Living Heritage A left-wing criticism of Macdonald's career Archived 27 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine Socialist Review More about Ramsay MacDonald Prime Minister's Office Ramsay MacDonald Papers, 1893–1937 The Peacemaker, Labour Publications Department via=Memorial University of Newfoundland - Digital Archives Initiative ( https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ) Portraits of Ramsay MacDonald at the National Portrait Gallery, London "Archival material relating to Ramsay MacDonald" .

UK National Archives .

Newspaper clippings about Ramsay MacDonald in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW Political offices Preceded by H. H. Asquith Leader of the Opposition 1922–1924 Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 1924–1924 Leader of the House of Commons 1924 Preceded by The Marquess Curzon of Kedleston Foreign Secretary 1924 Succeeded by Sir Austen Chamberlain Preceded by Stanley Baldwin Leader of the Opposition 1924–1929 Succeeded by Stanley Baldwin Prime Minister of the United Kingdom 1929–1935 Leader of the House of Commons 1929–1935 Lord President of the Council 1935–1937 Succeeded by The Viscount Halifax Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by Sir John Rolleston Henry Broadhurst Member of Parliament for Leicester 1906 – 1918 With: Henry Broadhurst , to March 1906 Franklin Thomasson , 1906–1910 Eliot Crawshay-Williams , 1910–1913 Sir Gordon Hewart , 1913–1918 Constituency abolished Preceded by John Edwards Member of Parliament for Aberavon 1922 – 1929 Succeeded by William Cove Preceded by Sidney Webb Member of Parliament for Seaham 1929 – 1935 Succeeded by Manny Shinwell Preceded by Noel Skelton Member of Parliament for the Combined Scottish Universities 1936 – 1937 Succeeded by Sir John Anderson Party political offices New political party Labour Party Secretary 1900–1912 Succeeded by Arthur Henderson Preceded by Philip Snowden Chairman of the Independent Labour Party 1906–1909 Succeeded by Fred Jowett Preceded by George Barnes Chairman of the Parliamentary Labour Party 1911–1914 Succeeded by Arthur Henderson Preceded by Arthur Henderson Treasurer of the Labour Party 1912–1929 Succeeded by Arthur Henderson Preceded by J. R. Clynes Leader of the British Labour Party 1922–1931 Succeeded by Arthur Henderson Preceded by Sidney Webb Chair of the Labour Party 1923–1924 Succeeded by Charlie Cramp New political party Leader of National Labour 1931–1937 Succeeded by Malcolm MacDonald v t e Ramsay MacDonald Premierships Labour Government, 1924 Labour Government, 1929–1931 First National Government, 1931 Second National Government, 1931–1935 General elections 1923 1924 1929 1931 1935 Constituencies Leicester Aberavon Seaham Combined Scottish Universities Career Gladstone–MacDonald pact 1922 party leadership election Campbell Case Defeat of the MacDonald ministry Zinoviev letter Great Depression London Naval Treaty India Round Table Conferences MacDonald Award National Government Anglo-German Naval Agreement Family Margaret Ethel MacDonald (wife) Malcolm MacDonald (son) Ishbel MacDonald (daughter) Sheila MacDonald (daughter) Cultural depictions Winston Churchill: The Wilderness Years (TV, 1981) Gandhi (Film, 1982) Number 10 (TV, 1983) Mosley (TV, 1998) Related articles 1921 Woolwich East by-election 1936 Combined Scottish Universities by-election Lady Margaret Sackville MacDonald letter MV Reina del Pacifico National Labour Organisation v t e Prime ministers of the United Kingdom ( list ) Great Britain Walpole (Orford) Wilmington Pelham Newcastle Devonshire Newcastle Bute G. Grenville Rockingham Chatham (Pitt the Elder) Grafton North Rockingham Shelburne Portland Pitt the Younger United Kingdom Pitt the Younger Addington Pitt the Younger Lord Grenville Portland Perceval Liverpool Canning Goderich Wellington Grey Melbourne Wellington Peel Melbourne Peel Russell Derby Aberdeen Palmerston Derby Palmerston Russell Derby Disraeli Gladstone Disraeli (Beaconsfield) Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Salisbury Gladstone Rosebery Salisbury Balfour Campbell-Bannerman Asquith Lloyd George Law Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin Chamberlain Churchill Attlee Churchill Eden Macmillan Douglas-Home Wilson Heath Wilson Callaghan Thatcher Major Blair Brown Cameron May Johnson Truss Sunak Starmer Category v t e Leaders of Labour Leaders Keir Hardie Arthur Henderson George Barnes Ramsay MacDonald Arthur Henderson William Adamson J. R. Clynes Ramsay MacDonald Arthur Henderson George Lansbury Clement Attlee Herbert Morrison ^ Hugh Gaitskell George Brown, Baron George-Brown ^ Harold Wilson James Callaghan Michael Foot Neil Kinnock John Smith Margaret Beckett ^ Tony Blair Gordon Brown Harriet Harman ^ Ed Miliband Harriet Harman ^ Jeremy Corbyn Keir Starmer Deputy Leaders Clynes Graham Clement Attlee Greenwood Morrison Griffiths Bevan George Brown Jenkins Short Michael Foot Denis Healey Roy Hattersley Margaret Beckett John Prescott Harriet Harman Watson Angela Rayner General Secretaries MacDonald Henderson Middleton Phillips Williams Barker ^ Nicholas Hayward Mortimer Whitty Sawyer McDonagh Triesman Carter Watt Collins McNicol Formby Evans Treasurers Henderson MacDonald Henderson Lathan Greenwood Gaitskell Bevan Nicholas Davies Callaghan Atkinson Varley Booth McCluskie Burlison Prosser Elsby Dromey Holland Leaders in the Lords Haldane Cripps Ponsonby Snell Addison Jowitt Alexander Pakenham Shackleton Shepherd Peart Hughes Richard Jay Williams Amos Ashton Royall Smith of Basildon Scottish Labour Leaders Dewar McLeish Jamieson ^ McConnell Jamieson ^ Alexander Jamieson ^ Gray Lamont Sarwar ^ Murphy Gray ^ Dugdale Rowley ^ Baillie ^ Leonard Sarwar PLP Chairs Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Hodge * Wardle * Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith * Pethick-Lawrence * Greenwood * Gaitskell Wilson Houghton Mikardo Hughes Willey Dormand Orme Hoyle Soley Corston Clwyd Lloyd Watts Cryer EPLP Leaders Stewart Prescott Castle Lomas Martin Seal Ford Green David Donnelly Murphy Titley Willmott Corbett v t e Labour Party History Main History of the Labour Party Topics Electoral history General election manifestos History of the socialist movement in the United Kingdom European Parliamentary Labour Party Scottish Labour Party (1888) Independent Labour Party Labour Representation Committee Gladstone–MacDonald pact National Labour Organisation Labour Independent Group Campaign for Democratic Socialism Lib–Lab pact Formation of SDP Gang of Four Limehouse Declaration Militant tendency The longest suicide note in history Labour Listens One more heave New Labour Tony's Cronies Blue Labour One Nation Labour Chakrabarti Inquiry Leadership Leaders Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Morrison ^ Gaitskell Brown ^ Wilson Callaghan Foot Kinnock Smith Beckett ^ Blair Brown Harman ^ Miliband Harman ^ Corbyn Starmer Deputy Leaders Clynes Graham Attlee Greenwood Morrison Griffiths Bevan Brown Jenkins Short Foot Healey Hattersley Beckett Prescott Harman Watson Rayner General Secretaries MacDonald Henderson Middleton Phillips Williams Barker ^ Nicholas Hayward Mortimer Whitty Sawyer McDonagh Triesman Carter Watt Collins McNicol Formby Evans Treasurers Henderson MacDonald Henderson Lathan Greenwood Gaitskell Bevan Nicholas Davies Callaghan Atkinson Varley Booth McCluskie Burlison Prosser Elsby Dromey Holland Leaders in the Lords Haldane Cripps Ponsonby Snell Addison Jowitt Alexander Pakenham Shackleton Shepherd Peart Hughes Richard Jay Williams Amos Ashton Royall Smith of Basildon Scottish Labour Leaders Dewar McLeish Jamieson ^ McConnell Jamieson ^ Alexander Jamieson ^ Gray Lamont Sarwar ^ Murphy Gray ^ Dugdale Rowley ^ Baillie ^ Leonard Baillie ^ Sarwar PLP Chairs Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Hodge * Wardle * Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith * Pethick-Lawrence * Greenwood * Gaitskell Wilson Houghton Mikardo Hughes Willey Dormand Orme Hoyle Soley Corston Clwyd Lloyd Watts Cryer Morden EPLP Leaders Stewart Prescott Castle Lomas Martin Seal Ford Green David Donnelly Murphy Titley Willmott Corbett Party Chairman Clarke Reid McCartney Blears Harman Watson Lavery Rayner Dodds Reeves * = wartime, in opposition ^ Interim/Acting Internal elections and selections Leadership elections 1922 Ramsay MacDonald 1931 Arthur Henderson 1932 George Lansbury 1935 Clement Attlee 1955 Hugh Gaitskell 1960 1961 1963 Harold Wilson 1976 James Callaghan 1980 Michael Foot 1983 Neil Kinnock 1988 1992 John Smith 1994 Tony Blair 2007 Gordon Brown 2010 Ed Miliband 2015 Jeremy Corbyn 2016 2020 Keir Starmer Deputy Leadership elections 1952 Herbert Morrison 1953 1956 Jim Griffiths 1959 Aneurin Bevan 1960 George Brown 1961 1962 1970 Roy Jenkins 1971 1972 Edward Short 1976 Michael Foot 1980 Denis Healey 1981 1983 Roy Hattersley 1988 1992 Margaret Beckett 1994 John Prescott 2007 Harriet Harman 2015 Tom Watson 2020 Angela Rayner Shadow Cabinet elections and reshuffles Sep 1931 (Henderson) Nov 1931 1932 (Lansbury) 1933 1934 1935 (Attlee) 1936 1937 1938 1939 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 (Gaitskell) 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 (Wilson) 1970 1971 1972 1973 1979 (Callaghan) 1980 (Foot) 1981 1982 1983 (Kinnock) 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 (Smith) 1993 1994 (Blair) 1995 1996 2010 (Miliband) June 2016 (Corbyn) May 2021 (Starmer) November 2021 2023 Party structure Constitution Clause IV Executive National Executive Committee General Secretary Treasurer Parliamentary Parliamentary Labour Party Chief Whip of the Labour Party Conference Labour Party Conference Subnational Scottish Labour Welsh Labour Labour Party in Northern Ireland Directly elected city mayoral authorities London Labour CLPs Constituency Labour Party Labour International Miscellaneous National Policy Forum Affiliated trade unions Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation Labour Co-operative Co-operative Party Labour – Federation of Labour Groups Associated organisations List Organisations associated with the Labour Party Sectional groups Young Labour Labour International LGBT+ Labour Labour for Trans Rights Labour Students BAME Labour Disability Labour Factional groups Blue Labour Campaign for Labour Party Democracy Christians on the Left Compass Fabian Society Young Fabians Future Britain Centre-Left Grassroots Alliance Jewish Labour Movement Labour Campaign for Electoral Reform Labour CND Labour Friends of Israel Labour Friends of Palestine & the Middle East Labour Growth Group Labour Party Irish Society Labour Representation Committee (2004) Labour Women's Network Momentum Open Labour National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs Progressive Britain Red Wall Caucus Revolutionary Communist Party Formerly Socialist Appeal Socialist Health Association Socialist Educational Association Socialist Environment and Resources Association Socialist Campaign Group Socialist Youth Network Socialist societies Media publications LabourList Tribune Party alliances Current Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats Progressive Alliance Socialist International v t e 1922 Labour Party leadership election Incumbent Leader: J. R. Clynes J. R. Clynes Ramsay MacDonald v t e Foreign secretaries of the United Kingdom Foreign affairs Fox Grantham Fox Temple Leeds Grenville Hawkesbury Harrowby Mulgrave Fox Howick Canning Bathurst Wellesley Castlereagh Canning Dudley Aberdeen Palmerston Wellington Palmerston Aberdeen Palmerston Granville Malmesbury Russell Clarendon Malmesbury Russell Clarendon Stanley Clarendon Granville Derby Salisbury Granville Salisbury Rosebery Iddesleigh Salisbury Rosebery Kimberley Salisbury Lansdowne Grey Balfour Curzon MacDonald Chamberlain Henderson Reading Simon Hoare Eden Halifax Eden Bevin Morrison Eden Macmillan Lloyd Douglas-Home Butler Gordon Walker Stewart Brown Stewart Foreign and commonwealth affairs Stewart Douglas-Home Callaghan Crosland Owen Carrington Pym Howe Major Hurd Rifkind Cook Straw Beckett Miliband Hague Hammond Johnson Hunt Raab Foreign, commonwealth and development affairs Raab Truss Cleverly Cameron Lammy Category:British secretaries of state Portal:United Kingdom v t e Leaders of the House of Commons Walpole Sandys Pelham Robinson H. Fox Pitt the Elder Vacant (caretaker ministry) Pitt the Elder Grenville H. Fox Grenville Conway North C. Fox Townshend ( C. Fox / North ) Pitt the Younger Addington Pitt the Younger C. Fox Howick Perceval Castlereagh Canning Huskisson Peel Althorp Peel Russell Disraeli Russell Palmerston Disraeli Palmerston Gladstone Disraeli Gladstone Northcote Gladstone Hicks-Beach Gladstone R. Churchill Smith Balfour Gladstone Harcourt Balfour Campbell-Bannerman Asquith Law A. Chamberlain Law Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin N. Chamberlain W. Churchill Cripps Eden Morrison Chuter Ede Crookshank Butler Macleod Lloyd Bowden Crossman Peart Whitelaw Carr Prior Short Foot St John-Stevas Pym Biffen Wakeham Howe MacGregor Newton Taylor Beckett Cook Reid Hain Hoon Straw Harman Young Lansley Hague Grayling Lidington Leadsom Stride Rees-Mogg Spencer Mordaunt Powell v t e Cabinet of Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald (1924) Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Leader of the House of Commons Foreign Secretary Ramsay MacDonald Lord Chancellor Leader of the House of Lords The Viscount Haldane Lord President of the Council The Lord Parmoor Chancellor of the Exchequer Philip Snowden Home Secretary Arthur Henderson First Lord of the Admiralty The Viscount Chelmsford Minister of Agriculture and Fisheries Noel Buxton Secretary of State for Air The Lord Thomson Secretary of State for the Colonies J. H. Thomas Lord Privy Seal Deputy Leader of the House of Commons J. R. Clynes President of the Board of Education Charles Trevelyan Secretary of State for India Sydney Olivier Secretary of State for War Stephen Walsh Minister of Health John Wheatley Secretary for Scotland William Adamson Minister of Labour Tom Shaw Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster Josiah Wedgwood Postmaster General Vernon Hartshorn President of the Board of Trade Sidney Webb First Commissioner of Works Frederick William Jowett v t e Leaders of the opposition of the United Kingdom House of Commons Fox Howick Ponsonby Tierney Peel Althorp Peel Russell Peel Russell Bentinck Granby Granby / Herries / Disraeli Disraeli Russell Disraeli Palmerston Disraeli Gladstone Disraeli Gladstone Hartington Northcote Gladstone Hicks Beach Gladstone Balfour Harcourt Campbell-Bannerman Balfour Chamberlain Balfour Law Vacant Carson Asquith Maclean Asquith MacDonald Baldwin MacDonald Baldwin Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith Pethick-Lawrence Greenwood Attlee Churchill Attlee Morrison Gaitskell Brown Wilson Douglas-Home Heath Wilson Heath Thatcher Callaghan Foot Kinnock Smith Beckett Blair Major Hague Duncan Smith Howard Cameron Harman Miliband Harman Corbyn Starmer Sunak Badenoch House of Lords Grenville Grey 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Wellington 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Wellington Melbourne Wellington Melbourne 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Stanley 3rd Marquess of Lansdowne Derby (Stanley) Granville Derby Russell Granville Malmesbury Cairns Richmond Granville Beaconsfield 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Granville 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Granville Kimberley 3rd Marquess of Salisbury Rosebery Kimberley Spencer Ripon 5th Marquess of Lansdowne Crewe Curzon of Kedleston Haldane Parmoor 4th Marquess of Salisbury Hailsham Parmoor Ponsonby of Shulbrede Snell Addison 5th Marquess of Salisbury Addison Jowitt Alexander of Hillsborough Carrington Shackleton Carrington Peart Cledwyn of Penrhos Richard Cranborne Strathclyde Royall of Blaisdon Smith of Basildon True v t e Independent Labour Party Chairs 1894: Keir Hardie 1900: Bruce Glasier 1903: Philip Snowden 1906: Ramsay MacDonald 1909: Fred Jowett 1910: W. C. Anderson 1913: Keir Hardie 1914: Fred Jowett 1917: Philip Snowden 1920: R. C. Wallhead 1923: Clifford Allen 1926: James Maxton 1931: Fenner Brockway 1934: James Maxton 1939: C. A. Smith 1941: John McGovern 1943: Bob Edwards 1948: David Gibson 1951: Fred Barton 1953: Annie Maxton 1957: Jim Graham 1960: Annie Maxton 1961: Fred Morel 1962: Emrys Thomas 1974: Stan Iveson Secretaries 1893: Shaw Maxwell 1894: Tom Mann 1895: John Robertson 1898: John Penny 1903: Francis Johnson 1924: John Taylor 1927: John Paton 1933: Fenner Brockway 1939: John McNair 1955: Wilfred Wigham 1962: Penny Lockett 1963: Jenny Morel 1964: Hira Mukherjee 1971: Barry Winter Treasurers 1893: John Lister 1896: France Littlewood 1902: T. D. Benson 1920: Philip Snowden 1923: George Benson 1924: Charles Roden Buxton 1927: Fred Jowett 1944: Percy Williams 1949: Harley Millichap 1953: Anne Gill 1963: Don Bateman v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ramsay_MacDonald&oldid=1304106633 " Categories : Ramsay MacDonald 1866 births 1937 deaths 20th-century prime ministers of the United Kingdom Alumni of Birkbeck, University of London Alumni of the University of London Academics of the London School of Economics British Christian Zionists British secretaries of state for foreign affairs Chairs of the Labour Party (UK) Fellows of the Royal Society (Statute 12) Independent Labour Party MPs Independent Labour Party National Administrative Committee members Welsh Labour MPs Scottish Labour MPs Labour Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies Leaders of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom Leaders of the Labour Party (UK) Lord presidents of the Council Members of London County Council Members of the Executive of the Labour and Socialist International Members of the Fabian Society Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for the Combined Scottish Universities Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom Members of the King's Privy Council for Canada National Labour (UK) politicians People associated with Conway Hall Ethical Society People from Lossiemouth People who died at sea Politics of Moray Presidents of Humanists UK Scottish humanists Scottish political writers Scottish Presbyterians Social Democratic Federation members UK MPs 1906–1910 UK MPs 1910 UK MPs 1910–1918 UK MPs 1922–1923 UK MPs 1923–1924 UK MPs 1924–1929 UK MPs 1929–1931 UK MPs 1931–1935 UK MPs 1935–1945 Labour Party prime ministers of the United Kingdom Expelled members of the Labour Party (UK) First Lords of the Treasury Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2023 CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from March 2020 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles with hAudio microformats Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2021 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from January 2021 CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 01:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ramsay MacDonald 72 languages Add topic

