Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fundamental principles 2 Parties to the convention Toggle Parties to the convention subsection 2.1 States parties 2.2 Participating non-parties 3 Species coverage Toggle Species coverage subsection 3.1 Appendix I – Threatened migratory species 3.2 Appendix II – Migratory species requiring international cooperation 4 CMS instruments Toggle CMS instruments subsection 4.1 Agreements 4.2 Memoranda of understanding (MOU) 5 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 5.1 Conference of the Parties (COP) 5.2 Standing committee (StC) 5.3 Scientific Council (ScC) 5.3.1 Sessional Committee 5.4 Secretariat 6 Implementation Toggle Implementation subsection 6.1 Reporting 6.2 Domestic legislation 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals 26 languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bonn Convention ) Wildlife conservation treaty "Bonn Convention" redirects here. For other agreements with similar names, see Bonn Agreement .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Convention on Migratory Species Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals Type Multilateral Context Wildlife conservation Signed 23 June 1979 ( 1979-06-23 ) Location Bonn , West Germany Effective 1 November 1983 ( 1983-11-01 ) Condition Ratification by 15 states Parties 130 States + EU Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Chile Congo Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic DR Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia eSwatini Ethiopia European Union Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia (Republic of The) Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guinea Guinea-Bissau Honduras Hungary India Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lebanon Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Netherlands New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Republic of Moldova Romania Rwanda Samoa São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania Uruguay Uzbekistan Yemen Zimbabwe Depositary Government of Germany Languages English French German Russian Spanish Full text Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals at Wikisource The Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals , also known as the Convention on Migratory Species ( CMS ) or the Bonn Convention , is an international agreement that aims to conserve migratory species throughout their ranges.

[ 1 ] The agreement was signed under the auspices of the United Nations Environment Programme and is concerned with conservation of wildlife and habitats on a global scale.

[ 2 ] Signed in 1979 in Bonn , West Germany , the convention entered into force in 1983. As of September 2020, there are 131 Member States to the convention. The depositary is the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany.

The CMS is the only global, and United Nations-based, intergovernmental organization established exclusively for the conservation and management of terrestrial, aquatic and avian migratory species. The CMS, and its daughter agreements, determine policy and provide further guidance on specific issues through their strategic plans, action plans, resolutions, decisions and guidelines.

Fundamental principles [ edit ] Fundamental Principles of the convention are set out in Article 2. The parties acknowledge the importance of migratory species being conserved and of range states agreeing to take action to this end "whenever possible and appropriate", "paying special attention to migratory species the conservation status of which is unfavourable and taking individually or in Mbappe se va a los rojos void any migratory species becoming endangered".

[ 2 ] Article 2(3) of the convention states that the parties: (a) Should promote, cooperate in and support research relating to migratory species; (b) Shall endeavour to provide immediate protection for migratory species included in Appendix I; and (c) Shall endeavour to conclude AGREEMENTS covering the conservation and management of migratory species included in Appendix II.

Parties to the convention [ edit ] Map showing the states parties of the CMS: States Parties Signed, but not ratified Participating non-parties States parties [ edit ] The following are all parties to the convention, as of 1 January 2021: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sovereign states Afghanistan Albania Algeria Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Chile Congo Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic DR Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia (Republic of The) Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guinea Guinea-Bissau Honduras Hungary India Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lebanon Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Maldives Mali Malta Mauritania Mauritius Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Netherlands New Zealand Niger Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palau Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Republic of Moldova Romania Rwanda Samoa São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Tajikistan Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland United Republic of Tanzania Uruguay Uzbekistan Yemen Zimbabwe Other states/entities Cook Islands European Union Signed, but not ratified Jamaica Participating non-parties [ edit ] The following, while not parties to the convention, are party to one or more of the agreements and/or have signed one or more of the MOUs: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sovereign states Azerbaijan Bahrain Botswana China Colombia Comoros Iceland Indonesia Malaysia Micronesia (Federated States of) Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Oman Papua New Guinea Russian Federation San Marino Sierra Leone Solomon Islands Sudan Thailand Tonga Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu United States of America Vanuatu Viet Nam Other states/entities Niue Species coverage [ edit ] The CMS Family covers a great diversity of migratory species. The appendices of CMS include many mammals, including land mammals, marine mammals and bats; birds; fish; reptiles and one insect. Among the instruments, AEWA covers 254 species of birds that are ecologically dependent on wetlands for at least part of their annual cycle.

EUROBATS covers 52 species of bat, the Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks seven species of shark, the IOSEA Marine Turtle MOU six species of marine turtle and the Raptors MoU 76 species of birds of prey.

Appendix I – Threatened migratory species [ edit ] Migratory species threatened with extinction are listed on Appendix I of the convention, with relevant provisions outlined in Article III, paragraphs 4 and 5. Parties that are range states to Appendix I species are obliged to afford them strict protection. CMS parties strive towards strictly protecting these animals, conserving or restoring the places where they live, mitigating obstacles to migration and controlling other factors that might endanger them. Besides establishing obligations for each state joining the convention, CMS promotes concerted action among the range states of many of these species.

Appendix II – Migratory species requiring international cooperation [ edit ] Migratory species that need or would significantly benefit from international co-operation are listed in Appendix II of the convention.  These species, either individually or by taxonomic group, are the basis for establishing instruments – regional or global – under CMS. For this reason, the convention encourages the range states to conclude global or regional agreements.

CMS instruments [ edit ] Agreements [ edit ] The CMS acts as a framework convention and encourages its states parties to conclude global or regional agreements. Article V of the convention lays out what agreements agreed to under its auspices should include. These agreements are usually legally binding treaties that aim to "restore the migratory species concerned to a favorable conservation status or to maintain it in such a status." To date seven agreements have been signed, they are as follow: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels (ACAP) Agreement on the Conservation of Cetaceans of the Black Sea, Mediterranean Sea and Contiguous Atlantic Area (ACCOBAMS) Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA) Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic, North East Atlantic, Irish and North Seas (ASCOBANS) Agreement on the Conservation of Populations of European Bats (EUROBATS) Agreement on the Conservation of Gorillas and their Habitats (Gorilla Agreement) Agreement on the Conservation of Seals in the Wadden Sea (Wadden Sea Seals) Memoranda of understanding (MOU) [ edit ] In addition, several memoranda of understanding (MOU) have also been concluded under the auspices of CMS. While not full agreements, these MOU still aim to conserve various migratory species. To date, 19 MOU have been signed. They are as follows: [ 7 ] Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Aquatic Warbler Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for Marine Turtles of the Atlantic Coast of Africa Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Birds of Prey in Africa and Eurasia Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation and Restoration of the Bukhara Deer Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Dugongs and their Habitats throughout their Range Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of High Andean Flamingos and their Habitats Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South-East Asia Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of the Middle-European Population of the Great Bustard Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Eastern Atlantic Populations of the Mediterranean Monk Seal Memorandum of Understanding for the Conservation of Cetaceans and their Habitats in the Pacific Islands Region Memorandum of Understanding between the Republic of Argentine and the Republic of Chile on the Conservation of the Ruddy-headed Goose Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation, Restoration and Sustainable Use of the Saiga Antelope Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Siberian Crane Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Slender-billed Curlew Memorandum of Understanding between the Argentine Republic and the Republic of Chile on the Conservation of the Southern Huemul Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Southern South American Migratory Grassland Bird Species and their Habitats Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the West African Populations of the African Elephant Memorandum of Understanding concerning the Conservation of the Manatee and Small Cetaceans of Western Africa and Macaronesia Organizational structure [ edit ] Conference of the Parties (COP) [ edit ] The Conference of the Parties of the CMS acts as its principal decision-making body. It is composed of all states parties to the convention, as well as any observers that wish to participate in the proceedings of the conference. COPs are held at least every three years.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] The functions of the COP are enumerated in Article VII of the convention. At conferences, the states parties review the implementation of this convention, as well as approve all financial regulations of the convention.

[ 6 ] List of Conference of Parties of the CMS [ 9 ] Conference Year Dates Location COP 1 1985 21–26 October Bonn , West Germany COP 2 1988 13–14 October Geneva , Switzerland COP 3 1991 9–13 September Geneva , Switzerland COP 4 1994 7–11 June Nairobi , Kenya COP 5 1997 10–16 April Geneva , Switzerland COP 6 1999 10–16 November Cape Town , South Africa COP 7 2002 18–24 September Bonn , Germany COP 8 2005 20–25 November Nairobi , Kenya COP 9 2008 1–5 December Rome , Italy COP 10 2011 20–25 November Bergen , Norway COP 11 2014 4–9 November Quito , Ecuador COP 12 2017 23–28 October Manila , Philippines COP 13 2020 15–22 February Gandhinagar , India COP 14 2024 12–27 February Samarkand , Uzbekistan Standing committee (StC) [ edit ] The Standing Committee is responsible for carrying out interim activities on behalf of the Conference of the Parties in between its meetings. The Committee meets at least once a year. It also usually meets immediately before and after any COPs.

[ 10 ] The functions of the Standing Committee were established by Resolution 1.1 of COP 1 in 1985. However, in 2008 at COP 9, the makeup of the Standing Committee was overhauled. Under Resolution 9.15 the composition of the committee, as well as its functions we updated. Its updated functions include: [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] To ensure that decisions of the COP are implemented To monitor the budget To make recommendations for consideration by the next COP To provide advice and guidance to the secretariat To represent the COP in negotiations with the Host Government and UNEP with regard to the secretariat To act as a bureau at the COP To undertake any other ad hoc task assigned to it by the COP.

The committee is composed of 15 members who are elected to serve three-year terms, or from the end of one COP until the end of the next. Alternate members are also selected. Under Resolution 9.15, the composition is as follows: [ 12 ] Three members from each of the geographic regions of Africa and Europe, Two members from each of the geographic regions of Asia and South and Central America and the Caribbean, One member from each of the geographic regions of North America and Oceania; The Depositary, and Host Government of the secretariat The Host Government of the next and previous meetings of the COP List of Members of the Standing Committee [ 10 ] Region / Member Members Alternate Members Africa Algeria Seychelles Kenya Uganda Mali Zimbabwe Asia Saudi Arabia Bangladesh Uzbekistan Pakistan South and Central America and the Caribbean Panama Costa Rica Uruguay Peru Europe Italy France Croatia Switzerland Georgia Monaco North America Vacant Oceania New Zealand Palau Depositary Germany Host of COP 13 India Host of COP 14 Vacant [ a ] Scientific Council (ScC) [ edit ] The main objective of the Scientific Council is to provide advice on scientific matters to CMS bodies, as well as CMS states parties. The council makes recommendations to the COP issues such as research on migratory species, specific conservation and management measures, the inclusion of migratory species in the Appendices and designation of species for Concerted or Cooperative Actions under the convention.

[ 6 ] [ 13 ] The functions of the Scientific Council are enumerated in Article VIII of the convention. However, it was not established until 1985 under Resolution 1.4 of COP 1. Each state party is entitled to appoint one qualified expert as a member of the Scientific Council, as well as one alternate scientific councillor. Additionally, the COP may also appoint to the council other experts to cover fields of particular interest to the convention.

[ 6 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Sessional Committee [ edit ] In 2014, at COP 11, a new sub-body of the Scientific Council was created via Resolution 11.4. This representative selection of the membership of the Scientific Council is called the Sessional Committee. It is composed of nine COP-appointed councillors, as well as fifteen party-appointed councillors (three from Africa; three from Asia; three from Europe; three from Oceania; three from South and Central America and the Caribbean).

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] The Sessional Committee works during the intersessional period between two consecutive meetings of the COP, and is responsible for the implementation of the mandate assigned to the Scientific Council by the COP. All work done by the Sessional Committee is considered work of the Scientific Council.

[ 13 ] Secretariat [ edit ] THE CMS secretariat acts as the convention's coordinating body. The CMS Secretariat is provided and administered by the United Nations Environment Programme.

[ 16 ] The functions of the secretariat are laid out in Article IX of the convention. They include: arranging for and servicing meetings of the COP, Scientific Council and Standing Committee, maintaining liaison between the states parties, disseminating information that furthers the objectives and implementation CMS, preparing COP reports, promote the conclusion of CMS Agreements, among other functions.

[ 6 ] [ 16 ] The secretariat has been based in Bonn, Germany, since its creation, but was relocated to the United Nations Campus in Bonn in 1998. Additionally, since 2009, the secretariat also maintains an out-post office in Abu Dhabi , United Arab Emirates . The Abu Dhabi office oversees implementation of the MOU on the Conservation of Migratory Birds of Prey in Africa and Eurasia, and the MOU on the Conservation and Management of Dugongs and their Habitats throughout their range. The office is hosted by the Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The current executive secretary of the convention is Amy Fraenkel.

[ 18 ] Implementation [ edit ] Reporting [ edit ] Article 6(3) requires parties which are range states for migratory species listed in Appendix I or II to inform the CoP through the secretariat, at least six months prior to each ordinary meeting of the conference, on measures that they are taking to implement the convention for these species.

Domestic legislation [ edit ] To varying degrees the Bonn Convention has been incorporated into domestic law by the parties.

See also [ edit ] Animal migration Highly migratory species Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Birds of Prey in Africa and Eurasia ( Raptors MoU ) Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the West African Populations of the African Elephant Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Aquatic Warbler Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation and Restoration of the Bukhara Deer Memorandum of Understanding for the Conservation of Cetaceans and Their Habitats in the Pacific Island Region Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Middle-European Populations of the Great Bustard Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of High Andean Flamingos and their Habitats Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for Marine Turtles of the Atlantic Coast of Africa Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Eastern Atlantic Populations of the Mediterranean Monk Seal Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for the Ruddy-headed Goose Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Conservation, Restoration and Sustainable Use of the Saiga Antelope Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Southern South American Migratory Grassland Bird Species and Their Habitats Memorandum of Understanding Concerning Conservation Measures for the Siberian Crane Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of the South Andean Huemul Memorandum of Understanding Concerning the Conservation of the Manatee and mall Cetaceans of Western Africa and Macaronesia Convention on Biological Diversity Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) List of international environmental agreements Ramsar Convention Japan–Australia Migratory Bird Agreement Notes [ edit ] ^ The host of COP 14 was Uzbekistan , which is already a member of the Standing Committee.

References [ edit ] ^ "Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 August 2023 .

^ a b "Amendments, done at Bergen on 25 November 2011,to Appendices I and II to the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals (Bonn, 23 June 1979) – ATS 10 of 2012" . Australasian Legal Information Institute, Australian Treaties Library. Retrieved on 18 April 2017.

^ a b "Parties and Range States" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. 1 June 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ a b "Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. 1 December 2018 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ "Agreements" .

Convention on Migratory Species . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . Bonn: UNEP/CMS Secretariat. 23 June 1979 – via Wikisource .

^ "Memoranda of Understanding" .

Convention on Migratory Species . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ "Organizational Structure of CMS" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "Conference of the Parties" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ a b c "Standing Committee" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "Resolution 1.1: The Standing Committee of the Conference of the Parties" (PDF) .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ a b "Resolution 9.15: Composition and Organisation of the Standing Committee" (PDF) .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ a b c d "Scientific Council" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "Resolution 1.4: Composition and Functions of the Scientific Council" (PDF) .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "Resolution 11.4: Restructuring of the Scientific Council" (PDF) .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ a b c "About the CMS Secretariat" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. n.d . Retrieved 1 September 2019 .

^ "Our Supported Entities" .

Environment Agency – Abu Dhabi . 25 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 September 2019 .

^ "Acting CMS Executive Secretary Enters on Duty" .

Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals . UNEP/CMS Secretariat. 20 May 2019 . Retrieved 1 September 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: CMS ID (P6033) (see uses ) Convention on Migratory Species Bonn Convention – Appendices I and II Ratifications NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2h6m4
Cached time: 20250818020748
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.416 seconds
Real time usage: 1.760 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 39578/1000000
Revision size: 42714/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 481247/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 113603/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76624/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.436/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7476397/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1304.180      1 -total
 58.22%  759.320    317 Template:Flagcountry
 40.08%  522.771      1 Template:Infobox_treaty
 39.80%  519.053      1 Template:Infobox
 33.20%  432.976      1 Template:Collapsible_list
 14.67%  191.358      3 Template:Reflist
 10.88%  141.841    317 Template:Flag_country/core
 10.61%  138.421     16 Template:Cite_web
  5.99%   78.068    329 Template:Main_other
  5.05%   65.867      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6668772:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818020748 and revision id 1297022173. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Convention_on_the_Conservation_of_Migratory_Species_of_Wild_Animals&oldid=1297022173 " Categories : Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals Environmental treaties Wildlife conservation Wildlife law Treaties concluded in 1979 Treaties entered into force in 1983 1983 in the environment 1979 in West Germany Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Armenia Treaties of Australia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Belarus Treaties of Belgium Treaties of the People's Republic of Benin Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Burundi Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of Chad Treaties of Chile Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of the Cook Islands Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of Zaire Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of Equatorial Guinea Treaties of Eritrea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of Ethiopia Treaties entered into by the European Union Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of the Gambia Treaties of Georgia (country) Treaties of West Germany Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Honduras Treaties of the Hungarian People's Republic Treaties of India Treaties of Iran Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Israel Treaties of Italy Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kazakhstan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Liberia Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of Liechtenstein Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Mali Treaties of Malta Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Monaco Treaties of Mongolia Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Mozambique Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Niger Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Norway Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Panama Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of Poland Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Romania Treaties of Rwanda Treaties of Samoa Treaties of São Tomé and Príncipe Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of the Somali Democratic Republic Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Eswatini Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tajikistan Treaties of North Macedonia Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Uganda Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Uzbekistan Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of Yemen Treaties of Zimbabwe Treaties extended to Aruba Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles Treaties extended to Hong Kong Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands Treaties extended to Akrotiri and Dhekelia Treaties extended to Bermuda Treaties extended to the British Indian Ocean Territory Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands Treaties extended to Gibraltar Treaties extended to Guernsey Treaties extended to Jersey Treaties extended to the Isle of Man Treaties extended to Montserrat Treaties extended to the Pitcairn Islands Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Treaties extended to the Turks and Caicos Islands Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 18:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals 26 languages Add topic

