Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and history 2 Semiprozines 3 APAs 4 Other types of fanzines 5 Conventions 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Science-fiction fanzine 2 languages Español کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fanzine on science fiction Speculative fiction Alternate history List of alternate history fiction Retrofuturism Sidewise Award Writers Fantasy fiction Anime Fandom Fantasy art Fiction magazines Films Genres History Early history Legendary creatures Literature Podcasts Quests Magic Superheroes Television Worlds Writers Science fiction Anime Artists Awards Climate fiction Editors Fandom Conventions Fanzine Fiction magazines Genres History Timeline Organizations Podcasts Film Television Themes Writers Horror fiction Anime Awards Conventions Fiction magazines Films History Genres Podcasts Television Writers Miscellaneous Fictional universe Fictional species Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of Japanese SF writers The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Portal v t e Cover of Imagination , a fanzine published by Forrest J. Ackerman, January 1938, drawn by Jim Mooney A science-fiction fanzine is an amateur or semi-professional magazine published by members of science-fiction fandom , from the 1930s to the present day. They were one of the earliest forms of fanzine , within one of which the term " fanzine " was coined, and at one time constituted the primary type of science-fictional fannish activity (" fanac ").

Origins and history [ edit ] The first science-fiction fanzine, The Comet , was published in 1930 by the Science Correspondence Club in Chicago . The term "fanzine" was coined by Russ Chauvenet in the October 1940 issue of his fanzine Detours .

[ 1 ] "Fanzines" were distinguished from "prozines", that is, all professional magazines . Prior to that, the fan publications were known as "fanmags" or "letterzines".

Traditionally, science-fiction fanzines were (and many still are) available for "the usual", meaning that a sample issue will be mailed on request; to receive further issues, a reader sends a "letter of comment" (LoC) about the fanzine to the editor. The LoC might be published in the next issue: some fanzines consisted almost exclusively of letter columns, where discussions were conducted in much the same way as they are in internet newsgroups and mailing lists , though at a relatively slow pace.

Since 1955, the annual Worldcon has awarded Hugo Awards for Best Fanzine ;  awards for Best Fan Writer and Best Fan Artist were added in 1967 and have continued since then.

Semiprozines [ edit ] During the 1970s and 1980s, some fanzines—especially sercon (serious and constructive) zines devoted to science fiction and fantasy criticism, and newszines such as Locus —became more professional journals, produced by desktop publishing programs and offset printing .  These new magazines were labeled "semiprozines", and were eventually sold rather than traded, and paid their contributors. Some semiprozines publish original fiction.  The Hugo Awards recognized semiprozines as a separate category from fanzines in 1984 after Locus won the award for best fanzine several years running (See Hugo Award for Best Semiprozine ). Well-known semiprozines include Locus , Ansible , The New York Review of Science Fiction , and Interzone .

APAs [ edit ] Main article: Amateur press association Amateur press associations (APAs) publish fanzines made up of the contributions of the individual members collected into an assemblage or bundle called an apazine .

The first science-fiction APA was the Fantasy Amateur Press Association (FAPA) formed by a group of science-fiction fans in 1937. Some APAs are still active as hardcopy publications, and some are published as virtual "e-zines", distributed on the internet .

Other types of fanzines [ edit ] Main article: Fanzine The term "fanzine" is also used to refer to fan-created magazines concerning other topics: the earliest rock-and-roll fanzines were edited by science-fiction fans. A significant part of modern computer/Web/Internet slang, abbreviations, etc. is derived from the jargon of the fanzine fans. See fanzine , fanspeak .

The fanzine movement is now well represented on the Web; see webzine .

Conventions [ edit ] Fanzine readers and producers naturally gather at science fiction conventions , but there are also small conventions dedicated to fanzines. The first fanzine-only annual convention was Autoclave, held by a Detroit-based fan group for several years in the 1970s. In 1984, the first Corflu was held in Berkeley, California . A second convention, Ditto , started in Toronto in 1988. Both of these conventions continue to take place each year.

See also [ edit ] See also: Category:Science fiction fanzines Fanspeak References [ edit ] ^ Sheidlower, Jesse, ed. (December 16, 2020).

"fanzine n." .

Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction . Retrieved January 31, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] eFanzines.com: science fiction fanzines on-line Fandom-related Collections at the University of Iowa Library "Collection: Science Fiction Fanzines Collection | Georgia Tech Archives Finding Aids" .

finding-aids.library.gatech.edu .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r2vwr
Cached time: 20250812050100
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.329 seconds
Real time usage: 0.456 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 682/1000000
Revision size: 5071/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 98677/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 368/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26803/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.211/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4452575/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  348.005      1 -total
 28.01%   97.487      1 Template:Speculative_fiction_sidebar
 27.43%   95.464      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 22.88%   79.640      1 Template:Short_description
 21.79%   75.844      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
 19.98%   69.541      6 Template:Navbox
 17.56%   61.102      1 Template:Science_fiction
 13.30%   46.288      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.99%   20.842      2 Template:Main_other
  5.58%   19.421      2 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:65686:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812050100 and revision id 1295561675. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science-fiction_fanzine&oldid=1295561675 " Categories : Science fiction fanzines Science fiction fandom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 14:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science-fiction fanzine 2 languages Add topic

