Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Game species 2 Waterfowl 3 Legislation Toggle Legislation subsection 3.1 Australian Capital Territory 3.2 New South Wales 3.3 Northern Territory 3.4 Queensland 3.5 South Australia 3.6 Tasmania 3.7 Victoria 3.8 Western Australia 4 Aboriginal hunting Toggle Aboriginal hunting subsection 4.1 Hunting techniques 4.2 Legal framework 4.3 Controversy 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hunting in Australia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australia has a population of about 26 million [ 1 ] while the Commonwealth Government estimating there are 640,000 recreational hunters in the country. There are around 6 million legally owned guns in Australia, ranging from airguns to single-shot , bolt-action , pump-action , lever-action or semi-automatic firearms .

[ 2 ] Game species [ edit ] Hunter and kangaroo in Thylungra , 1924.

Many species of game animals in Australia have been introduced by European settlers since the 18th century.

[ 3 ] Among these are traditional game species such as deer , red foxes and upland birds ( quails , pheasants and partridges ), as well as other invasive species including rabbits / hares , cats , dogs , goats , pigs , donkeys , horses , feral cattle (including banteng ), water buffaloes and camels .  Native waterfowls are also targeted, and the commercial harvest of kangaroos by professional hunters was recorded as 1.6 million in 2012.

[ 4 ] The most commonly hunted animals by recreational hunters are rabbits, foxes, ducks, feral pigs , feral cats and feral goats .

[ 5 ] Hunting of rabbits , in particular, is encouraged across all of Australia, as they are considered a highly invasive pest , and the most common form of hunting is ground shooting .

The recreational hunting of foxes is also commonly done by shooting.  However, this usually requires other techniques to lure the animal (e.g. using a fox whistle , which makes a sound mimicking a distressed prey ) and then spotlighting the eyeshine to locate and shoot the animal.

[ 6 ] Six species of deer can be found in Australia.

[ 7 ] The chital deer ( Axis axis ) is also known as the Indian spotted deer; they are light to dark brown with permanent white spots which appear as broken lines running along the body. They typically have three tined antlers.

The hog deer ( Axis porcinus ) is a close relative of the chital; they range from a uniform dark brown during winter to a rich reddish-brown in summer, at which time light-coloured spots along the sides and on either side of the dark dorsal stripe are visible in individuals. Typically, they have three tined antlers, but extra points are not unheard of.

The sambar deer ( Rusa unicolor ) is the largest deer species to be found in Australia. They are normally brown, but individuals of grey to almost black are seen. Typically, they have three tined antlers, but they often sported with a wide variety of styles.

The rusa deer ( Rusa timorensis ) is a close relative of the sambar but smaller in size; they are a uniform grey-brown, variable between individuals and season. It typically has three tined antlers.

The red deer ( Cervus elaphus ) ranges from a dull brown in winter coat to a rich reddish brown in summer; a permanent straw-coloured rump or caudal patch is retained throughout the year The fallow deer ( Dama dama ) is the most common species of deer in the world. In the summer, they are light to reddish brown with white spots. In the winter, this changes to a greyish brown.

Waterfowl [ edit ] Duck hunting at Lake Burrumbeet using duck decoys .

Only three states and one territory permits the hunting of waterfowl using firearms. Hunting with a permit is allowed in the Northern Territory , South Australia , Tasmania and Victoria .

[ 8 ] In addition to the native species, the Mallard is a feral species in Australia and is permitted to be hunted.

[ 9 ] Penalties apply for hunters who kill or injure non-listed species. Waterfowl that are fully protected in all states and territories and therefore must not be shot include: the Cape Barren goose , Black swan , Freckled duck , Blue-billed duck and Burdekin duck .

[ 10 ] When hunting with shotguns , there is a risk of accidentally injuring ducks . As ducks often fly in flocks, there is a potential for multiple ducks to be hit when hunters shoot into the flock to target an individual . The duck struck by the central cluster of the shot typically dies and falls to the ground. However, ducks on the periphery of the shot may still be hit by some pellets , which they survive but result in lifelong suffering.

[ 11 ] A survey conducted in Victoria on hunting four species of native ducks revealed a significant number of injured birds. Some of these birds survive, while others suffer before eventually dying. Approximately 26% of the shot ducks are either wounded or mutilated . Of these, 12% will be wounded and survive, whereas between 14% and 33% will be mutilated. The likely outcome for mutilated birds is a slow, painful death.

[ 12 ] An X-ray study of ducks caught using nets in Victoria found that between 6% and 19% of the ducks live with embedded shot pellets in their bodies .

[ 13 ] This animal cruelty has been mostly neglected by government officials.

[ 14 ] Waterfowl species permitted to be hunted in Australia (by region) Common Name Species Northern Territory [ 15 ] South Australia [ 16 ] Victoria [ 17 ] Tasmania [ 18 ] Chestnut teal Anas castanea No Yes Yes Yes Grey teal Anas gracilis Yes Yes Yes Yes Mallard (introduced species) Anas platyrhynchos Yes Yes Yes Yes Australasian shoveller Anas rhynchotis No No Yes No Pacific black duck Anas superciliosa Yes Yes Yes Yes Magpie goose Anseranas semipalmata Yes No No No Hardhead Aythya australis Yes No Yes No Australian wood duck Chenonetta jubata Yes Yes Yes Yes Wandering whistling duck Dendrocygna arcuata Yes No No No Plumed whistling duck Dendrocygna eytoni Yes No No No Pink-eared duck Malacorhynchus membranaceus Yes Yes Yes No Mountain duck / Australian shelduck Tadorna tadornoides No Yes Yes Yes Legislation [ edit ] Laws related to hunting vary between each state or territory .

[ 19 ] Except where otherwise stated, most states and territories allow the hunting of pest species – feral dogs, feral goats, feral pigs, foxes, hares, and rabbits – at any time of year with the landowner's permission. Every state and territory requires those carrying firearms to be licensed to do so. A survey of recreational hunters identified the following usage rates of particular hunting methods: 92% rifles , 16% bow and arrows ,
3% black powder muzzleloaders , 56% shotguns , 9% dogs only and 3% others.

[ 5 ] Australian Capital Territory [ edit ] All that is required to hunt in Australian Capital Territory is a valid firearms licence. Individuals between the ages of 12 – 17 can hold a minor's firearms licence, allowing them to hunt under adult supervision. However, hunting is restricted to pest animals on private property and may only be carried out with the landowner's permission.

New South Wales [ edit ] New South Wales allows the hunting of deer. In NSW game species include ducks, which may be hunted under the New South Wales Game Bird Management Program , as well as wild deer, California quails , partridges, pheasants, peafowl and turkeys. Dogs, cats and hares are classified as both feral and game.

[ 20 ] Northern Territory [ edit ] The Northern Territory freely allows the hunting of feral animals on private land with the landowner's permission as long as the hunter holds a valid firearms licence. This excepts feral pigs and waterfowl , for which a permit is required to hunt on certain reserves. The Northern Territory considers many animals to be feral: Arabian camels , buffaloes , banteng , cane toads , donkeys, feral cats, horses, wild dogs, feral cattle, house sparrows , pigeons, sambar deer , rusa deer, chital and turtle doves . All waterfowl hunters require a permit to hunt and may only do so during the declared open season. Waterfowl includes the following species: magpie geese, Pacific black duck, wandering whistling duck , plumed whistling duck , grey teal, pink-eared duck, hardhead duck, maned duck.

Queensland [ edit ] In Queensland , some native species (with a permit [ 21 ] ) and all pest species may be hunted at any time of the year with the landowner's permission. A weapons licence is required to carry firearms. No species are declared as game animals, but many animals are declared pests in Queensland instead. Species commonly hunted include red deer , chital , fallow deer , rusa , dingo , feral dog, rabbits , hares , cats, foxes, goats, pigs, dogs, donkeys, horses and feral cattle.

South Australia [ edit ] See also: Duck hunting in South Australia South Australia allows the hunting of game species during open season. Species listed as game are the stubble quail , Pacific black duck , grey teal , chestnut teal , Australian shelduck , pink-eared duck and maned duck . Some native species and all introduced species may be hunted at any time of the year. Namely camels, deer, starling , domestic pigeon, European blackbird and the spotted turtle-dove.

Tasmania [ edit ] A game licence is required to hunt in Tasmania , pests and feral creatures are eligible to be hunted on private, state and crown land. Tasmania classifies as game species: deer, wild duck, brown quail and pheasant. For non-commercial purposes, muttonbirds and wallabies may also be hunted. Pests can be hunted on crown land at any time, however on private and state land hunts are only carried out with explicit permission from the owner of the private land. Minor permits in both firearms and hunting can be applied for if under the age of 18 years. There are two different grades of minor permits available from 12 years.

Victoria [ edit ] Hunting of game species is allowed during open seasons under a state licence scheme. In Victoria , state licenses are issued to: 26,200 duck hunters, 29,000 quail hunters, and 32,000 deer hunters.

Victoria allows the hunting of many native and introduced species , including stubble quail , pheasants , partridges , European quail , California quail , Pacific black duck , grey teal , hardhead , Australian shelduck , pink-eared duck , Australian wood duck , chestnut teal , Australasian shoveller , hog deer , red deer , sambar deer and fallow deer .

Victoria makes no restrictions on the hunting of pest or feral animals in state forests , or on private lands as long as the hunter has permission from the landowner. Both hares and feral dogs are classified as pests, and can be hunted at any time throughout the year.

Western Australia [ edit ] In Western Australia , only feral species may be hunted on private land with the landowner's permission, subject to holding a valid firearms licence. These species include camels, donkeys, feral cattle, wood ducks, feral dogs, feral horse, hares and starling.

Aboriginal hunting [ edit ] An Aboriginal and a wallaby , 1901.

Aboriginal Australians lived on the Australian continent for thousands of years before Europeans settlement in the late 1700s. They had a wealth of animals to hunt and had very refined and sometimes ingenious ways of hunting them.

[ 22 ] Hunting techniques [ edit ] Boomerangs have been used as a hunting tool by Aboriginal Peoples for tens of thousands of years.

[ citation needed ] The way a hunter tends to use a boomerang is to rustle tree branches, causing the birds inside to be startled and fly into nets that the hunter had already set up between trees. Contrary to popular belief, Aboriginal hunting boomerangs are not designed to return to the thrower. Related to the boomerang, a throwing stick is bigger and heavier. These heftier weapons are used to hunt bigger animals such as kangaroos. They were thrown straight at their target and could even break bones on impact. This made it a lethal tool in the hands of an experienced hunter. Aboriginals use fire to clear vegetation from patches of land to make it easier to hunt game.

[ 23 ] Among the animals hunted are monitor lizards .

Legal framework [ edit ] The National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975 (Cth) mandates Aboriginal people are not subject to general conservation restrictions so long as they engage in hunting only for food, ceremonial or religious purposes (in all cases must be non-commercial).

[ 24 ] However, restrictions may be put in place to protect wildlife and must specifically state that such restrictions apply to Aboriginal people.

[ 25 ] This section does not give an Aboriginal person right of entry onto land.  Entry onto private land, state forests, national parks or other kinds of crown land is regulated under State or Territory Legislation and is variable.

[ 26 ] Controversy [ edit ] There has been a number of controversies surrounding indigenous Australians and the Australian government regarding their hunting rights.
In 1993, the Australian Government brought in legislation called the Native Title Act. This act meant that the Australian Government recognised that the Aboriginal Australians have rights to and interests to their land that come from their traditional laws and customs. One of the activities that are covered by the Native Title is the right for Aboriginal peoples to hunt otherwise endangered species for food or ceremonial purposes.

[ citation needed ] The killing of endangered is a wide source of outrage with many [ who?

] calling for a rewrite of the legislation to protect the endangered species.

References [ edit ] ^ "Australian Bureau of Statistics – Population Clock" . Retrieved 23 May 2014 .

^ "Economic and social impacts of recreational hunting and shooting" (PDF) .

health.gov.au . September 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2024 .

^ "Feral Feast" . Archived from the original on 25 October 2012 . Retrieved 26 November 2013 .

^ "Kangaroo Quotas and Harvest" (PDF) . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ a b "Baxter Finch Murray and Hoy. ATTITUDES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF AUSTRALIAN RECREATIONAL HUNTERS" (PDF) . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ "Fox hunting and shooting" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 November 2013 . Retrieved 12 November 2013 .

^ "Australia's Wild Deer" . Retrieved 12 November 2013 .

^ Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (9 December 2019).

"Duck - Game Management Authority" .

www.gma.vic.gov.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Byrne, Jack (1974).

Duck hunting in Australia and New Zealand . Wellington [N.Z.]: Reed.

ISBN 978-0-589-00757-7 .

^ "Know your birds - SSAA" .

ssaa.org.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Russell, Geoff (1994).

"Shotgun Wounding Characteristics" .

Maple Tech: Maple in Mathematics and the Sciences . December: 17– 23.

^ Norman, Fi; Powell, Dgm (1981).

"Rates of Recovery of Bands, Harvest Patterns and Estimates for Black Duck, Chestnut Teal, Grey Teal and Mountain Duck Shot during Victorian Open Seasons, 1953-1977" .

Wildlife Research .

8 (3): 659.

doi : 10.1071/WR9810659 .

ISSN 1035-3712 .

^ Norman, Fi (1976).

"The Incidence of Lead Shotgun Pellets in Waterfowl (Anatidae and Rallidae) Examined in South-Eastern Australia Between 1957 and 1973" .

Wildlife Research .

3 (1): 61.

doi : 10.1071/WR9760061 .

ISSN 1035-3712 .

^ Hampton, Jordan O.; Hyndman, Timothy H. (2019).

"Underaddressed animal-welfare issues in conservation" .

Conservation Biology .

33 (4): 803– 811.

Bibcode : 2019ConBi..33..803H .

doi : 10.1111/cobi.13267 .

hdl : 11343/285334 .

ISSN 0888-8892 .

^ Government, Northern Territory (22 August 2019).

"Magpie geese and waterfowl season dates" .

nt.gov.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ "Duck Hunting" .

www.environment.sa.gov.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ Department of Jobs, Precincts and Regions (9 December 2019).

"Game duck species - Game Management Authority" .

www.gma.vic.gov.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ "Species of Game | Department of Primary Industries, Parks, Water and Environment, Tasmania" .

dpipwe.tas.gov.au . Retrieved 17 June 2020 .

^ "State and territory hunting regulations – SSAA" . Sporting Shooters' Association of Australia . Retrieved 7 November 2013 .

^ "Managing feral deer in NSW" . 15 August 2023.

^ "Recreational wildlife harvesting licence for macropods under the Nature Conservation Act" . Retrieved 29 October 2015 .

^ Ross, Anne (19 March 2010).

"Traditional Aboriginal Hunting in Australia: A cultural heritage issue" .

Cultural Survival .

^ Jordan, Rob (29 October 2013).

"Stanford research: Aboriginal hunting increases animal populations" . Retrieved 26 November 2013 .

^ National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975 (Cth) S70(1) ^ National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975 (Cth) S70(2) ^ "Australian Legislation on Hunting, Fishing and Gathering: An Overview" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hunting in Australia .

NSW DPI Hunting Victoria Department of Sustainability and Environment Game Management Authority of Victoria v t e Hunting in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_in_Australia&oldid=1296400390 " Categories : Hunting in Australia Animal culling Animal rights Cruelty to animals Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 19:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting in Australia Add languages Add topic

