Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Guerrilla artists Toggle Guerrilla artists subsection 1.1 Artists 2 Use in advertising campaigns 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Guerrilla art 3 languages Italiano 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Street art movement This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Guerrilla art" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of Guerrilla art by Banksy found on Brick Lane , East End of London (2004) Guerrilla art is a street art movement that first emerged in the UK , but has since spread around the world and is now established in most countries that already had developed graffiti scenes. In fact, it owes so much to the early graffiti movement, in the United States guerrilla art is still referred to as 'post-graffiti art'.

Guerrilla art differs from other art forms in it has no external boundary between the image and the environment. While a traditional painting can be moved from one gallery to another without the meaning or the artistic credibility of the piece being affected, street art is environmental, the surface to which it is applied to being as fundamental to the piece's meaning as that which is applied. Without the dynamics of modern life, guerrilla art is reduced to 'art for arts sake' and would be defined by what it is as opposed to what it does .

The production of guerrilla art is focused on cause and effect, not the material piece itself. It aims to produce an effect within the minds of those people who live within the environment being altered. It does not necessarily aim to produce meaningful art in itself.

Guerrilla artists [ edit ] Guerrilla artists increasingly seem to be moving towards a philosophy of painting a continuous work of art, adding to it over time as less developed elements of the piece are erased by graffiti cleaning efforts or in the battle for space. Art on canvas is not guerrilla art. Although many guerrilla artists regularly produce 'trapped art', they do not generally consider it to be the same thing. This has manifested itself in a wave of new canvas styles that have a guerrilla art style, but are more comprehensive and finished. Few traditional artists would create artwork intentionally meaning for it to be mass produced with little fidelity and put up with wheatpaste . Many guerrilla artists hijack major branding for their own publicity and identity, often at odds with the brand itself. This can be seen with D*Face 's hijacking of the Walt Disney signature.

It's not a movement that attempts to support or to oppose brand conditioning. It is the general public's artistic response to it.

Artists [ edit ] See also: List of street artists Banksy is an English-based graffiti artist, political activist and film director whose real identity is unknown. Their satirical street art and subversive epigrams combine dark humour with graffiti executed in a distinctive stenciling technique. Their works of political and social commentary have been featured on streets, walls, and bridges of cities throughout the world.

[ 1 ] In 1978 in downtown Wellington , New Zealand, Barry Thomas planted 180 cabbages forming the word 'CABBAGE' on the corner of Willis and Manners Streets where a hotel and theatre had been demolished.

[ 2 ] This 'public art project' was called The vacant lot of cabbages aka The cabbage patch.

[ 3 ] Thomas's intention was to promote inner city parks rather than commercial development. The cabbages lasted six months during which time city residents added to the site and took part in poetry readings and performances.

[ 2 ] Use in advertising campaigns [ edit ] The principles of guerrilla art have occasionally been adopted by corporations in various forms of guerrilla marketing , particularly viral marketing and street marketing . Such activity may be conducted either directly or through the use of front groups , and is used to promote a product or service.

Controversies have arisen over corporate guerrilla campaigns. In 2006, the Australian launch campaign for Coca-Cola Zero Sugar , which included fake blogs and public graffiti, attracted significant criticism for violating ethical standards.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Similarly, in 2007, a Boston -based campaign for Aqua Teen Hunger Force caused a citywide bomb scare .

See also [ edit ] Culture jamming Street installation Subvertising Bust of Edward Snowden Yarn bombing Brandalism References [ edit ] ^ "The Banksy Paradox: 7 Sides to the World's Most Infamous Street Artist [ permanent dead link ] , 19 July 2007 ^ a b Barton, Christina (2007). "Fragments & bits: a brief history of temporary art in Wellington". In Harper, Jenny; Lister, Aaron (eds.).

Wellington: a city for sculpture . Wellington [N.Z.: Victoria University Press in association with Wellington Sculpture Trust. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0-86473-570-6 .

OCLC 174080777 .

^ Farrar, Sarah (2 November 2012).

" 'Vacant lot of cabbages' documentation enters Te Papa's archives" .

Te Papa’s Blog . Retrieved 2022-07-12 .

^ "Coke Gets A Zero For Effort" ^ "The Zero Movement" . Tim Longhurst. Archived from the original on 12 January 2006 . Retrieved July 24, 2006 .

External links [ edit ] POW (Pictures On Walls) Iranian Graffiti movement GUERRILLA - INTERVENTIONIST - POLITICAL Art Links v t e Street art Culture Activism Aerosol paint Culture jamming Direct action Graffiti ( terminology ) Handstyle Hip hop culture Installation art Propaganda Screenprinting Spray paint art Subway Art Types Guerrilla art Moss graffiti Mural Pieces Poster Reverse graffiti Rock balancing Stencil graffiti Sticker art Tagging Throw ups Yarn bombing Wheatpaste Wildstyle Lists of artists Street Graffiti Stencil Photographers Henry Chalfant Martha Cooper Places Adelaide Atlanta Berlin (Berlin Wall) Brazil ( Southeastern Brazil ( pichação ) , São Paulo (Beco do Batman) ) Hong Kong (Free Ai Weiwei campaign) Kyiv Northern Ireland Melbourne New York City ( 5 Pointz ) Philadelphia San Francisco ( Balmy Alley , Clarion Alley ) Sarajevo Sydney (Newtown area) Tehran Toronto Palestine (West Bank Wall) Events Beton Fest The Cans Festival Living Walls See No Evil Pasadena Chalk Festival Sarajevo Street Art Festival Sarasota Chalk Festival Related Built environment Public art Public space Psychogeography Street party Urban planning Visual arts Vandalism Category: Street art Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guerrilla_art&oldid=1300965860 " Categories : Visual arts genres Graffiti and unauthorised signage Culture jamming Guerrilla art and hacking art Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 10:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guerrilla art 3 languages Add topic

