Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Techniques Toggle Techniques subsection 2.1 Time 2.1.1 Direct measurement of solar time 2.1.2 Timekeepers 2.1.3 Time generators 2.2 Length 2.3 Volume 2.4 Mass 2.5 Electric charge 2.6 Temperature 2.7 Photometry 2.8 Amount of substance 3 References Toggle the table of contents Realisation (metrology) 1 language 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conversion of the definition of a unit of measure into reality In metrology , the realisation of a unit of measure is the conversion of its definition into reality.

[ 1 ] An example of the concept of realisation, is the unit of length, the meter . The metre was originally defined in 1791 as one ten-millionth of the distance from the equator to the North Pole along a great circle . To actually measure a length, this definition must be converted into a physical tool, which can be used to complete the measurement. The meter stick is the realisation of the meter.

The International Bureau of Weights and Measures maintains the techniques for realisation of the base units in the International System of Units (SI), all seven of which are defined in terms of natural physical constants, rather than human artefacts such as the standard kilogram .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Following the 2019 revision of the SI all fundamental units of metrology are now defined in terms of natural physical constants, rather than human artefacts. The realization of these units is also defined by a published  "Practice for the Realization of the Unit", for each unit. This is a detailed set of technical instructions for the construction of a device that will produce a practical realization  of each unit. Any competent person, who follows these instructions can realize any unit.

For example, the metre is defined as 1/ 299 792 458 of the distance light travels in one second. The Practice for the Realization of the Metre describes how to build an apparatus to determine this distance. Using this apparatus it is possible to construct a metre stick which is the realization of the metre.

[ 4 ] The International vocabulary of metrology identifies three distinct methods of realisation: Realisation of a measurement unit from its definition.

Reproduction of measurement standards .

Adopting a particular artefact as a standard.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] The Oxford English Dictionary defines the word "realise" (also spelt "realize") as "to convert (something imagined, planned, etc.) into real existence or fact".

[ 1 ] The International vocabulary of metrology identifies three distinct ways in which this is done – the first being the realisation of a measurement unit from its definition, the second the reproduction of measurement standards and the third the process of actually adopting a particular artefact as a standard.

[ 6 ] Techniques [ edit ] Time [ edit ] The realisation of time has gone through three phases. During both the first and second phases, man used solar time – during the first phase, realisation of time was by observing the Earth's rotation using such devices as the sundial or astrolabe .  During the second phase actual timing devices such as hourglasses or clocks were used. If the user needed to know time-of-day rather than elapsed time, clocks were synchronised with astronomical time .  The third phase made use of clocks that were sufficiently accurate that they could measure variations in the Earth's rotation – such clocks taking over from the rotation of the earth as the prime measure of time.

Direct measurement of solar time [ edit ] Sundials and astrolabes Timekeepers [ edit ] Accuracy of clocks Time generators [ edit ] Radiation frequency and SI Length [ edit ] Units of length, along with mass (or weight) and time, are one of the earliest quantities that was measured by man.  Historically two distinct approaches were used – one was to use a naturally occurring phenomenon such as a particular seed or part of the human body, the other was to use a standard length that was held by a community leader.

Natural units – barleycorn , feet Regal units – measures held by ruler Using speed of light An example of a modern realisation is the realisation of the metre in terms of optical frequency standards.

[ 7 ] Volume [ edit ] Jugs etc. in ancient times Not a base unit in SI Mass [ edit ] Grains Artefacts held by governments (e.g. the International Prototype of the Kilogram ) Kibble balance and Avogadro experiment Electric charge [ edit ] Silver nitrate deposits force between conductors charge on the electron Temperature [ edit ] freezing & boiling water Non-linearity etc.

Boltzmann constant Photometry [ edit ] Sensitivity of the eye Amount of substance [ edit ] Development of the mole References [ edit ] ^ a b "Realise" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "BIPM statement: Information for users about the proposed revision of the SI" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 January 2018 . Retrieved 5 May 2018 .

^ "Decision CIPM/105-13 (October 2016)" .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 31 August 2017 .

^ Wilkie, Tom (27 October 1983).

"Time to remeasure the metre" .

New Scientist (27 October 1983): 258– 263.

^ International Bureau of Weights and Measures (2012).

"Practical realization of the definitions of some important units" . p. 46 . Retrieved 23 April 2013 .

^ International vocabulary of metrology—Basic and general concepts and associated terms (VIM) (PDF) (3rd ed.).

International Bureau of Weights and Measures on behalf of the Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology. 2012 . Retrieved 26 April 2013 .

^ Quinn, T. J. (2003).

"Practical realisation of the definition of the metre, including recommended radiations of other optical frequency standards (2001)" (PDF) .

Metrologia .

40 : 103– 133.

Bibcode : 2003Metro..40..103Q .

doi : 10.1088/0026-1394/40/2/316 . Retrieved 6 December 2013 .

v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Realisation_(metrology)&oldid=1294412737 " Category : Systems of units Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from December 2013 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 15:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Realisation (metrology) 1 language Add topic

