Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content and concepts 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Time Reborn 3 languages العربية مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Lee Smolin Time Reborn Hardcover edition Author Lee Smolin Language English Subject Physics Publisher Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publication date April 23, 2013 Publication place United States Media type Print Pages 352 pp ISBN 978-0547511726 Preceded by The Trouble with Physics (2006) Followed by The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time (2014) Time Reborn: From the Crisis in Physics to the Future of the Universe is a 2013 book by the American theoretical physicist Lee Smolin .

Smolin argues for what he calls a revolutionary view that time is real, in contrast to existing scientific orthodoxy which holds that time is merely a "stubbornly persistent illusion" ( Einstein 's words).

[ 1 ] Smolin hypothesizes that the very laws of physics are not fixed, but that they actually evolve over time.

[ 2 ] Content and concepts [ edit ] Time Reborn is divided into two parts: Part I describes established physics and its history from the time of Plato and the main established ideas, Newtonian physics (and Leibniz ' philosophical views that countered Newton's e.g. on background dependent physics [ 3 ] and his religious justification), Albert Einstein 's special and general relativity, and quantum mechanics . Part II describes Smolin's views (his "future" for physics, relying on his and ideas of others) on why these all are slightly wrong, that is, the need to reestablish time as fundamental (and probably space as non-fundamental, rather than vice versa, that was Einstein's view) through e.g. one idea, shape dynamics , a duality of Einstein's general relativity, that does that.

Smolin argues for what he calls a revolutionary view that time is real, in contrast to existing scientific orthodoxy which holds that time is merely a "stubbornly persistent illusion" ( Einstein 's words).

[ 1 ] Smolin reasons that physicists have improperly rejected the reality of time because they confuse their mathematical models—which are timeless but deal in abstractions that do not exist—with reality.

[ 1 ] Smolin hypothesizes instead that the very laws of physics are not fixed, but that they actually evolve over time.

[ 2 ] Smolin asserts that overturning the existing orthodoxy is the best hope for finding solutions to contemporary physics problems, such as bringing gravity into line with the rest of the currently accepted models, [ 1 ] the nature of the quantum world and its unification with spacetime and cosmology.

[ 2 ] Outside science, Smolin asserts his views have important implications for human agency , and on how our social, political, economic and environmental decisions affect our future, [ 2 ] Smolin saying that contrary to deterministic philosophies derived from conventional physics, humans do have the power to exert control over climate change, our economic system and our technology.

[ 4 ] The book's topic was the subject of the author's 2013 presentation at the Royal Society of Arts .

[ 2 ] Reception [ edit ] Through his brilliant writing [in The Trouble with Physics ] and articulate arguments, readers took him seriously. One string theorist told me that he struggled to convince nonphysicists that he wasn’t a charlatan after the publication of Smolin’s book. Now, in Time Reborn , Smolin attempts to chip away at basic theories of modern physics. He makes the case that by doing away with time, existing theories are missing a trick [...] According to Smolin, our picture of a timeless Universe stems from the assumption that all modern physics — quantum as well as classical — is predictive. How a system evolves is entirely encoded in the starting set of ‘ initial conditions ’ and their transformation according to the laws of physics. Evolution in time is secondary, a by-product of the theory. This bothers Smolin. A timeless view of reality is, he says repeatedly, incomplete (where do the initial conditions or laws come from?) and, simply, “wrong”. He believes that a better description of time lies at the heart of some of the big questions, such as the marriage of quantum physics and general relativity .

Smolin sketches an alternative path for modern physics. Inspired by the ideas of Brazilian philosopher and political theorist, Roberto Mangabeira Unger , who argues that social structures emerge without an underlying natural order or guiding principle, Smolin develops some of the ideas behind his first book, The Life of the Cosmos .

— Pedro Ferreira, professor of astrophysics at the University of Oxford, UK, review of the book in Nature journal .

[ 5 ] The New York Times ' James Gleick wrote that Smolin's arguments from science and history were "as provocative, original, and unsettling as any I’ve read in years," contradicting the commonly accepted views of H.G. Wells, Hermann Minkowski, Albert Einstein, Isaac Newton and Plato; Gleick predicted it will ring false to many contemporaries in theoretical physics.

[ 6 ] Gleick further wrote that Smolin has a "fairly puritanical view of what science should and should not do"—disfavoring multiverses or other non-testable concepts or quests for timeless truths, but allowing that science creates “effective theories” even though they are incomplete, of limited domains, and approximate.

[ 6 ] Kirkus Reviews described the book, which omits mathematical explanations, as being as much philosophy as science, and as providing "a flood of ideas from an imaginative thinker." [ 7 ] For the Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies , author Rick Searle wrote that Time Reborn is "just as much a diagnosis of contemporary economic and political ills" as it is a book about physics.

[ 4 ] Possible economic and political similarities/"implication" (to physics and philosophy discussed in the book) are only mentioned in the preface and epilogue of the book.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Monk, Ray (June 6, 2013).

"Time Reborn by Lee Smolin – review" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on August 13, 2013.

^ a b c d e "Time Reborn: a new theory of time - a new view of the world" .

Royal Society of Arts . May 21, 2013. Archived from the original on October 1, 2013.

^ Smolin, Lee.

"Actors on a changing stage: quantum gravity and background independence" .

Einstein Online .

Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics . Archived from the original on June 13, 2018 . Retrieved June 8, 2016 .

Newton's view of the universe is manifestly background dependent [..] But even in Newton's day, there were philosophers like Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz who took a different stance. In modern parlance, theirs is a relationist point of view. For a relationist, there is no background of absolute space and time.

^ a b Searle, Rick (July 15, 2013).

"Time Lost: Scene 1" . Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies. Archived from the original on July 27, 2013.

^ "Clockwork cosmos: Pedro Ferreira ponders a vision of the Universe in which time is paramount" (PDF) .

Nature .

496 (7446). Macmillan Publishers Limited.: 430– 431 April 25, 2013.

Bibcode : 2013Natur.496..430F .

doi : 10.1038/496430a . Retrieved August 19, 2015 – via Time Reborn website.

^ a b Gleick, James (June 6, 2013).

"Time Regained!" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on June 7, 2013.

^ "Time Reborn / Kirkus Reviews" .

Kirkus Reviews . 2013. Archived from the original on June 1, 2013.

External links [ edit ] The author's official website page for the book "Time Reborn: a new theory of time - a new view of the world" on YouTube v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time_Reborn&oldid=1267020794 " Categories : 2013 non-fiction books Books by Lee Smolin Contemporary philosophical literature English-language non-fiction books Philosophy of time Popular physics books Houghton Mifflin books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 07:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Time Reborn 3 languages Add topic

