Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Modern times 3 Incidents 4 Key works 5 Films 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Uffizi 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°46′6″N 11°15′19″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.76833°N 11.25528°E ﻿ / 43.76833; 11.25528 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art museum in Florence, Italy Uffizi Galleria degli Uffizi Narrow courtyard between the two wings of the museum, with view toward the Arno river Interactive fullscreen map Established 1581 ; 444 years ago ( 1581 ) Location Piazzale degli Uffizi, 50122 Florence , Italy Coordinates 43°46′6″N 11°15′19″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.76833°N 11.25528°E ﻿ / 43.76833; 11.25528 Type Art museum , design/textile museum, historic site Visitors 4,957,978 (2023) Director Simone Verde [ 1 ] Website www .uffizi .it /en Art of Italy Periods Nuragic Etruscan Ancient Roman Italo-Byzantine Gothic architecture Renaissance painting and sculpture Mannerism Baroque and Rococo Neoclassical and 19th century Modern and contemporary Centennial divisions Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Important art museums Uffizi Pinacoteca di Brera Vatican Museums Villa Borghese Sabauda Gallery Gallerie dell'Accademia Pitti Palace Accademia di Belle Arti Firenze Bargello Important art festivals Venice Biennale Rome Quadriennale Major works The Tribute Money (Masaccio) The Birth of Venus Primavera Mona Lisa The Last Supper Annunciation (Leonardo) Sistine Chapel ceiling Sistine Madonna Pietà The Last Judgment The Creation of Adam David (Michelangelo) The School of Athens The Battle of San Romano Venus of Urbino David (Donatello) The Calling of St. Matthew Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Italian artists Painters Sculptors Architects Photographers Illustrators Italian art schools Bolognese school Ferrarese school Forlivese school Florentine school Lucchese and Pisan School Sienese school Venetian school Art movements Italo-Byzantine Renaissance Pittura infamante Mannerism Baroque Macchiaioli Futurism Novecento Italiano Metaphysical art Scuola Romana Aeropittura Arte Povera Transavantgarde Other topics Italian architecture Sculpture of Italy Timeline of Italian artists to 1800 Raphael Rooms v t e The Uffizi Gallery ( UK : / juː ˈ f ɪ t s i , ʊ ˈ f iː t s i / yoo- FIT -see, uu- FEET -see ; [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Italian : Galleria degli Uffizi , pronounced [ɡalleˈriːa deʎʎ ufˈfittsi] ) is a prominent art museum adjacent to the Piazza della Signoria in the Historic Centre of Florence in the region of Tuscany, Italy. One of the most important Italian museums and the most visited, it is also one of the largest and best-known in the world and holds a collection of priceless works, particularly from the period of the Italian Renaissance .

After the ruling House of Medici died out, their art collections were given to the city of Florence under the famous Patto di famiglia negotiated by Anna Maria Luisa , the last Medici heiress. The Uffizi is one of the first modern museums. The gallery had been open to visitors by request since the sixteenth century, and in 1769 it was officially opened to the public, formally becoming a museum in 1865.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The building of the Uffizi complex was begun by Giorgio Vasari in 1560 for Cosimo I de' Medici as a means to consolidate his administrative control of the various committees, agencies, and guilds established in Florence's Republican past so as to accommodate them all in one place, hence the name uffizi , "offices". The construction was later continued by Alfonso Parigi and Bernardo Buontalenti ; it was completed in 1581. The top floor was made into a gallery for the family and their guests and included their collection of Roman sculptures.

[ 5 ] The cortile (internal courtyard) is so long, narrow, and open to the Arno at its far end through a Doric screen that articulates the space without blocking it, that architectural historians [ 6 ] treat it as the first regularized streetscape of Europe. Vasari, a painter, and architect as well, emphasized its perspective length by adorning it with the matching facades' continuous roof cornices, and unbroken cornices between storeys, as well as the three continuous steps on which the museum fronts stand. The niches in the piers that alternate with columns of the Loggiato were filled with sculptures of famous artists in the 19th century.

The Uffizi brought together under one roof the administrative offices and the Archivio di Stato, the state archive. The project was intended to display prime artworks of the Medici collections on the piano nobile ; the plan was carried out by his son, Grand Duke Francesco I . He commissioned the architect Buontalenti to design the Tribuna degli Uffizi that would display a series of masterpieces in one room, including jewels; it became a highly influential attraction of a Grand Tour . The octagonal room was completed in 1584.

[ 7 ] Over the years, more sections of the building were recruited to exhibit paintings and sculptures collected or commissioned by the Medici . For many years, 45 to 50 rooms were used to display paintings from the 13th to 18th century.

[ 8 ] Modern times [ edit ] Because of its vast collection, some of the Uffizi's works have in the past been transferred to other museums in Florence—for example, some famous statues to the Bargello . A project was finished in 2006 to expand the museum's exhibition space some 6,000 metres 2 (64,000 ft 2 ) to almost 13,000 metres 2 (139,000 ft 2 ), allowing public viewing of many artworks that had usually been in storage.

The Nuovi Uffizi (New Uffizi) renovation project which started in 1989 was progressing well from 2015 to 2017.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] It was intended to modernize all of the halls and more than double the display space. A new exit was also planned and the lighting, air conditioning and security systems were updated. During construction, the museum remained open, although rooms were closed as necessary with the artwork temporarily moved to another location.

[ 11 ] For example, the Botticelli rooms and two others with early Renaissance paintings were closed for 15 months but reopened in October 2016.

[ 12 ] Over two million people visited the Uffizi in 2016, making it the most visited art gallery in Italy.

[ 13 ] At peak periods (particularly in July), waiting times for entry can be up to five hours. Advance tickets can be bought online, to significantly reduce the waiting time.

[ 8 ] In 2018 a revised ticketing system was introduced to reduce queuing times to just minutes.

[ 14 ] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic , the museum was closed for 150 days in 2020, and attendance plunged by 72 percent to 659,043.  Nonetheless the Uffizi was 27th in the list of most-visited art museums in the world in 2020.

[ 15 ] Works from the Uffizi gallery collection are now available for remote viewing on Google Arts and Culture.

[ 16 ] The museum reopened in May 2021 following a renovation that included an addition of 14 new rooms and a display of additional 129 artworks, with the museum attempting to give more voice to historically under-represented groups including women and people of color.

[ 17 ] Incidents [ edit ] On 27 May 1993, the Sicilian Mafia carried out a car bomb explosion in Via dei Georgofili which damaged parts of the palace and killed five people. The blast destroyed five pieces of art and damaged another 30. Some of the paintings were fully protected by bulletproof glass.

[ 18 ] The most severe damage was to the Niobe room and classical sculptures and neoclassical interior, which have since been restored, although its frescoes were damaged beyond repair.

On 22 July 2022, members of the climate activist group Ultima Generazione (Last Generation) glued themselves to the glass protecting Sandro Botticelli 's Primavera demanding an end to fossil fuel usage. The painting was undamaged.

[ 19 ] On 13 February 2024, members of Ultima Generazione glued images of flooding in Tuscany in 2023 to the glass protecting Sandro Botticelli's Birth of Venus in protest over the Italian government's inaction on climate change. The painting was undamaged and the images were removed.

[ 20 ] Key works [ edit ] Cimabue : Santa Trinita Maestà Duccio : Rucellai Madonna Giotto : Ognissanti Madonna , Badia Polyptych Simone Martini : Annunciation with St. Margaret and St. Ansanus Ambrogio Lorenzetti : Presentation at the Temple Gentile da Fabriano , Adoration of the Magi Paolo Uccello : The Battle of San Romano Rogier van der Weyden : Lamentation of Christ Fra Filippo Lippi : Madonna and Child , Coronation of the Virgin Piero della Francesca : Diptych of Duke Federico da Montefeltro and Duchess Battista Sforza of Urbino Andrea del Verrocchio : The Baptism of Christ Hugo van der Goes : Portinari Triptych Sandro Botticelli : Primavera , The Birth of Venus , Adoration of the Magi of 1475 and others Michelangelo : The Holy Family (Doni Tondo) Leonardo da Vinci : The Annunciation , Adoration of the Magi Piero di Cosimo : Perseus Freeing Andromeda Albrecht Dürer : Adoration of the Magi Raphael : Madonna of the Goldfinch , Portrait of Leo X Titian : Flora , Venus of Urbino Parmigianino : Madonna with the Long Neck Caravaggio : Bacchus , Sacrifice of Isaac , Medusa Artemisia Gentileschi : Judith and Holofernes Rembrandt : Self-portrait as a Young Man (attribution doubtful), Self-portrait as an Old Man , Portrait of an Old Man The collection also contains some ancient sculptures, such as the Arrotino , the Two Wrestlers , Venus de' Medici , and the Bust of Severus Giovanni .

Films [ edit ] Inside the Uffizi . It, De, USA, 2021, 97 min.

[ 21 ] (documentary by Corinna Belz and Enrique Sánchez Lansch) Gallery [ edit ] Canaletto, Veduta del Palazzo Ducale di Venezia Sandro Botticelli , The Birth of Venus Caravaggio, Sacrificio di Isacco Tribuna of the Uffizi Caravaggio, Medusa Artemisia Gentileschi, Judith Beheading Holofernes Giotto, Ognissanti Madonna Michelangelo, Doni Tondo Parmigianino, The Madonna with the Long Neck Albrecht Dürer, Adorazione dei Magi Raphael, Madonna of the Goldfinch Titian, Venus of Urbino Leonardo da Vinci, Annunciation Restored Niobe room represents Roman copies of late Hellenistic art . View of daughter of Niobe bent by terror.

View of hallway, the walls were originally covered with tapestries.

Cosimo de' Medici by Luigi Magi and Andrea Di Cione ( Orcagna ) by Niccolò Bazzanti See also [ edit ] List of most-visited art museums References [ edit ] ^ "The new Director of the Uffizi Galleries, Simone Verde, takes office" .

uffizi.it . 17 January 2024.

^ "Uffizi" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ "Uffizi" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 3 March 2020.

^ "Uffizi Gallery Tickets – Museums Tickets Florence Uffizi Gallery" .

www.florence-museum.com .

^ "History of Uffizi Gallery" .

www.uffizi.com . Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ Sigfried Giedion , Space, Time and Architecture (1941) 1962 fig.17.

^ "Tribuna :: Hall n. 18 ► Virtual Uffizi" .

Virtual Uffizi Gallery .

^ a b "Uffizi Gallery Tickets – Museums Tickets Florence Uffizi Gallery" .

www.florence-museum.com .

^ "Florence tours Uffizi Gallery" .

italy.mytour.eu .

^ "Discover the New Halls at Uffizi" .

Virtual Uffizi Gallery .

^ "History" .

Uffizi Gallery . Archived from the original on 4 July 2015.

^ "New Uffizi: The Botticelli & Early Renaissance Rooms Reopen" . Uffizi Gallery. 19 October 2016.

^ "MUSEI, TOP 30: COLOSSEO, UFFIZI E POMPEI SUPERSTAR NEL 2019 Franceschini: autonomia funziona, andiamo avanti su percorso innovazione" .

www.beniculturali.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 3 July 2020 .

^ Squires, Nick (12 October 2018).

"Uffizi gallery, Florence: Queuing times cut from hours to minutes with new system" .

^ The Art Newspaper , 30 March 2021 ^ Maxim Staff (20 March 2020).

"Google Now Offering Virtual Tours of Over 1,200 Iconic Museums" .

Maxim . Retrieved 27 January 2021 .

^ Julia Buckley.

"One of Italy's most famous sites just reopened with a striking change" .

CNN . Retrieved 17 November 2022 .

^ Cowell, Alan (28 May 1993).

"Bomb Outside Uffizi in Florence Kills 6 and Damages Many Works" .

The New York Times .

^ Gayle, Damien (22 July 2022).

"Climate activists in Italy glue themselves to Botticelli painting" .

The Guardian .

^ "Climate activists target Botticelli's 'Birth of Venus' in Florence's Uffizi Gallery" .

Associated Press . 13 February 2024.

^ "IN DEN UFFIZIEN | EIN FILM VON CORINNA BELZ UND ENRIQUE SÁNCHEZ LANSCH | Offizielle Website | Im Kino ab 25. November 2021" .

uffizien.piffl-medien.de .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Uffizi Gallery .

Official website Virtual tour of the Uffizi provided by Google Arts & Culture v t e Tourism in Florence Museums , galleries and palaces Bargello Casa Buonarroti Casa Guidi Galleria dell'Accademia David Garden of Archimedes Loggia del Bigallo Loggia dei Lanzi Loggia del Mercato Nuovo Loggia del Pesce Loggia Rucellai Museo dell'Opera del Duomo Museo Galileo Museo Nazionale Alinari della Fotografia Museo Nazionale di San Marco Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze La Specola National Archaeological Museum Orsanmichele Ospedale degli Innocenti Palazzo dell'Arte dei Beccai Palazzo Davanzati Palazzo Della Stufa Palazzo Gondi Palazzo Medici Riccardi Magi Chapel Palazzo Pitti Museo delle Porcellane Palazzo Spini Feroni Palazzo Strozzi Palazzo Vecchio Studiolo of Francesco I Stibbert Museum Uffizi Vasari Corridor Religious sites Basilicas Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore S Croce Baroncelli Chapel Pazzi Chapel S Lorenzo Medici Chapels S Maria Novella Tornabuoni Chapel SS Annunziata S Marco S Maria del Carmine Brancacci Chapel S Miniato al Monte S Spirito S Trinita Bartolini Salimbeni Chapel Sassetti Chapel Churches Badia Fiorentina Battistero di San Giovanni Certosa del Galluzzo Ognissanti Oratorio dei Vanchetoni Oratory of Gesù Pellegrino Oratory of S Thomas Aquinas Orsanmichele S Ambrogio Ss Apostoli S Felicita S Frediano in Cestello S Gaetano S Giovannino degli Scolopi S Giovannino dei Cavalieri S Jacopo sopr'Arno S Maria degli Angeli S Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi S Maria Maggiore S Martino del Vescovo S Pancrazio S Salvatore al Vescovo S Salvi Ss Simone e Giuda S Stefano al Ponte Other Great Synagogue Towers (Torri) degli Amidei degli Alberti dei Belfredelli dei Della Bella dei Gianfigliazzi dei Mannelli dei Pulci Giotto's Campanile Library Biblioteca Riccardiana ( Palazzo Medici Riccardi ) British Institute of Florence Gabinetto Vieusseux ( Palazzo Strozzi ) Kunsthistorisches Institut Laurentian Library National Central Library Landmarks Fountain of Neptune Giotto's Campanile Monument to Dante Ponte Vecchio Theatres Teatro Comunale Teatro della Pergola Teatro Verdi Squares Piazza del Duomo Piazza della Repubblica Piazza della Signoria Piazza Santa Croce Piazza San Lorenzo Piazzale Michelangelo Streets Via Cavour Via de' Tornabuoni Forts Belvedere Fortezza da Basso Gardens and parks Bardini Gardens Boboli Gardens Giardino dell'Iris Giardino delle Rose Orto Botanico di Firenze Parco delle Cascine Villas Medici villas di Castello La Petraia di Careggi Medicea L'Ambrogiana del Poggio Imperiale Gamberaia I Tatti Il Gioiello La Pietra Rusciano Events and traditions Buchette del vino Calcio storico fiorentino Maggio Musicale Fiorentino Scoppio del carro Districts of Florence Trams in Florence Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Geographic Structurae Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uffizi&oldid=1301922623 " Categories : Uffizi 1580s establishments in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany 1581 establishments in Italy 1765 establishments in Italy 1765 in art Art museums and galleries established in the 1760s Art museums and galleries in Florence Buildings and structures completed in 1581 Buildings and structures completed in 1765 Collection of the Uffizi Educational organizations established in 1765 National museums of Italy Palaces in Florence Renaissance architecture in Florence Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles containing Italian-language text Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 11:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uffizi 70 languages Add topic

