Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Ascus 24 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Walon 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spore-bearing cell in ascomycete fungi This article is about the spore-bearing cell in fungi. For Atypical Squamous Cells of Undetermined Significance (ASCUS), see Bethesda system . For the Greek mythological giant, see Ascus (mythology) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ascus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Asci of Morchella elata , Phase contrast image There are eight ascospores in each ascus of Sordaria fimicola .

An ascus (from Ancient Greek ἀσκός ( askós ) ' skin bag, wineskin ' ; pl.

: asci ) [ 1 ] is the sexual spore -bearing cell produced in ascomycete fungi . Each ascus usually contains eight ascospores (or octad), produced by meiosis followed, in most species, by a mitotic cell division. However, asci in some genera or species can occur in numbers of one (e.g.

Monosporascus cannonballus ), two, four, or multiples of four. In a few cases, the ascospores can bud off conidia that may fill the asci (e.g.

Tympanis ) with hundreds of conidia, or the ascospores may fragment, e.g. some Cordyceps , also filling the asci with smaller cells. Ascospores are nonmotile, usually single celled, but not infrequently may be coenocytic (lacking a septum ), and in some cases coenocytic in multiple planes. Mitotic divisions within the developing spores populate each resulting cell in septate ascospores with nuclei. The term ocular chamber , or oculus ,  refers to the epiplasm (the portion of cytoplasm not used in ascospore formation) that is surrounded by the "bourrelet" (the thickened tissue near the top of the ascus).

[ 2 ] Typically, a single ascus will contain eight ascospores (or octad). The eight spores are produced by meiosis followed by a mitotic division. Two meiotic divisions turn the original diploid zygote nucleus into four haploid ones.  That is, the single original diploid cell from which the whole process begins contains two complete sets of chromosomes . In preparation for meiosis, all the DNA of both sets is duplicated, to make a total of four sets. The nucleus that contains the four sets divides twice, separating into four new nuclei – each of which has one complete set of chromosomes. Following this process, each of the four new nuclei duplicates its DNA and undergoes a division by mitosis. As a result, the ascus will contain four pairs of spores. Then the ascospores are released from the ascus.

In many cases the asci are formed in a regular layer, the hymenium , in a fruiting body which is visible to the naked eye, here called an ascocarp or ascoma .  In other cases, such as single-celled yeasts , no such structures are found. In rare cases asci of some genera can regularly develop inside older discharged asci one after another, e.g.

Dipodascus .

Asci normally release their spores by bursting at the tip, but they may also digest themselves, passively releasing the ascospores either in a liquid or as a dry powder.  Discharging asci usually have a specially differentiated tip, either a pore or an operculum. In some hymenium forming genera, when one ascus bursts, it can trigger the bursting of many other asci in the ascocarp resulting in a massive discharge visible as a cloud of spores – the phenomenon called "puffing".  This is an example of positive feedback . A faint hissing sound can also be heard for species of Peziza and other cup fungi .

Asci, notably those of Neurospora crassa , have been used in laboratories for studying the process of meiosis, because the four cells produced by meiosis line up in regular order.  By modifying genes coding for spore color and nutritional requirements, the biologist can study crossing over and other phenomena.  The formation of asci and their use in genetic analysis are described in detail in Neurospora crassa .

Asci of most Pezizomycotina develop after the formation of croziers at their base. The croziers help maintain a brief dikaryon . The compatible nuclei of the dikaryon merge forming a diploid nucleus that then undergoes meiosis and ultimately internal ascospore formation. Members of the Taphrinomycotina and Saccharomycotina do not form croziers.

Classification [ edit ] Asci of Hypomyces chrysospermus (they are unitunicate-inoperculate).

DIC image.

The form of the ascus, the capsule which contains the sexual spores, is important for classification of the Ascomycota . There are four basic types of ascus.

A unitunicate-operculate ascus has a "lid", the Operculum , which breaks open when the spores are mature and allows the spores to escape.  Unitunicate-operculate asci only occur in those ascocarps which have apothecia, for instance the morels .  'Unitunicate' means 'single-walled'.

Instead of an operculum, a unitunicate-inoperculate ascus has an elastic ring that functions like a pressure valve .  Once mature the elastic ring briefly expands and lets the spores shoot out.  This type appears both in apothecia and in perithecia ; an example is the illustrated Hypomyces chrysospermus .

A bitunicate ascus is enclosed in a double wall.  This consists of a thin, brittle outer shell and a thick elastic inner wall.  When the spores are mature, the shell splits open so that the inner wall can take up water. As a consequence this begins to extend with its spores until it protrudes above the rest of the ascocarp so that the spores can escape into free air without being obstructed by the bulk of the fruiting body.  Bitunicate asci occur only in pseudothecia and are found only in the classes Dothideomycetes and Chaetothyriomycetes (which were formerly united in the old class Loculoascomycetes).  Examples: Venturia inaequalis ( apple scab )  and Guignardia aesculi (Brown Leaf Mold of Horse Chestnut).

Prototunicate asci are mostly spherical in shape and have no mechanism for forcible dispersal.  The mature ascus wall dissolves allowing the spores to escape, or it is broken open by other influences, such as animals.  Asci of this type can be found both in perithecia and in cleistothecia , for instance with Dutch elm disease ( Ophiostoma ).  This is something of a catch-all term for cases which do not fit into the other three ascus types, and they probably belong to several independent groups which evolved separately from unitunicate asci.

References [ edit ] ^ Henry Liddell ; Robert Scott .

"ἀσκός" .

A Greek-English Lexicon . Retrieved 27 February 2018 – via Perseus Project .

^ Hawksworth DL. (2013).

Ascomycete Systematics: Problems and Perspectives in the Nineties . Springer. p. 116.

ISBN 978-1-4757-9290-4 .

External links [ edit ] IMA Mycological Glossary: Ascus APSnet Illustrated Glossary of Plant Pathology: Ascus v t e Microbiology : Fungus Outline of fungi · Outline of lichens Branch Ethnomycology Lichenology Marine fungi Medicinal fungi Mycology Mycosis Mycotoxicology Structure Reproduction/ spore teleomorph/sexual : Zygospore Ascospore / Ascus Basidiospore / Basidium / Teliospore anamorph/asexual : Sporangium Conidium Chlamydospore Oidium Pycniospore Other Hypha Haustorium Mycelium Cell wall Sporocarp Growth patterns Dimorphic fungi Mold Yeast Mushroom List Glossary of mycology List of fungal orders List of mycologists List of mycology journals Category Commons WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xvmbv
Cached time: 20250815012246
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.395 seconds
Real time usage: 0.546 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 730/1000000
Revision size: 7922/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 29068/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1068/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 18227/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.291/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18770869/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  491.723      1 -total
 31.12%  153.042      1 Template:Etymology
 24.35%  119.710      1 Template:Wikt-lang
 21.25%  104.478      1 Template:Reflist
 17.51%   86.091      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 16.56%   81.419      1 Template:Fungus_structure
 16.01%   78.736      2 Template:Navbox
 14.19%   69.763      1 Template:Short_description
 11.04%   54.303      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.23%   50.305      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:220446:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815012246 and revision id 1291191448. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ascus&oldid=1291191448 " Categories : Mycology Fungal morphology and anatomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 17:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ascus 24 languages Add topic

