Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Educational approach 2 Specialty areas 3 Academics Toggle Academics subsection 3.1 Continuing and community education 3.2 Accreditation 4 Centers and programs 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents William James College Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°17′42″N 71°12′12″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.2950°N 71.2033°W ﻿ / 42.2950; -71.2033 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private school of psychology in Newton, Massachusetts, U.S.

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( April 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may need to be rewritten .

Please review the lead guide and help improve the lead of this article if you can.

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "William James College" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) William James College Former name Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology (MSPP) Motto Meeting the Need...Making a Difference Type Private university Established 1974 ; 51 years ago ( 1974 ) [ 1 ] Accreditation NECHE Academic affiliation APA NASP President Nicholas Covino Students 750 Location Newton , Massachusetts , United States 42°17′42″N 71°12′12″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.2950°N 71.2033°W ﻿ / 42.2950; -71.2033 Website www .williamjames .edu William James College , formerly Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology ( MSPP ), [ 1 ] is a private university focused on psychology and located in Newton, Massachusetts , United States. It enrolls more than 750 students and offers graduate academic degree and certificate programs across four departments: Clinical Psychology , Counseling Psychology , Organizational and Leadership Psychology , and School Psychology , as well as a Bachelor of Science completion program in Psychology and Human Services.

[ 2 ] Educational approach [ edit ] Founded in 1974, William James College uses an experiential education model, which combines academic instruction with supervised clinical experience. Students are in the field beginning in the first year and are placed in various local field facilities including social service agencies, schools, hospitals, community mental health centers, child guidance clinics, court clinics, college counseling centers, private agencies, and corporate settings.

[ 3 ] Specialty areas [ edit ] The Lucero Latino Mental Health Training Program is a concentration open to students from many of the graduate programs, specializing in the specific mental health needs of Latino patients or clients.

[ 4 ] The Dr. Cynthia Lucero Center, which sponsors the concentration in Latino Mental Health, was founded by the friends and family of Cynthia Lucero, a deceased graduate of William James College.

[ 5 ] Lectures and scholarships in Cynthia's memory are also sponsored by the Lucero Center.

[ 6 ] The academic concentration provides relevant coursework and summer immersion programs in Costa Rica and Ecuador focused on improving Spanish language skills and exposure to Latino cultures through community service mental health work.

One distinguishing William James College program is designed to "train vets to treat vets". In 2011, [ 7 ] William James College was awarded a grant from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , working to recruit veterans and train them to meet the mental health needs of their fellow servicemen and women.  William James College participates in the Veteran's Administration Yellow Ribbon Program and provides matching grant assistance to eligible veterans.

The Center for Multicultural and Global Mental Health (CMGMH) aims to be a preeminent academic, clinical training, and research center in promoting social justice and addressing mental health disparities among disenfranchised populations in the U.S. and abroad.  It houses the Latino Mental Health Program (LMHP), the African and Caribbean Mental Health (ACMH) Program, and the Global Mental Health (GMH) Program.

[ 8 ] William James College is also home to the Black Mental Health Graduate Academy, an emerging academic pipeline program designed to recruit, mentor, and support Black students in Master's and Doctoral degree programs for mental health counseling and psychology.

[ 9 ] Academics [ edit ] The institution offers the PsyD , [ 10 ] MA, [ 11 ] and BS degrees, as well as several certificates.

Continuing and community education [ edit ] William James College offers continuing education opportunities in a variety of formats.

[ 12 ] Professional continuing education is available for psychologists, [ 13 ] social workers, nurses, mental health counselors, school psychologists, counselors, other mental health professionals, educators, businesspeople, psychotherapists, and the community.

In addition, the Freedman Center for Child and Family Development offers courses for parents.

[ 14 ] Accreditation [ edit ] William James College is accredited by the New England Commission of Higher Education .

[ 15 ] The Clinical Psychology Doctoral Program, the School Psychology Doctoral Program, and the William James College American Psychological Association (APA) internship consortium are accredited by the APA.

[ 16 ] The Master of Arts (MA)/Certificate of Advanced Graduate Study (CAGS) and PsyD in School Psychology are approved by the National Association of School Psychologists .

[ 17 ] The Behavior Analyst Certification Board, Inc.

[ 18 ] has verified the William James College Applied Behavior Analysis course sequence as meeting the coursework requirements for eligibility to take the Board Certified Behavior Analyst Examination.

Centers and programs [ edit ] William James College is home to the following centers and programs: Center of Excellence for Children, Families, and the Law [ 19 ] Center for Multicultural & Global Mental Health [ 8 ] Dr. Leon O. Brenner Center for Psychological Assessment and Testing [ 20 ] Freedman Center for Child and Family Development [ 21 ] Lucero Center for Latino Mental Health Alliance for Aging Leadership Learning Hub Human Trafficking Research Hub Juvenile Court Clinic Operations PATHWAYS program References [ edit ] ^ a b "History" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Academic Departments at William James College in Boston, MA" .

williamjames.edu . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

^ "Field Education & Job Training: Overview" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Latino Mental Health Program (LMHP)" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Remembering Dr. Cynthia Lucero" .

The Marathon Solution . April 28, 2011 . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Meet Our Lucero Scholars" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ " 'Train Veterans to Treat Veterans' Program Becomes Law in Massachusetts" .

West Roxbury Patch . Patch Media. November 16, 2011 . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ a b "Multicultural & Global Mental Health Center of Excellence" . William James College . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ "Black Mental Health Initiative" . William James College . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ "Doctorate of Clinical Psychology (PsyD)" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Clinical Mental Health Counseling Master of Arts (MA) program" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "William James College Continuing Education Programs" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "APA Approved Sponsors of Continuing Professional Education" . American Psychological Association . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "About the Freedman Center" . William James College . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "New England Commission of Higher Education" .

NECHE . Retrieved February 20, 2019 .

^ "Search for Accredited Programs" . American Psychological Association. November 21, 2017 . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "NASP-Approved Programs" . National Association of School Psychologists . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Behavior Analyst Certification Board" . Retrieved February 20, 2019 .

^ "The Children, Families & the Law Center of Excellence" . William James College . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ "Adult Assessment, Child Assessment (NYC), Rapid Response Testing (RRPTS)" . William James College . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

^ "The Freedman Center at William James College, Parent and Educator Resources, Newton MA Metrowest" . William James College . Retrieved January 11, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_James_College&oldid=1304829908 " Categories : Universities and colleges in Boston Private universities and colleges in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles lacking reliable references from April 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2018 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2018 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William James College Add languages Add topic

