Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Meteor burst technology 3 System capabilities 4 Data storage, management and accessibility 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents SNOTEL 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Data from a SNOTEL site in Elko County, Nevada SNOTEL is an automated system of snowpack and related climate sensors operated by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture in the Western United States .

There are over 900 SNOTEL (or sno w tel emetry ) sites in 11 states, including Alaska . The sites are generally located in remote high-mountain watersheds where access is often difficult or restricted. Access for maintenance by the NRCS includes various modes from hiking and skiing to helicopters .

[ 1 ] All SNOTEL sites measure snow water content , accumulated precipitation , and air temperature.  Some sites also measure snow depth, soil moisture and temperature, wind speed, solar radiation , humidity , and atmospheric pressure .  These data are used to forecast yearly water supplies, predict floods , and for general climate research.

History [ edit ] Installation of SNOTEL began in the mid-1960s.  Its use in climate forecasting was not originally envisioned, but it has become the standard climate data for western U.S. locations which are elevated sufficiently to have at least a seasonal snowpack.  Ongoing algorithm upgrades correct and backfill missing data, while improvements in communications improve the overall quality of data collection.

[ 2 ] Meteor burst technology [ edit ] SNOTEL sites make use of meteor burst communications technology SNOTEL uses meteor burst communications technology to collect and communicate data in near-real-time.

VHF radio signals are reflected at a steep angle off the ever-present band of ionized meteors existing from about 50 to 75 miles (80 to 120 km) above the earth.

Satellites are not involved; the NRCS operates and controls the entire system.

[ 1 ] Sites are designed to operate unattended and without maintenance for a year. They are battery powered with solar cell recharge. The condition of each site is monitored daily when it reports on 8 operational functions. Serious problems or deteriorating performance trigger a response from the NRCS electronics technicians located in six data collection offices.

[ 1 ] The SNOTEL sites are polled by 2 master stations operated by NRCS in Boise, Idaho , and Ogden, Utah . A central computer at the NRCS's National Water and Climate Center (NWCC) in Portland, Oregon controls system operations and receives the data collected by the SNOTEL network.

[ 1 ] System capabilities [ edit ] SNOTEL diagram Basic SNOTEL sites have a pressure sensing snow pillow , storage precipitation gauge , and air temperature sensor . However, they can accommodate 64 channels of data and will accept analog and parallel or serial digital sensors. On-site microprocessors provide functions such as computing daily maximum, minimum, and average temperature information. Generally, sensor data are recorded every 15 minutes and reported out in a daily poll of all sites. Special polls are conducted more frequently in response to specific needs.

[ 1 ] The new generation of remote sites, master stations, and central computer facilities allows for hourly interrogation of remote sites. The system has the ability to vary the configuration of a remote site by transmitting the appropriate commands telling the remote site what sensors to turn on or what parameters to send.

[ 1 ] A variety of calculations can be made on any sensor channel. For example, the user can select maximum , minimum , average , standard deviation , or circular averaging .

[ 1 ] Each sensor can be accessed independently at a specific interval. For example, wind speed may be sensed every minute during the day to arrive at an average, while the snow pillow may be accessed every 15 minutes for the accumulated total.

[ 1 ] System performance has increased over the years, mainly due to a better understanding of meteor burst communication characteristics and improved equipment.  While a 95 percent response to a system-wide poll is the standard, over 99 percent is common.

[ 1 ] Data storage, management and accessibility [ edit ] All data are received by the SNOTEL central computer, which in turn is linked to the Centralized Forecasting System (CFS) in the NWCC where data can be accessed. Once on the CFS the data is kept in a relational database , where various analysis and graphics programs are available. Current and historical data and analyses are available by dialing into the CFS, by disk or tape media, paper copy, and on the Internet .

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j "SNOTEL Data Collection Network Fact Sheet" .

USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service . Retrieved 14 December 2015 .

^ Jan Curtis (September 19, 2006).

"Abstract from MTNCLIM 2006 (Mountain Climate Conference)—SNOTEL Quality Control Using PRISM" (PDF) . NRCS National Water & Climate Center, Portland. p. 15 . Retrieved 2015-12-14 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to SnoTel .

Official SNOTEL site Meteor Communications Corporation What You Don’t Know About Snow: The USDA’s SNOTEL Network is Playing a Critical Role in Protecting Water Resources in the Western United States v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=SNOTEL&oldid=1304214795 " Categories : Meteorological stations United States Department of Agriculture Snow Hidden category: Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 17:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents SNOTEL 1 language Add topic

