Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Wildflower 19 languages العربية বাংলা Български Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Kiswahili Lietuvių Norsk bokmål Simple English ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flower that grows in the wild, not intentionally planted For other uses, see Wildflower (disambiguation) .

Five wildflower species occupy less than 1,000 cm 2 in this photo taken on the eastern slope foothills of the Canadian Rocky Mountains in late July. Pink: Alberta wild rose; white: Western yarrow; blue: Bluebells showing both pink (immature) and blue (mature) stages; yellow: Arnica cordifolia (heart-leaved arnica); and red: Red paintbrush Wildflowers of Western Australia Wildflowers are blooming in April in a field in central Texas near Lake Grapevine .

Wildflowers in Death Valley National Park A wildflower (or wild flower ) is a flower that grows in the wild, rather than being intentionally seeded or planted. The term implies that the plant is neither a hybrid nor a selected cultivar that is any different from the native plant , even if it is growing where it would not naturally be found. The term can refer to the whole plant, even when not in bloom, and not just the flower.

[ 1 ] "Wildflower" is an imprecise term. More exact terms include: native species naturally occurring in the area (see flora ) exotic or introduced species not native to the area, including invasive species that out-compete other plants, whether native or not imported (introduced to an area whether deliberately or accidentally) naturalized (imported, but come to be considered by the public as native) In the United Kingdom, the organization Plantlife International instituted the "County Flowers scheme" in 2002; see County flowers of the United Kingdom for which members of the public nominated and voted for a wildflower emblem for their county . The aim was to spread awareness of the heritage of native species and about the need for conservation, as some of these species are endangered. For example, Somerset has adopted the cheddar pink ( Dianthus gratianopolitanus ), London the rosebay willowherb ( Chamerion angustifolium ) and Denbighshire /Sir Ddinbych in Wales the rare limestone woundwort ( Stachys alpina ).

Examples [ edit ] Adonis aestivalis , summer pheasant's-eye Anagallis , [ 2 ] pimpernel Agrostemma githago , common corn-cockle Anthemis arvensis , corn chamomile Callirhoe involucrata , purple poppy-mallow Centaurea cyanus , cornflower Coreopsis tinctoria , plains coreopsis Dianthus barbatus , sweet William Digitalis purpurea , foxglove Dimorphotheca sinuata , glandular Cape marigold Eschscholzia californica , California poppy Ficaria verna , lesser celandine Glebionis segetum , corn marigold Gypsophila elegans , annual baby's-breath Lantana spp.

, shrub verbenas Papaver rhoeas , common poppy Petasites hybridus , butterbur Phlox drummondii , annual phlox Potentilla sterilis , strawberryleaf cinquefoil Prunus padus , bird cherry Silene latifolia , white campion Tussilago farfara , coltsfoot Viola riviniana , common dog-violet Viola tricolor , wild pansy See also [ edit ] List of San Francisco Bay Area wildflowers Superbloom Megaherb Native plant Naturalisation Weed Escaped plant References [ edit ] ^ Wild flowers can be found in deserts, forests,
meadows, and fields.

"wildflower" . Retrieved December 5, 2014 .

Wildflower, noun. Any flowering plant that grows without intentional human aid.

^ Pauline Pears (2005), HDRA encyclopedia of organic gardening , Dorling Kindersley, ISBN 978-1-4053-0891-5 External links [ edit ] Media related to Wild flowers at Wikimedia Commons Wildflower Magazine promotes the use and conservation of wildflowers and native plants, Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center. Formerly published by the North American Native Plant Society Plantlife, UK organization Wildflower in Cyprus Information on 1250 native plant species to North Cyprus.

Ontario Wildflowers Detailed information about wildflowers of Ontario (Canada) and Northeastern North America Wild flowers of the north-eastern states . (1895)  Being three hundred and eight individuals common to the north-eastern United States.

Western USA wildflower reports NPIN: Native Plant Database Native Plant Database from the North American Native Plant Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildflower&oldid=1296980970 " Category : Flowers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildflower 19 languages Add topic

