Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Underdetermination and evidence 3 Arguments involving underdetermination Toggle Arguments involving underdetermination subsection 3.1 Epistemological problem of the indeterminacy of data to theory 3.2 General skeptical arguments 3.3 Philosophy of science 4 See also 5 Notes and references 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Underdetermination 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Русский Suomi 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idea in the philosophy of science For the mathematical term involving systems of linear equations, see Underdetermined system .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of science , underdetermination or the underdetermination of theory by data (sometimes abbreviated UTD ) is the idea that evidence available to us at a given time may be insufficient to determine what beliefs we should hold in response to it.

[ 1 ] The underdetermination thesis states that all evidence necessarily underdetermines any scientific theory.

[ 2 ] Underdetermination exists when available evidence is insufficient to identify which belief one should hold about that evidence. For example, if all that was known was that exactly $10 were spent on apples and oranges, and that apples cost $1 and oranges $2, then one would know enough to eliminate some possibilities (e.g., 6 oranges could not have been purchased), but one would not have enough evidence to know which specific combination of apples and oranges were purchased. In this example, one would say that belief in what combination was purchased is underdetermined by the available evidence.

In contrast, overdetermination in philosophy of science means that more evidence is available than is necessary to justify a conclusion.

Origin [ edit ] Ancient Greek skeptics argued for equipollence , the view that reasons for and against claims are equally balanced. This captures at least one sense of saying that the claims themselves are underdetermined.

Underdetermination, again under different labels, arises in the modern period in the work of René Descartes . Among other skeptical arguments, Descartes presents two arguments involving underdetermination. His dream argument points out that experiences perceived while dreaming (for example, falling) do not necessarily contain sufficient information to deduce the true situation (being in bed). He concluded that since one cannot always distinguish dreams from reality, one cannot rule out the possibility that one is dreaming rather than having veridical experiences; thus the conclusion that one is having a veridical experience is underdetermined. His demon argument posits that all of one's experiences and thoughts might be manipulated by a very powerful and deceptive "evil demon". Once again, so long as the perceived reality appears internally consistent to the limits of one's limited ability to tell, the situation is indistinguishable from reality and one cannot logically determine that such a demon does not exist.

Underdetermination and evidence [ edit ] To show that a conclusion is underdetermined, one must show that there is a rival conclusion that is equally well supported by the standards of evidence.  A trivial example of underdetermination is the addition of the statement "whenever we look for evidence" (or more generally, any statement which cannot be falsified ). For example, the conclusion "objects near Earth fall toward it when dropped" might be opposed by "objects near Earth fall toward it when dropped but only when one checks to see that they do." Since one may append this to any conclusion, all conclusions are at least trivially underdetermined.  If one considers such statements to be illegitimate, e.g. by applying Occam's Razor , then such "tricks" are not considered demonstrations of underdetermination.

This concept also applies to scientific theories : for example, it is similarly trivial to find situations that a theory does not address. For example, classical mechanics did not distinguish between non-accelerating reference frames . As a result, any conclusion about such a reference frame was underdetermined; it was equally consistent with the theory to say that the Solar System is at rest, as it is to say that it moves at any constant velocity in any particular direction. Newton himself stated that these possibilities were indistinguishable. More generally, evidence may not always be sufficient to distinguish between competing theories (or to determine a different theory that will unify both), as is the case with general relativity and quantum mechanics .

Another example is provided by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's 1810 book Theory of Colours : "Newton believed that with the help of his prism experiments, he could prove that sunlight was composed of variously coloured rays of light. Goethe showed that this step from observation to theory is more problematic than Newton wanted to admit. By insisting that the step to theory is not forced upon us by the phenomena, Goethe revealed our own free, creative contribution to theory construction. And Goethe's insight is surprisingly significant, because he correctly claimed that all of the results of Newton's prism experiments fit a theoretical alternative equally well. If this is correct, then by suggesting an alternative to a well-established physical theory, Goethe developed the problem of underdetermination a century before Duhem and Quine's famous argument ." (Mueller, 2016) [ 3 ] Hermann von Helmholtz says of this, "And I for one do not know how anyone, regardless of what his views about colours are, can deny that the theory in itself is fully consequent, that its assumptions, once granted, explain the facts treated completely and indeed simply".

[ 4 ] Experimental violations of Bell inequality show, that there are some limitations to underdetermination – every theory exhibiting local realism and statistical independence was disproved by this tests. Analogus limitations follow from Kochen–Specker experiments .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] These tests employ only correlations between results of measurements and therefore are able to bypass the issue of theory-ladenness of observation.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Arguments involving underdetermination [ edit ] Arguments involving underdetermination attempt to show that there is no reason to believe some conclusion because it is underdetermined by the evidence.  Then, if the evidence available at a particular time can be equally well explained by at least one other hypothesis, there is no reason to believe it rather than the equally supported rival, which can be considered observationally equivalent (although many other hypotheses may still be eliminated).

Because arguments involving underdetermination involve both a claim about what the evidence is and that such evidence underdetermines a conclusion, it is often useful to separate these two claims within the underdetermination argument as follows: All the available evidence of a certain type underdetermines which of several rival conclusions is correct.

Only evidence of that type is relevant to believing one of these conclusions.

Therefore, there is no evidence for believing one among the rival conclusions.

The first premise makes the claim that a theory is underdetermined. The second says that rational decision (i.e. using available evidence) depends upon insufficient evidence.

Epistemological problem of the indeterminacy of data to theory [ edit ] Any phenomenon can be explained by a multiplicity of hypotheses.  How, then, can data ever be sufficient to prove a theory?  This is the " epistemological problem of the indeterminacy of data to theory".

The poverty of the stimulus argument and W.V.O. Quine 's 1960 'Gavagai' example are perhaps the most commented variants of the epistemological problem of the indeterminacy of data to theory.

General skeptical arguments [ edit ] Some skeptical arguments appeal to the fact that no possible evidence could be incompatible with 'skeptical hypotheses' like the maintenance of a complex illusion by Descartes ' evil demon or (in a modern version) the machines who run the Matrix . A skeptic may argue that this undermines any claims to knowledge , or even (by internalist definitions), justification .

Philosophers have found this argument very powerful.

Hume felt it was unanswerable, but observed that it was in practice impossible to accept its conclusions. Influenced by this, Kant held that while the nature of the ' noumenal ' world was indeed unknowable, we could aspire to knowledge of the ' phenomenal ' world. A similar response has been advocated by modern anti-realists .

Underdetermined ideas are not implied to be incorrect (taking into account present evidence); rather, we cannot know if they are correct.

Philosophy of science [ edit ] In the philosophy of science , underdetermination is often presented as a problem for scientific realism , which holds that we have reason to believe in entities that are not directly observable talked about by scientific theories.  One such argument proceeds as follows (to be compared to the previous one): All the available observational evidence for such entities underdetermines the claims of a scientific theory about such entities.

Only the observational evidence is relevant to believing a scientific theory.

Therefore, there is no evidence for believing what scientific theories say about such entities.

Particular responses to this argument attack both the first and the second premise (1 and 2).  It is argued against the first premise that the underdetermination must be strong and/or inductive. It is argued against the second premise that there is evidence for a theory's truth besides observations; for example, it is argued that simplicity , explanatory power or some other feature of a theory is evidence for it over its rivals.

A more general response from the scientific realist is to argue that underdetermination is no special problem for science, because, as indicated earlier in this article, all knowledge that is directly or indirectly supported by evidence suffers from it—for example, conjectures concerning unobserved observables . It is therefore too powerful an argument to have any significance in the philosophy of science, since it does not cast doubt uniquely on conjectured unobservables.

See also [ edit ] Indeterminacy (philosophy) Poverty of the stimulus Reference class problem Scientific method Instrumentalism Confirmation holism Equifinality Metaphysics Occam's razor Observational equivalence Overdetermination Philosophical skepticism Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "Underdetermination of Scientific Theory" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2017.

^ Norton, John D. (July 9–12, 2003).

"Must Evidence Underdetermine Theory?" (PDF) . Retrieved 2023-04-07 .

^ Mueller, Olaf L. (2016).

"Prismatic Equivalence – A New Case of Underdetermination: Goethe vs. Newton on the Prism Experiments, 2016/2 (n° 24)" .

British Journal for the History of Philosophy .

24 (2): 323– 347.

doi : 10.1080/09608788.2015.1132671 .

S2CID 170843218 .

^ Helmholtz, Hermann von. 1853.

Goethes Vorahnungen kommender naturwissenschaftlicher Ideen . Berlin: Pastel. 1971. Philosophische Vortrdge und Aufsdtze. Ed. H. Horz and S. Wollgast. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.

^ Agazzi, Evandro, ed. (2017).

Varieties of Scientific Realism . Cham: Springer International Publishing. p. 312.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-51608-0 .

ISBN 978-3-319-51607-3 .

^ Alai, Mario (December 2019).

"The Underdetermination of Theories and Scientific Realism" .

Axiomathes .

29 (6): 621– 637.

doi : 10.1007/s10516-018-9384-4 .

hdl : 11576/2661165 .

ISSN 1122-1151 .

S2CID 126042452 .

^ a b Maudlin, Tim (1996), Cushing, James T.; Fine, Arthur; Goldstein, Sheldon (eds.), "Space-Time in the Quantum World" , Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum Theory: An Appraisal , Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 184, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, p. 305, doi : 10.1007/978-94-015-8715-0_20 , ISBN 978-90-481-4698-7 , retrieved 2022-04-23 ^ James T. Cushing; Ernan McMullin, eds. (1989).

Philosophical consequences of quantum theory : reflections on Bell's theorem . Notre Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press. p. 65.

ISBN 0-268-01578-3 .

OCLC 19352903 .

External links [ edit ] Underdetermination and the Claims of Science by P. D. Magnus Stanford, Kyle (Winter 2000), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), Underdetermination of Scientific Theory , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underdetermination&oldid=1292128649 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Concepts in the philosophy of science Evidence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 10:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underdetermination 12 languages Add topic

