Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main features Toggle Main features subsection 1.1 Phonology 1.2 Nouns 1.3 Pronouns 1.4 Verbs 1.5 Adverbs 1.6 Particles 1.7 Other features 2 Vocabulary 3 Sample 4 Authors Toggle Authors subsection 4.1 Poets of the Epic Cycle 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Homeric Greek 23 languages العربية Asturianu Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Simple English Suomi اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of the Greek language found in Homer Homeric Greek Language family Indo-European Hellenic Greek (disputed) Attic – Ionic Ionic Homeric Greek Early form Proto-Greek Writing system Greek alphabet Language codes ISO 639-3 – Linguist List grc-hom Homeric Greek is the form of the Greek language that was used in the Iliad , Odyssey , and Homeric Hymns . It is a literary dialect of Ancient Greek consisting mainly of an archaic form of Ionic , with some Aeolic forms, a few from Arcadocypriot , and a written form influenced by Attic .

[ 1 ] It was later named Epic Greek because it was used as the language of epic poetry , typically in dactylic hexameter , by poets such as Hesiod and Theognis of Megara . Some compositions in Epic Greek date from as late as the 5th century [AD], and it only fell out of use by the end of classical antiquity .

Main features [ edit ] In the following description, only forms that differ from those of later Greek are discussed. Omitted forms can usually be predicted from patterns seen in Ionic Greek.

Phonology [ edit ] Homeric Greek is like Ionic Greek , and unlike Classical Attic , in shifting almost all cases of long ᾱ to η .

Examples of Homeric Greek phonology Homeric Attic English Τροίη Τροίᾱ Troy (nominative singular) ὥρη ὥρᾱ an hour (nominative singular) πύλῃσι πύλαις/πύλαισι gates (dative plural) Exceptions include nouns like θεᾱ́ ("a goddess"), and the genitive plural of first-declension nouns and the genitive singular of masculine first-declension nouns.
For example θεᾱ́ων ("of goddesses"), and Ἀτρεΐδᾱο ("of the son of Atreus").

Nouns [ edit ] First declension [ 2 ] The nominative singular of most feminine nouns ends in -η , rather than long -ᾱ , even after ρ , ε , and ι (an Ionic feature): χώρη for χώρᾱ . However, θεᾱ́ and some names end in long -ᾱ .

Some masculine nouns have a nominative singular in short -ᾰ rather than -ης ( ναύτης , Ἀτρεΐδης ): ἱππότᾰ for Attic ἱππότης .

The genitive singular of masculine nouns ends in -ᾱο or -εω (rarely - only after vowels - -ω ), rather than -ου : Ἀτρεΐδᾱο for Attic Ἀτρείδου .

[ note 1 ] The genitive plural usually ends in -ᾱων or -εων : νυμφᾱ́ων for Attic νυμφῶν .

[ note 2 ] The dative plural almost always ends in -ῃσι(ν) or -ῃς : πύλῃσιν for Attic πύλαις .

Second declension Genitive singular: ends in -οιο , as well as -ου . For example, πεδίοιο , as well as πεδίου .

Genitive and dative dual: ends in -οιϊν . Thus, ἵπποιϊν appears, rather than ἵπποιν .

Dative plural: ends in -οισι (ν) and -οις . For example, φύλλοισι , as well as φύλλοις .

Third declension Accusative singular: ends in -ιν , as well as -ιδα . For example, γλαυκῶπιν , as well as γλαυκώπιδα .

Dative plural: ends in -εσσι and -σι . For example, πόδεσσι or ἔπεσσι .

Homeric Greek lacks the quantitative metathesis present in later Greek (except in certain α-stem genitive plurals and certain masculine α-stem genitive singulars): Homeric βασιλ ῆος instead of βασιλ έως , πόλ ηος instead of πόλ εως βασιλ ῆα instead of βασιλ έᾱ βασιλ ῆας instead of βασιλ έᾱς βασιλ ήων instead of βασιλ έων Homeric Greek sometimes uses different endings: πόλ η ος alternates with πόλ ι ος A note on nouns: After short vowels, the reflex of Proto-Greek * ts can alternate between -σ- and -σσ- in Homeric Greek. This can be of metrical use. For example, τόσος and τόσσος are equivalent; μέσος and μέσσος ; ποσί and ποσσί .

A relic of the Proto-Greek instrumental case, the ending -φι (ν) ( -οφι (ν)) can be used for the dative singular and plural of nouns and adjectives (occasionally for the genitive singular and plural, as well). For example, βίηφι (...by force), δακρυόφιν (...with tears), and ὄρεσφιν (...in the mountains).

Pronouns [ edit ] First-person pronoun (singular "I", dual "we both", plural "we") Singular Dual Plural Nominative ἐγώ, ἐγών νῶι, νώ ἡμεῖς, ἄμμες Genitive ἐμεῖο, ἐμέο, ἐμεῦ, μεῦ, ἐμέθεν νῶιν ἡμείων, ἡμέων, ἀμμέων Dative ἐμοί, μοι ἡμῖν, ἄμμι(ν) Accusative ἐμέ, με νῶι, νώ ἡμέας, ἧμας, ἄμμε Second-person pronoun (singular "you", dual "you both", plural "you") Singular Dual Plural Nominative σύ, τύνη σφῶϊ, σφώ ὑμεῖς, ὔμμες Genitive σεῖο, σέο, σεῦ, σευ, σέθεν, τεοῖο σφῶϊν, σφῷν ὑμέων, ὑμείων , ὔμμέων Dative σοί, τοι, τεΐν ὑμῖν, ὔμμι(ν) Accusative σέ σφῶϊ, σφώ ὑμέας, ὔμμε Third-person pronoun (singular "he, she, it", dual "they both", plural "they") Singular Dual Plural Nominative — σφωέ σφεῖς Genitive οὗ, εἷο, ἕο, εὗ, ἕθεν σφωΐν σφείων, σφέων Dative ἑοῖ, οἱ σφι(ν), σφίσι(ν) Accusative ἕ, ἑέ, μιν σφωέ σφε, σφέας, σφας Third-person singular pronoun ("he, she, it") (the relative) or rarely singular article ("the"): ὁ, ἡ, τό Third-person plural pronoun ("they") (the relative) or rarely plural article ("the"): nominative οἰ, αἰ, τοί, ταί , dative τοῖς, τοῖσι, τῇς, τῇσι, ταῖς .

Interrogative pronoun, singular and plural ("who, what, which") Nominative τίς Accusative τίνα Genitive τέο, τεῦ Dative τέῳ Genitive τέων [ clarification needed ] Verbs [ edit ] Person endings -ν appears rather than -σαν . For example, ἔσταν for ἔστησαν in the third-person plural active.

The third plural middle/passive often ends in -αται or -ατο ; for example, ἥατο is equivalent to ἧντο .

Tenses Future: Generally remains uncontracted. For example, ἐρέω appears instead of ἐρῶ or τελέω instead of τελῶ .

Present or imperfect: These tenses sometimes take iterative form with the suffix -σκ- before the ending. For example, φύγεσκον : 'they kept on running away' Aorist or imperfect: Both tenses can occasionally drop their augments. For example, βάλον may appear instead of ἔβαλον , and ἔμβαλε may appear instead of ἐνέβαλε .

Homeric Greek does not have a historical present tense, but rather uses injunctives . Injunctives are replaced by the historical present in the post-Homeric writings of Thucydides and Herodotus .

[ 3 ] Subjunctive The subjunctive appears with a short vowel. Thus, the form ἴομεν , rather than ἴωμεν .

The second singular middle subjunctive ending appears as both -ηαι and -εαι .

The third singular active subjunctive ends in -σι (ν). Thus, we see the form φορεῇσι , instead of φορῇ .

Occasionally, the subjunctive is used in place of the future and in general remarks.

Infinitive The infinitive appears with the endings -μεν , -μεναι , and -ναι , in place of -ειν and -ναι . For example, δόμεναι for δοῦναι ; ἴμεν instead of ἰέναι ; ἔμεν , ἔμμεν , or ἔμμεναι for εἶναι ; and ἀκουέμεν(αι) in place of ἀκούειν .

Contracted verbs In contracted verbs, where Attic employs an -ω- , Homeric Greek will use -οω- or -ωω- in place of -αο- . For example, Attic ὁρῶντες becomes ὁρόωντες .

Similarly, in places where -αε- contracts to -α- or -αει- contracts to -ᾳ- , Homeric Greek will show either αα or αᾳ .

Adverbs [ edit ] Adverbial suffixes -δε conveys a sense of 'to where'; πόλεμόνδε 'to war' -δον conveys a sense of 'how'; κλαγγηδόν 'with cries' -θεν conveys a sense of 'from where'; ὑψόθεν 'from above' -θι conveys a sense of 'where'; ὑψόθι 'on high' Particles [ edit ] ἄρα, ἄρ, ῥα 'so' or 'next' (transition) τε 'and' (a general remark or a connective) Emphatics δή 'indeed' ἦ 'surely' περ 'just' or 'even' τοι 'I tell you ...' (assertion) Other features [ edit ] In most circumstances, Homeric Greek did not have available a true definite article .

Ὁ , ἡ , τό and their inflected forms do occur, but they are in origin and usually used as demonstrative pronouns .

[ 4 ] Vocabulary [ edit ] Homer (in the Iliad and the Odyssey ) uses about 9,000 words, of which 1,382 are proper names . Of the 7,618 remaining words 2,307 are hapax legomena .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] According to classical scholar Clyde Pharr , "the Iliad has 1097 hapax legomena , while the Odyssey has 868".

[ 7 ] Others have defined the term differently, however, and count as few as 303 in the Iliad and 191 in the Odyssey .

[ 8 ] Sample [ edit ] The Iliad , lines 1–7 Μῆνιν ἄειδε, θεά, Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρί’ Ἀχαιοῖς ἄλγε’ ἔθηκε, πολλὰς δ’ ἰφθίμους ψυχὰς Ἄϊδι προΐαψεν ἡρώων, αὐτοὺς δὲ ἑλώρια τεῦχε κύνεσσιν οἰωνοῖσί τε δαῖτα· Διὸς δ’ ἐτελείετο βουλή· ἐξ οὗ δὴ τὰ πρῶτα διαστήτην ἐρίσαντε Ἀτρεΐδης τε ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν καὶ δῖος Ἀχιλλεύς.

Theodore Alois Buckley (1860): Sing, O goddess, the destructive wrath of Achilles, son of Peleus, which brought countless woes upon the Greeks, and hurled many valiant souls of heroes down to Hades, and made themselves a prey to dogs and to all birds but the will of Jove was being accomplished, from the time when Atrides, king of men, and noble Achilles, first contending, were disunited.

Authors [ edit ] Homer Hesiod Theognis of Megara Apollonius Rhodius Quintus Smyrnaeus Nonnus Author(s) of the Homeric Hymns Poets of the Epic Cycle [ edit ] Stasinus Arctinus of Miletus Lesches Agias Eumelus of Corinth Eugammon of Cyrene Musaeus of Athens See also [ edit ] Wiktionary has a category on Epic Greek .

Ancient Greek dialects Homer's works Hesiod's works Notes [ edit ] ^ Some suggest that -ᾱο may have originally been the more expected -ηο , with -ηο later being transcribed -ᾱο under the influence of other (literary) dialects, whilst others suggest that -ᾱο may have been an Aeolic form.  

Alternatively, it may be that as of the Homeric period, original ᾱ had not yet merged with η in front of ο or ω, and was instead still pronounced [æː]. Then, in later Ionic, when vernacular [æːo] and [æːɔː] had disappeared via metathesis to [eɔː], the metrically-constrained ᾱο of epic poetry came to be pronounced [aːo]. (See λᾱός and Ποσειδᾱ́ων for expected ληός and Ποσειδήων .) ^ -ᾱων for expected -ηων would occur for the reasons given in Note 1.

References [ edit ] ^ Stanford 1959 , pp. lii, liii, the Homeric dialect ^ Stanford 1959 , pp. lvii–lviii, first declension ^ Carroll D. Osburn (1983). "The Historical Present in Mark as a Text-Critical Criterion".

Biblica .

64 (4): 486– 500.

JSTOR 42707093 .

^ Goodwin, William W. (1879).

A Greek Grammar (pp 204). St Martin's Press.

^ The Iliad: A Commentary : Volume 5, Books 17-20, Geoffrey Stephen Kirk, Mark W. Edwards, Cambridge University Press, 1991, ISBN 978-0-521-31208-0 p53, footnote 72 ^ Kirk, G. S.; Edwards, Mark W.; Janko, Richard; Hainsworth, John Bryan; Richardson, Nicholas James (1985).

The Iliad: A Commentary: Volume 5, Books 17-20 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-31208-0 .

^ Pharr, Clyde (1920).

Homeric Greek, a book for beginners . D. C. Heath & Co., Publishers. p. xxii.

^ Reece, Steve (2011-01-01).

"Homeric Encyclopaedia: Digressions; Epithets; Hapax Legomena; Hospitality; Metacharacterism; Type-Scenes" .

Homeric Encyclopedia (Oxford: Blackwell, 2011) .

Bibliography [ edit ] Pharr, Clyde .

Homeric Greek: A Book for Beginners . University of Oklahoma Press, Norman, new edition, 1959. Revised edition: John Wright, 1985.

ISBN 0-8061-1937-3 .

First edition of 1920 in public domain.

Stanford, William Bedell (1959) [1947]. "Introduction, Grammatical Introduction".

Homer: Odyssey I-XII . Vol. 1 (2nd ed.). Macmillan Education Ltd. pp.

ix– lxxxvi.

ISBN 1-85399-502-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Homeric Greek Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010.

A companion to the Ancient Greek language.

Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Christidis, Anastasios-Phoivos, ed. 2007.

A history of Ancient Greek: From the beginnings to Late Antiquity.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Colvin, Stephen C. 2007.

A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Edwards, G. Patrick. 1971.

The language of Hesiod in its traditional context.

Oxford: Blackwell.

Hackstein, Olav. 2010. "The Greek of epic." In A companion to the Ancient Greek language.

Edited by Egbert J. Bakker, 401–23. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Horrocks, Geoffrey C. 1987. "The Ionian epic tradition: Was there an Aeolic phase in its development?" Minos 20–22: 269–94.

––––. 2010.

Greek: A history of the language and its speakers.

2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Janko, Richard. 1982.

Homer, Hesiod, and the Hymns: Diachronic development in epic diction.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

––––. 1992. "The origins and evolution of the Epic diction." In The Iliad: A commentary.

Vol. 4, Books 13–16. Edited by Richard Janko, 8–19. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Lord, Albert B. 1960.

The singer of tales.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Nagy, Gregory. 1995. "An evolutionary model for the making of Homeric poetry: Comparative perspectives." In The ages of Homer.

Edited by Jane Burr Carter and Sarah Morris, 163–79. Austin: University of Texas Press.

Palmer, Leonard R. 1980.

The Greek language.

London: Faber & Faber.

Parry, Milman. 1971.

The making of Homeric verse: The collected papers of Milman Parry.

Edited by Adam Parry. Oxford: Clarendon.

Reece, Steve. 2009.

Homer's Winged Words: the Evolution of Early Greek Epic Diction in the Light of Oral Theory.

Amsterdam: Brill.

West, Martin L. 1988. "The rise of the Greek epic." Journal of Hellenic Studies 108: 151–72.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Ages of Greek c.

3rd millennium BC c.

1600–1100 BC c.

800–300 BC c.

300 BC – AD 600 c.

600–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Authority control databases : National France BnF data NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rrfns
Cached time: 20250817044951
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.046 seconds
Real time usage: 1.205 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6903/1000000
Revision size: 19457/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 282392/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4624/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72054/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.661/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15951742/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1001.304      1 -total
 38.22%  382.678    204 Template:Lang
 18.89%  189.133      2 Template:Reflist
 11.90%  119.151      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 11.68%  116.973      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.41%   94.234      2 Template:Cite_journal
  8.70%   87.127      1 Template:Short_description
  8.44%   84.555      1 Template:Infobox_language
  6.64%   66.477      1 Template:Infobox
  4.96%   49.621      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2360438:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044951 and revision id 1292260244. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Homeric_Greek&oldid=1292260244 " Categories : Homeric Greek Varieties of Ancient Greek Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Language articles with Linglist code Language articles without speaker estimate Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Dialects with Linguist List code Language articles missing Glottolog code Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2021 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Homeric Greek 23 languages Add topic

