Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early era (1917–1944) 2 Stalinist and Cold War era (1945–1992) 3 Collapse and survival 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents World communism 11 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Communism of an international scope This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "World communism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Comintern logo depicts a communist world.

Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e World communism , also known as global communism or international communism , is a form of communism placing emphasis on an international scope rather than being individual communist states. The long-term goal of world communism is an unlimited worldwide communist society that is classless , moneyless, stateless , and nonviolent , which may be achieved through an intermediate-term goal of either a voluntary association of sovereign states as a global alliance , or a world government as a single worldwide state.

A series of internationals have proposed world communism as a primary goal, including the First International , the Second International , the Third International (the Communist International or Comintern), the Fourth International , the Revolutionary Internationalist Movement , Maoist Internationalist Movement , the World Socialist Movement , and variant offshoots. The methods and political theories of each International remain distinct in their pursuit of the global communist society.

During the early years of the Stalin era (1927–1953), the theory of socialism in one country flew in the face of the generally accepted practice of Marxism at the time, and became part of the ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union . According to Joseph Stalin and his supporters it was naïve to think the world revolution was imminent in the 1920s–1930s after the USSR's failure to conquer Poland in 1919 and the defeat of the People's State of Bavaria . With the rise in socialist states post-WWII various splits occurred, namely the Tito-Stalin split , the Mao-Khrushchev split , and the Sino-Albanian split , further exacerbating the prospect of a soon-to-be worldwide revolution, alongside nationalistic tendencies in countries such as Romania and North Korea fomenting a non-aligned front .

The end of the Cold War , with the Revolutions of 1989 and the dissolution of the Soviet Union , is often regarded as the fall of communism. Nevertheless, the international communist tendencies remain among Maoists , Trotskyists , left communists , and some present-day Russian communists among others seeking to further refine and revise the theory of dialectical materialism .

Early era (1917–1944) [ edit ] Marxist philosophers had observed in the turn of the century that because capitalism had begun to exhaust the low hanging fruit of domestic exploitation whether on a national or a continental scale, it had become Imperialist and sought out the global exploitation of markets by colonization and subsequent wealth extraction, and workers by the rampant exploitation of labour . This drive for profit as the sole motivating force of the capitalist class compels class solidarity among the now international capitalist class of the world against any attempt to unify in solidarity by the now also international workers of the world, with the capitalist class' goal being to maintain profitability and thus their class' dominance as the engine and reason for the class conflict . Recognition by people of the pain of this exploitation by capitalists inexorably unites the proletariat of the world and necessitates international cooperation to halt the suffering of humankind. This proletarian internationalism has as its aim the end of continuous subjugation via divide and rule by the comparatively few capitalists who seek to stop the development of class consciousness in their workers lest they too form trade unions to counter the capitalists monopolies ; (thus the rallying cry of communists, " Workers of the world, unite!

"). In this view, after a transitional period of international socialism, the terminal stage of development of the (future) history of communism would likewise be replaced by world communism, defined by world peace .

Theorists have differed on whether world communism may be achieved peacefully despite evidently ongoing class conflict. Those who believe the capitalist class would not put down their property rights to become workers again believe the transition to world communism must be more contentious. World communism as the utopian final goal of the class conflict can only be achieved by world revolution as " injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere" in the words of noted one time socialist, Martin Luther King Jr.

As such, World communism is ultimately incompatible with the permanent existence of the nation state formation as a means of organizing people and property. To be a socialist is to believe that people are people everywhere, even within nations and they must unite to end their own exploitation by the would be elitists of capitalism. Whether the people unite in a supranational unions of sovereign states or a world government to progress through the socialist phase of human development is guided by the desire to end this capitalist exploitation of humankind.

This transitional period of Socialism is considered to then continue to develop the productive forces and alleviate drudgery until either the state becomes irrelevant to organizing human activity and the people agree to the abolition of the state, or the now useless state undergoes what Marx and Engels call the withering away of the state . When governance no longer requires state institutions or state power no one would desire it nor wield it. In other words, the people of a utopian communist society would be self-governing via direct democracy so direct that the state would not even exist.

The flag of the Chinese Soviet Republic which depicts a hammer and sickle spanning the globe as proletarian internationalists believed that one focus of a communist revolution was to ensure another successful revolution elsewhere [ 1 ] Abolition of the state is not in itself a distinctively Marxist doctrine . It was sometime it was happened by any of the country held by various socialist and anarchist thinkers of the nineteenth century as well as some present-day anarchists ( libertarians are anti-statist typically in a subtly different sense, in that they support small government although not absence of government or state ). The crux here is a text of the Friedrich Engels , from his Anti-Dühring . It is often cited as "The state is not 'abolished,' it withers away".

[ 2 ] This is from the pioneer work of historical materialism , a formulation of Marx's idea of a materialist conception of history . The withering away of the state is a graphic formulation, that has passed into cliché. The translation (Engels was writing in German) is also given as: "The state is not 'abolished'. It dies out".

[ 3 ] Reference to the whole passage shows that this happens only after the proletariat has seized the means of production . The schematic is therefore revolution, transitional period, ultimate period. Although the ultimate period sounds like a utopia , Marx and Engels did not consider themselves utopian socialists , but rather scientific socialists . They considered violence necessary for resistance of wage slavery .

Whereas for Engels the transitional period was reduced to a single act, for Lenin thirty to forty years later it had become extended and "obviously lengthy".

[ 4 ] In the same place, he argues strongly that Marx's conception of communist society is not utopian, but takes into account the heritage of what came before.

This gives at least roughly the position on world communism as the Comintern was set up in 1919: world revolution is necessary for the setting up of world communism, but not as an immediate or clearly sufficient event.

Stalinist and Cold War era (1945–1992) [ edit ] As the theory of socialism in one country challenged Trotsky's permanent revolution , the Soviet Union dissolved the Third International during World War II. However, Stalin did not intend to implement isolationism despite this one-country approach.

In a 1936 interview with journalist Roy W. Howard , Stalin articulated his rejection of world revolution and stated that "We never had such plans and intentions" and that "The export of revolution is nonsense".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nevertheless, Stalin also supported revolutionary socialism around the world to continue to work toward world communism, however distant it might be. Thus it backed the 26th of July Movement in the Cuban Revolution , the North Vietnamese in the Vietnam War and the MPLA in the Angolan Civil War . The domino theory of the Cold War was driven by this intent as anti-communists feared that isolationism by capitalist countries would lead to the collapse of their self-defense .

Collapse and survival [ edit ] Socialism survived in China, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos and Cuba, after severe internal crises. In 1989–1992 the party control collapsed in other Communist states, which then entered into Post-communism . Yugoslavia plunged into a long complex series of wars between ethnic groups. Soviet-oriented Communist movements collapsed in countries where it was not in control.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Communist nostalgia Dissolution of the Soviet Union Fall of communism in Albania History of communism § Contemporary communism (1993–present) List of communist parties with national parliamentary representation National communism Post-communism Predictions of the collapse of the Soviet Union Proletarian internationalism Revolutions of 1989 Exporting the Islamic Revolution References [ edit ] ^ Leopold, David (2015).

Freeden, Michael ; Stears, Marc ; Sargent, Lyman Tower (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies . Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp.

20– 38.

ISBN 978-0198744337 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1894).

"Part III: Socialism - II. Theoretical" .

Anti-Dühring . Translated by Burns, Emile. Archived from the original on April 15, 2007 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

. The passage was not in the first edition of 1878.

^ Engels, Friedrich (1894).

"Part III: Socialism - II. Theoretical" .

Anti-Dühring . Translated by Burns, Emile. Archived from the original on April 15, 2007 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

. The passage was not in the first edition of 1878.

^ Lenin, V.I.

"5" .

The State and Revolution . Archived from the original on April 23, 2007.

^ Vyshinsky, Andrey Yanuaryevich (1950).

Speeches Delivered at the Fifth Session of the General Assembly of the United Nations, September-October, 1950 . Information Bulletin of the Embassy of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. p. 76.

^ Volkogonov, Dmitriĭ Antonovich (1998).

Autopsy for an Empire: The Seven Leaders who Built the Soviet Regime . Simon and Schuster. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-684-83420-7 .

^ Kotkin, Stephen (2017).

Stalin. Vol II, Waiting for Hitler, 1928-1941 . London : Allen Lane. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9945-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Priestland 2010 , pp. 346–353.

Further reading [ edit ] Bown, Archie.

The Rise and Fall of Communism (2009).

Kotkin, Stephen.

Armageddon Averted: The Soviet Collapse, 1970-2000 (2nd ed. 2008) excerpt Pons, Silvio; Quinn-Smith, Stephen A., eds. (2017). "World Revolution and Socialism in One Country, 1917-1941".

The Cambridge History of Communism . Vol. 1.

Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781316137024 .

ISBN 9781316137024 .

Naimark, Norman; Pons, Silvio; Quinn-Judge, Sophie, eds. (2017). "The Socialist Camp and World Power, 1941-1960s".

The Cambridge History of Communism . Vol. 2.

Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/9781316459850 .

ISBN 9781316459850 .

Fürst, Juliane, Silvio Pons and Mark Selden, eds.

The Cambridge History of Communism (Volume 3): Endgames? Late Communism in Global Perspective, 1968 to the Present (2017) excerpt Pons, Silvio, and Robert Service, eds.

A Dictionary of 20th-Century Communism (2010).

Priestland, David (2010).

The Red Flag: Communism and the Making of the Modern World . Penguin. pp.

5– 7.

ISBN 978-0140295207 .

Service, Robert (2007).

Comrades!: A History of World Communism . Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-02530-1 .

v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=World_communism&oldid=1302967877 " Categories : Communism Communist theory Marxist theory World government Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Use American English from January 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2014 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 11:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents World communism 11 languages Add topic

