Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Feminist technologies and technoscience studies Toggle Feminist technologies and technoscience studies subsection 2.1 Feminist technologies 2.2 Bioethics and capitalism 3 See also 4 Further reading 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Feminist technoscience 3 languages العربية Català فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transdisciplinary branch of science studies Feminist technoscience is a transdisciplinary branch of science studies which emerged from decades of feminist critique on the way gender and other identity markers are entangled in the combined fields of science and technology .

[ 1 ] The term technoscience , especially in regard to the field of feminist technoscience studies, seeks to remove the distinction between scientific research and development with applied applications of technology while assuming science is entwined with the common interests of society.

[ 2 ] As a result, science is suggested to be held to the same level of political and ethical accountability as the technologies which develop from it.

[ 1 ] Feminist technoscience studies continue to develop new theories on how politics of gender and other identity markers are interconnected to resulting processes of technical change, and power relations of the globalized, material world.

[ 3 ] Feminist technoscience focuses less on intrapersonal relationships between men and women, and more on broader issues concerning knowledge production and how bodies manifest and are acknowledged in societies.

[ 4 ] Feminist technoscience studies are inspired by social constructionist approaches to gender , sex , intersectionalities , and science, technology and society (STS).  It can also be referred to as feminist science studies, feminist STS, [ 5 ] feminist cultural studies of science, feminist studies of science and technology, and gender and science.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e History [ edit ] According to Judy Wajcman , the concept of technology has historically been bound to indigenous women.  The roles of harvesters, or caretakers of the domestic economy taken up by these women lead Wajcman to conclude they would have created tools such as the sickle and the pestle , making them the first technologists.

[ 6 ] : 15 During the eighteenth century, industrial engineering began to constitute the modern definition of technology. This transformed the meaning from including useful arts technology – such as needlework , metalwork , weaving , and mining – to strictly applied science.

[ 6 ] : 16 As a result, "male machines" replaced the "female fabrics" as identifiers of modern technology when engineering was considered a masculine profession.

[ 6 ] : 16 Due to political movements of the 1960s and early 70s, science and technology were considered as industrial, governmental, and/or militaristic based practices, which were associated with masculinity, thus resulting in a lack of feminist discourse.

[ 7 ] Feminist scholarship identified the absence of women's presence in technological and scientific spheres, due to the use of sex stereotyping in education and sexual discrimination in the workforce, as well as the development of technology as a masculine construct.

[ 6 ] : 16 Examples of masculine-coded technologies under these categories included ARPANET , a precursor to the internet developed by the United States Department of Defence, and the Manhattan Project .

[ 7 ] The women's health movements of the 1970s in the United States and the United Kingdom provided momentum to the emergence of feminist politics around scientific knowledge.

[ 6 ] During the early states of second-wave feminism , campaigns for improved birth control and abortion rights were at the forefront in challenging the consolidation of male dominated sciences and technologies at the expense of women's health.

[ 6 ] After the first successful birth of a child using in vitro fertilization technology, critiques of reproductive technologies rapidly grew.

[ 7 ] In the 1970s and 1980s, there were fears that oppressive population policies would be enacted, since men could use technology to appropriate the reproductive abilities of women.

[ 7 ] For many feminist activists, such as Gena Corea and Maria Mies , such technologies changed women's bodies into industrialized factories for the production of more human beings, which these feminist activists viewed as another way of continuing the subjugation of women in society.

[ 7 ] Others viewed the act of regaining knowledge and control over women's bodies as a crucial component to women's liberation.

[ 6 ] : 17 Further advances in reproductive technologies allowed the possibility to allow new family types and lifestyles to form, beyond the heterosexual family unit.

[ 1 ] Science was originally seen as an alien entity opposed to women's interests.

[ 8 ] Sciences and technologies developed under the misconception that women's needs were universal and inferior to the needs of men, forcing women into rigid, determined sex roles.

[ 6 ] : 18 A shift happened in the 1980s – Sandra Harding proposed "the female question in science" to raise "the question of the science in feminism", claiming that science is involved in projects that are not only neutral and objective, but that are strongly linked to male interests.

[ 6 ] : 18 The conceptualization of science and technology was expanded to reflect the all-pervasive ways in which technology is encountered in daily life, [ 7 ] gaining attention of feminists out of concern for female positions in science and technological professions.  Rather than asking how women can be better treated within and by science, feminist critics instead chose to focus on how a science deeply involved in masculinity and masculine projects could be used for the emancipation of women.

[ 6 ] : 18 Today's feminist critique often uses the former demonology of technology as a point of departure to tell a story of progress from liberal to postmodern feminism . According to Judy Wajcman, both liberal and Marxist feminists failed in the analysis of science and technology, because they considered the technology as neutral and did not pay attention to the symbolic dimension of technoscience.

[ 9 ] Feminist technologies and technoscience studies [ edit ] Feminist technoscience studies have become intrinsically linked with practices of Technofeminism and the development of feminist technologies in cultural and critical vernacular.  Feminist technoscience studies explore the coded social and historical implications of science and technology on the development of society, including how identity constructs and is constructed by these technologies.  Technofeminism emerged in the early 1980s, leaning on the different feminist movements. Feminist scholars reanalyzed the Scientific Revolution , and stated that the resulting science was based on the masculine ideology of exploiting the Earth and control.  During this time, nature and scientific inquiry were modelled after misogynous relationships to women.  Femininity was associated with nature and considered as something passive to be objectified. This was in contrast to culture, which was represented by objectifying masculinity.  This analysis depended on the use of gender imagery to conceptualize the nature of technoscientific masculine ideology.

[ 6 ] : 85 Judy Wajcman draws parallels between Judith Butler 's theory of gender performativity and the construction of technology.  Butler conceives gender as a performative act as opposed to a naturalized condition one is born into.

[ 10 ] Through a fluctuating process achieved in daily social interaction, gender identity is acted and constructed through relational behaviours – it is a fluid concept. Drawing from the work of Butler and Donna Haraway , Amade M'charek analyzes how objects, when linked to another object or signifier, construct identity through the use of human imagination: [ 11 ] Differences and similarities may be stable or not, depending on the maintenance work that goes into the relations that help to produce them. They are neither fundaments nor qualities that are always embodied… Differences are relational. They do not always materialize in bodies (in the flesh, genes, hormones, brains, or the skin). Rather they materialize in the very relations that help to enact them.

In this theory, identity is not the byproduct of genes, but the constant upholding of hierarchical difference relations.

[ 11 ] Differences in identity are the effect of interferences, performing and enacting and being enacted upon.  Technology too, as proposed by Wajcman, is a product of mutual alliances, not objectively given but collectively created in a process of reiteration.

[ 6 ] To this end, technology exists as both a source and a concurrence of identity relations.

Western technology and science is deeply implicated in the masculine projection and patriarchal domination of women and nature.

[ 6 ] : 85 After the shift of feminist theory to focus more on technoscience, there was a call for new technology to be based on the needs and values of women, rather than masculine dominated technological development.  The differences between female and male needs were asserted by feminist movements, drawing attention to the exclusion of women being served by current technologies.

[ 6 ] : 22 Reproductive technologies in particular were influenced by this movement. During this time, household technologies, new media, and new technosciences were, for the most part, disregarded.

[ 12 ] Feminist technologies [ edit ] Feminist technologies are ones that are formed from feminist social relations, but varied definitions and layers of feminism complicate the definition.  Deborah Johnson [ 13 ] proposes four candidates for feminist technologies: Technologies that are good for women Technologies that constitute gender-equitable social relations Technologies that favor women Technologies that constitute social relations that are more equitable than those that were constituted by a prior technology or than those that prevail in the wider society The successes of certain technologies, such as the pap smear for cervical cancer testing, relied on the feminization of technician jobs.

[ 6 ] The intervention of women outside the technological sphere, like from members of the women's health movement, and public health activists also aided in the tool's development.

[ 14 ] However, other feminist technologies, such as birth control serve as an example of a feminist technology also shaped in part by dominant masculinity.

Combined oral contraceptive pills were first approved for use in the United States in 1960, during the time of the women's liberation movement. The birth control pill helped make it possible for more women to enter the workforce by giving them the ability to control their own fertility.  Decades prior to this, activists such as Margaret Sanger and Katharine McCormick fought for female contraceptives, seeing it as a necessity for the emancipation of women.

[ 15 ] However, in the 1970s feminists raised critique on male control of the medical and pharmaceutical industry .  The male domination of these fields led technologies such as oral contraceptives to be developed around what men considered to be universal, defining characteristics of women (these being their sex and reproductive capabilities).

[ 16 ] Birth control pills themselves also succeeded in perpetrating and creating this universality – shaped by moral considerations of the natural body, the length of the menstrual cycle was able to be engineered.

[ 16 ] Feminist work in design including fields like industrial design , graphic design and fashion design parallels work on feminist technoscience and feminist technology. Isabel Prochner examines feminist design processes and the development of feminist artefacts and technology, stressing that the process should: Emphasize human life and flourishing over output and growth Follow best practices in labor, international production and trade Take place in an empowering workspace Involve non-hierarchical, interdisciplinary and collaborative work Address user needs at multiple levels, including support for pleasure, fun and happiness Create thoughtful products for female users Create good jobs through production, execution and sale of the design solution [ 17 ] Bioethics and capitalism [ edit ] The development of reproductive technologies blur the lines between nature and technology, allowing for the reconfiguration of life itself. Through the advances of genetic technologies, the controlling of pregnancy, childbirth, and motherhood has become increasingly possible through intrusive means.  These advances in biotechnology are serving to develop life as a commodity and deepen monetary inequality - a link made by feminist theorists such as Donna Haraway.

[ 18 ] Genetic engineering also brings about questions in eugenics, leading early radical feminist analysis to declare and attempt to reclaim motherhood as a foundation of female identity.

[ 6 ] : 79 The idea of a green, natural motherhood was popularized by ecofeminists who celebrated the identification of women with nature, and natural life.

[ 6 ] : 79 Haraway instead chooses to embrace technology as feminist instead of reverting to this idea of naturalized femininity. By embracing the image of the cyborg ,  an amalgamation that is neither human/animal nor machine, Haraway explores the ideas of technoscience and gender, conceptualizing a space where gender is an arbitrary, unnecessary construct.

[ 6 ] : 80 The corporatization of biology through the alteration of nature through technology is also a theme explored by Haraway. The OncoMouse is a laboratory mouse genetically modified to carry a specific gene which increases the creature's chance of developing cancer.  Until 2005, American conglomerate DuPoint owned the patent to the OncoMouse, reconfiguring and relegating life to a commodity.

[ 6 ] : 89 This development in genetic engineering brings up questions about lab animal treatment, as well as ethical questions around class and race. Increasing breast cancer rates in Black women are discussed in ecofeminist analysis of the modification of lab animals from breast cancer research to being the discussion into an ethically ambiguous space.  Haraway in particular raises the question of whether modifying and expending a live commodity like OncoMouse is ethical if it leads to the development of a cure for breast cancer.

[ 6 ] : 91 The reconfiguring of life in biotechnologies and genetic engineering allow for a precedence to be set, leading to capitalist cultural consequences.  Through these technologies technoscience becomes naturalized, and also becomes increasingly subject to the process of commodification and capital accumulation in transnational capitalist corporations.

[ 6 ] : 89 Similar to Marxist and Neo-Marxist analyses of sciences, biotechnologies allow for the concept of commodity to become fetishized as genes are reified to have a monetary value outside of use value .  This also positions life and nature as things to be exploited by capitalism.

[ 6 ] : 90 See also [ edit ] Cyberfeminism Digital rhetoric Annemarie Mol Donna Haraway Evelyn Fox Keller John Law Judy Wajcman Karen Barad Lucy Suchman Nina Lykke Sandra Harding TechnoFeminism Further reading [ edit ] Faulkner, Wendy (January 2001). "The technology question in feminism".

Women's Studies International Forum .

24 (1): 79– 95.

doi : 10.1016/S0277-5395(00)00166-7 .

Giordano, Sara (2017).

"Feminists increasing public understandings of science: a feminist approach to developing critical science literacy skills" .

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies .

38 (1): 100– 123.

doi : 10.5250/fronjwomestud.38.1.0100 .

JSTOR 10.5250/fronjwomestud.38.1.0100 .

S2CID 152248924 .

Xavier, Mínguez Alcaide (January 2015).

"Métodos de Diálogo con Grandes Grupos. Herramientas para afrontar la complejidad" .

Revista de Estudios Sociales (51): 186– 197.

doi : 10.7440/res51.2015.14 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Åsberg, Cecilia; Lykke, Nina (5 November 2010). "Feminist technoscience studies".

European Journal of Women's Studies .

17 (4): 299– 305.

doi : 10.1177/1350506810377692 .

S2CID 146433213 .

^ Law, John; Singleton, Vicky (2000). "Performing Technology's Stories: On Social Constructivism, Performance, and Performativity".

Technology and Culture .

41 (4): 765– 775.

doi : 10.1353/tech.2000.0167 .

S2CID 144203339 .

^ Wajcman, Judy (June 2007). "From Women and Technology to Gendered Technoscience".

Information, Communication & Society .

10 (3): 287– 298.

doi : 10.1080/13691180701409770 .

S2CID 144375460 .

^ Booth, Shirley (2010).

Gender Issues in Learning and Working with Technology: Social Contexts and Cultural Contexts . Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-61520-813-5 .

^ Ford, Heather; Wajcman, Judy (August 2017).

" 'Anyone can edit', not everyone does: Wikipedia's infrastructure and the gender gap" (PDF) .

Social Studies of Science .

47 (4): 511– 527.

doi : 10.1177/0306312717692172 .

PMID 28791929 .

S2CID 32835293 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-09-19 . Retrieved 2021-03-08 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Judy Wajcman, TechnoFeminism, 1st ed. (Cambridge: Polity, 2004).

ISBN 0745630448 ^ a b c d e f Weber, Jutta (2006).

From Science and Technology to Feminist Technoscience (PDF) . Davis K, Evans M, Lorber J. pp.

398– 399.

ISBN 9780761943907 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Wajcman, Judy. (2004).

TechnoFeminism . Cambridge: Polity. p. 18.

ISBN 074563043X .

OCLC 52799702 .

^ Wajcman, Judy (2004).

Technofeminism (Réimpr. 2005. ed.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 978-0-7456-3043-4 .

^ Butler, Judith (1988). "Performative Acts and Gender Constitution: An Essay in Phenomenology and Feminist Theory".

Theatre Journal .

40 (4): 519– 31.

doi : 10.2307/3207893 .

JSTOR 3207893 .

^ a b M'charek, Amade (November 2010).

"Fragile differences, relational effects: Stories about the materiality of race and sex" (PDF) .

European Journal of Women's Studies .

17 (4): 307– 322.

doi : 10.1177/1350506810377698 .

S2CID 204326672 .

^ Davis, Kathy, ed. (2006).

Handbook of gender and women's studies (1. publ. ed.). London [u.a.]: Sage.

ISBN 9780761943907 .

^ Johnson, Deborah G. (2010).

"Sorting out the question of feminist technology" (PDF) .

Feminist Technology : 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ Judy Wajcman, TechnoFeminism, 1st ed. (Cambridge: Polity, 2004), 48.

^ "People & Events: The Pill and the Women's Liberation Movement." PBS. Accessed December 04, 2016.

https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/americanexperience/features/pill-and-womens-liberation-movement/ .

^ a b Judy Wajcman, TechnoFeminism, 1st ed. (Cambridge: Polity, 2004), 50.

^ Prochner, Isabel (2020). "Starting a Feminist Design Think Tank".

Pivot 2020: Designing a World of Many Centers .

doi : 10.21606/pluriversal.2020.105 .

ISBN 9781912294428 .

S2CID 231473965 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Weber, Jutta (2006).

From Science and Technology to Feminist Technoscience (PDF) . Davis K, Evans M, Lorber J. p. 399.

ISBN 9780761943907 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) References [ edit ] Booth, Shirley (2010).

Gender Issues in Learning and Working with Technology: Social Contexts and Cultural Contexts . Hershey, PA: Information Science Reference. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-61520-813-5 .

Whelan, Emma (2001). "Politics by Other Means: Feminism and Mainstream Science Studies".

The Canadian Journal of Sociology .

26 (4): 535– 581.

doi : 10.2307/3341492 .

JSTOR 3341492 .

Wajcman, Judy (2004).

Technofeminism (Reprint ed.). Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity.

ISBN 978-0-7456-3043-4 .

Elovaara, Pirjo; Mörtberg, Christina (2010).

Travelling thoughtfulness: feminist technoscience stories . Umeå: Department of Informatics, Umeå University.

ISBN 978-91-7459-094-4 .

Weber, Jutta Davis, Kathy ; Evans, Mary; Lorber, Judith (2006).

From Science and Technology to Feminist Technoscience (PDF) . pp.

397– 414.

ISBN 9780761943907 .

In: Handbook of Gender and Women's Studies; Davis K, Evans M, Lorber J Åsberg, Cecilia; Lykke, Nina (5 November 2010). "Feminist technoscience studies".

European Journal of Women's Studies .

17 (4): 299– 305.

doi : 10.1177/1350506810377692 .

S2CID 146433213 .

Gill, Rosalind (March 2005). "Technofeminism".

Science as Culture .

14 (1): 97– 101.

doi : 10.1080/09505430500042130 .

S2CID 219715620 .

External links [ edit ] Feminist Epistemology and Philosophy of Science, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy van der Velden, Maja; Mörtberg, Christina (November 2012). "Between Need and Desire: Exploring Strategies for Gendering Design".

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

37 (6): 663– 683.

doi : 10.1177/0162243911401632 .

S2CID 146481731 .

Review of “Technofeminism” of Judy Wajcman, Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (Spanish) Norma (Nordic Journal for Masculinity Studies) International Journal of Feminist Technoscience Kvinder, Køn & Forskning Tidsskrift för genusvetenskap Tidsskrift for kjønnsforskning Centre for Gender and Women's Studies v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_technoscience&oldid=1305188412 " Categories : Feminism and society Science studies Epistemology of science Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 15:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist technoscience 3 languages Add topic

