Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 History and use 3 Voltages 4 Modern cold shoes and other devices 5 References Toggle the table of contents Hot shoe 10 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Polski Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mounting point on top of a camera to attach a flash unit For the horseshoeing technique, see Horseshoe § Process of shoeing .

Canon EOS 350D Hot shoe Proprietary hot shoe used by Minolta and older Sony cameras ( Konica Minolta Maxxum 7D ) Minolta SRT101 accessory shoe without electrical function (cold shoe) A hot shoe is a mounting point on the top of a camera to attach a flash unit and other compatible accessories. It takes the form of an angled metal bracket surrounding a metal contact point which completes an electrical connection between camera and accessory for standard, brand-independent flash synchronization .

The hot shoe is a development of the standardised " accessory shoe " or " cold shoe ", with no flash contacts, formerly fitted to cameras to hold accessories such as a rangefinder, or flash connected by a cable .

The dimensions of the hot shoe are defined by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) in ISO 518:2006. Details such as trigger voltage are not standardised; electrical incompatibilities are still possible between brands.

[ 1 ] Design [ edit ] The hot shoe is shaped somewhat like an inverted, squared-off "U" of metal. The matching adapter on the bottom of the flash unit slides in from the back of the camera and is sometimes secured by a clamping screw or sliding clamp on the flash. In the center of the "U" is a metal contact point. This is used for standard, brand-independent flash synchronization . Normally the metal of the shoe and the metal of the contact are electrically isolated from each other. To fire the flash, these two pieces are connected together. The flash unit sets up a circuit between shoe and contact—when it is completed by the camera, the flash fires.

In addition to the central contact point, many cameras have additional metal contacts within the "U" of the hot shoe. These are proprietary connectors that allow for more communication between the camera and a "dedicated flash".

[ citation needed ] A dedicated flash can communicate information about its power rating to the camera, set camera settings automatically, transmit color temperature data about the emitted light, and can be commanded to light a focus-assist light or fire a lower-powered pre-flash for focus-assist, metering assist or red-eye effect reduction.

[ citation needed ] The physical dimensions of the "standard hot shoe" are defined by the International Organization for Standardization ISO 518:2006.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The internal dimensions are 18.6 mm (+0.2-0) x 16.0 mm (+3-2) x 2 mm (+0.15-0), while the spacing between the two "teeth" of the shoe is 12.5 mm (+0.4-0).

[ 4 ] The external dimensions aren't standardized, but measured on a Nikon D3400 are 20.7 mm x 18 mm x 5.1 mm. Most hotshoes possess leaf springs under the "teeth".

History and use [ edit ] Before the 1970s, many cameras had an "accessory shoe" intended to hold accessories including flashes that connected electrically via a cable , external light meters , special viewfinders , or rangefinders . These earlier accessory shoes were of standard shape and had no electrical contacts; contacts were added to produce the hot shoe.

Canon , Nikon , Olympus , and Pentax use the standard ISO hot shoe with various proprietary electronic extensions.

In 1988 Minolta switched to use a 4-pin proprietary slide-on auto-lock "iISO" connector . A compatible 7-pin variant, which allows battery-less accessories to be powered by the camera's battery were also made, but not widely used.

Konica Minolta and Sony Alpha digital SLR cameras are based on Minolta designs and used the same connector, officially named Auto-lock Accessory Shoe , as well up to 2012. Since the electrical protocol remained mostly compatible, TTL and non-TTL adapters exist to adapt ISO-based flashes to iISO hotshoes and vice versa.

Sony also used a variety of other proprietary hotshoes for other digital cameras, including the ISO-based 6-pin Cyber-shot hotshoe, the 16-pin Active Interface Shoe (AIS) and the ISO-based 16-pin Intelligent Accessory Shoe (IAS). Some of their NEX cameras used a proprietary Smart Accessory Terminal (versions 1 and 2). In September 2012, Sony announced a new ISO-based 21+3 pin Multi Interface Shoe for use with their future digital cameras of the Alpha, NEX, Handycam , NXCAM and Cyber-shot series. This quick-lock hotshoe is mechanically and electrically compatible with a standard 2-pin ISO-518 hotshoe, but electrically compatible with the previous Auto-lock Accessory Shoe with extensions, so that passive adapters ADP-AMA and ADP-MAA allow the use of digital-ready iISO flashes on new cameras and some new Multi Interface Shoe equipment on older cameras, while providing compatibility with standard ISO-based equipment as well.

Canon uses a non-ISO-based 13+1 pin hot shoe, named Mini Advanced Shoe on some of its camcorders.

Voltages [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An internal camera circuit connects the center contact and shoe mount to trigger the flash. The magnitude and polarity of the voltage between the contacts on the flash in the open-circuit condition has varied between different flash units; this is of no consequence for a simple electromechanical contact on the camera so long as the energy is not so high as to damage the contacts. However, with more recent cameras with electronic triggering, excessive or insufficient voltage, or incorrect polarity can cause failure to fire, or damage the camera.

[ 5 ] The ISO 10330 specification allows for a trigger voltage of 24 volts. Some manufacturers, particularly Canon, ask for no more than 6 volts. Flash units designed for modern cameras use voltages which are safe and effective, but some older flashes have much higher voltages, up to hundreds of volts, which damage electronic triggering circuits.

[ 6 ] Some use negative DC polarity, or AC.

iISO hotshoe contacts are only protected up to ca. 5 volts in some cameras. Minolta documented all their cameras' electronically controlled PC terminals and ISO hot shoes to be protected up to 400 volts.

It is possible to connect an older high-voltage triggering flash to a camera which can only tolerate 5 or 6 volts through an adaptor containing the necessary voltage protection circuitry, typically using a high power TRIAC . Such adapters drain power from the flash's trigger voltage and therefore often do not need a power supply of their own.

In order to avoid dangerous loops when connecting equipment in complex studio setups, better adapters offer voltage protection and galvanic isolation of the units. Such adapters will ensure that there is no electrical connection of any kind between both sides of the adapter, including ground. They use either transformers or opto-couplers to transfer a safe trigger impulse from the camera to the flash. They are powered by batteries, as their electronics cannot be powered from the flash.
As an example, Minolta offered the PC terminal adapter PCT-100 ( 8825-691 ) for this purpose, which worked as a galvanic isolator and could withstand 400 volts DC or AC. The similar Sony flash sync terminal and ISO hotshoe adapters FA-ST1AM and FA-HS1AM also offer galvanic isolation as well, but only up to 60 volts DC or AC.

Flash servos and radio triggers, e.g.

PocketWizard , can also provide electrical isolation, as trigger and receiver unit are physically separate. The camera is only presented with the low voltage used by the local trigger unit, and the remote receiver unit is designed to tolerate up to 200 volts from its flash port.

[ 7 ] Slave flash, where the flash from a safe flash unit connected to the camera triggers an unconnected flashgun which, if connected, would present a dangerous voltage, is another way to use a flashgun which cannot be connected to a hot shoe; indeed, it can be used for a camera with built-in flash and no hot shoe.

The trigger voltages provided by some modern flashes or radio triggers can also be too low to reliably trigger electronic circuits in the camera or receiver. Trigger circuit voltages below ca. 2 to 2.5 volts may exhibit this problem, unless the triggering circuit is specifically designed to work with such low voltages.

Older cameras equipped with an electro-mechanical trigger contact may exhibit yet another problem. If they provide both an ISO hotshoe and a PC terminal, both are typically wired to the same trigger contact in the camera rather than triggered independently as in cameras with electronic triggering circuits. When only the PC terminal is used and nothing is connected to the hotshoe, a flash with high trigger circuit voltages connected to the PC terminal delivers this voltage on the normally unprotected middle contact of the camera's ISO hotshoe. If the photographer's eyebrows accidentally make contact with the middle contact, the electrical shock can cause pain or even injuries [ citation needed ] . One way camera manufacturers have used to avoid this problem was to use two independent trigger contacts, which, however, could cause flash synchronization problems. Another, as utilized by Minolta in all such cameras supporting a PC terminal, was to add a small switch on the side of the ISO hotshoe which disabled the middle contact until something was inserted into the hotshoe.

Modern cold shoes and other devices [ edit ] There is still a need for accessory shoes without electrical function ( cold shoes ). They are used with off-camera flash units, mounted on stands and connected to the camera by cable or triggered wirelessly.

[ 8 ] Accessories which do not connect electrically to the camera can be inserted into hot shoes, without using the contacts. For instance a stereo microphone or electronic viewfinder can be used in the Olympus XZ-1 camera's hot shoe.

[ 9 ] FotoSpot geotagging satellite positioning units utilize the accessory shoe for mounting to the camera.

References [ edit ] ^ "Photo Strobe Trigger Voltages" . Retrieved 5 June 2019 .

^ "ISO 518:2006 - Photography - Camera accessory shoes, with and without electrical contacts, for photoflash lamps and electronic photoflash units - Specification" . International Organization for Standardization. 12 May 2006 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ "ISO 518:2006 - Photography -- Camera accessory shoes, with and without electrical contacts, for photoflash lamps and electronic photoflash units" . International Organization for Standardization. 2006 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ "ISO518 - Photography — Camera accessory shoes, with and without electrical contacts, for photoflash lamps and electronic photoflash units — Specification" (PDF) .

iTeh Standards preview . 15 May 2006 . Retrieved 25 December 2024 .

^ "Strobist: Don't fry your camera" .

^ "List of strobes and voltages" .

^ "Pocket Wizard owner's manual for PW II Plus, p. 14" (PDF) .

^ "Strobist: Frio Cold Shoe: Locked and Loaded" .

^ "Olympus" . Archived from the original on 20 May 2015 . Retrieved 2 June 2015 .

v t e Photography Equipment Camera light-field digital field instant phone pinhole press rangefinder SLR still TLR toy view Darkroom enlarger safelight Film base format holder stock available films discontinued films Filter Flash beauty dish cucoloris gobo hot shoe lens hood monolight reflector snoot softbox Lens long-focus prime zoom wide-angle fisheye swivel telephoto Manufacturers Monopod Movie projector Slide projector Tripod head Zone plate Terminology 35 mm equivalent focal length Angle of view Aperture Backscatter Black-and-white Chromatic aberration Circle of confusion Clipping Color balance Color temperature Depth of field Depth of focus Exposure Exposure compensation Exposure value Zebra patterning F-number Film format large medium Film speed Focal length Guide number Hyperfocal distance Lens flare Metering mode Perspective distortion Photograph Photographic printing Albumen Photographic processes Reciprocity Red-eye effect Science of photography Shutter speed Sync Zone System Genres Abstract Aerial Aircraft Architectural Astrophotography Banquet Candid Conceptual Conservation Cloudscape Documentary Eclipse Ethnographic Erotic Fashion Fine-art Fire Forensic Glamour High-speed Landscape Monochrome Nature Neues Sehen Nude Photojournalism Pictorialism Pornography Portrait Post-mortem Ruins Selfie space selfie Social documentary Sports Still life Stock Straight photography Street Underwater Vernacular Wedding Wildlife Techniques Afocal Bokeh Brenizer Burst mode Contre-jour Crittercam ( Pigeon photography ) ETTR Fill flash Fireworks Hand-colouring Harris shutter High-speed Holography Infrared Intentional camera movement Kirlian Kite aerial Lo-fi photography Lomography Long-exposure Luminogram Macro Mordançage Multiple exposure Multi-exposure HDR capture Night Panning Panoramic Photogram Print toning Redscale Rephotography Rollout Scanography Schlieren photography Sabattier effect Slow motion Stereoscopy Stopping down Strip Slit-scan Sprocket hole Sun printing Tilt–shift Miniature faking Time-lapse Ultraviolet Vignetting Xerography Zoom burst Composition Diagonal method Framing Headroom Lead room Rule of thirds Simplicity Golden triangle (composition) History Timeline of photography technology Ambrotype Film photography Autochrome Lumière Box camera Calotype Camera obscura Daguerreotype Dufaycolor Heliography Lippmann plate Painted photography backdrops Photography and the law Glass plate Tintype Visual arts Regional Albania Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Greece India Japan Korea Luxembourg Norway Philippines Serbia Slovenia Sudan Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United States Uzbekistan Vietnam Digital photography Digital camera D-SLR comparison MILC camera back Digiscoping Comparison of digital and film photography Film scanner Image sensor CMOS APS CCD Three-CCD camera Foveon X3 sensor Image sharing Pixel Color photography Print film Chromogenic print Reversal film Color management color space primary color CMYK color model RGB color model Photographic processing Bleach bypass C-41 process Collodion process Cross processing Cyanotype Developer Digital image processing Dye coupler E-6 process Fixer Gelatin silver process Gum printing Instant film K-14 process Print permanence Push processing Stop bath Lists Largest photographs Most expensive photographs Museums devoted to one photographer Photographs considered the most important Photographers Norwegian Polish street women Photography periodicals Related Conservation and restoration of photographs film photographic plates Polaroid art Stereoscopy Say cheese Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hot_shoe&oldid=1305781099 " Category : Flash mounts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2016 Articles that may contain original research from November 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hot shoe 10 languages Add topic

