Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sociology 2 Principle of extensiveness 3 Groups and networks 4 Status groups 5 Values and norms 6 Power and authority 7 Spontaneous order 8 Social honor 9 Attainment 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Social order 22 languages Afrikaans العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Монгол 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set or system of linked social structures, institutions, relations, customs, values and practices This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Social order" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e The term social order can be used in two senses: In the first sense, it refers to a particular system of social structures and institutions . Examples are the ancient, the feudal, and the capitalist social order. In the second sense, social order is contrasted to social chaos or disorder and refers to a stable state of society in which the existing social structure is accepted and maintained by its members. The problem of order or Hobbesian problem , which is central to much of sociology , political science and political philosophy , is the question of how and why it is that social orders exist at all.

Sociology [ edit ] Thomas Hobbes is recognized as the first to clearly formulate the problem, to answer which he conceived the notion of a social contract .

Social theorists (such as Karl Marx , Émile Durkheim , Talcott Parsons , and Jürgen Habermas ) have proposed different explanations for what a social order consists of, and what its real basis is. For Marx, it is the relations of production or economic structure which is the basis of social order. For Durkheim, it is a set of shared social norms. For Parsons, it is a set of social institutions regulating the pattern of action-orientation, which again are based on a frame of cultural values. For Habermas, it is all of these, as well as communicative action.

Principle of extensiveness [ edit ] Another key factor concerning social order is the principle of extensiveness. This states the more norms and the more important the norms are to a society , the better these norms tie and hold together the group as a whole.

A good example of this is smaller religions based in the U.S., such as the Amish . Many Amish live together in communities and because they share the same religion and values, it is easier for them to succeed in upholding their religion and views because their way of life is the norm for their community.

[ 1 ] Groups and networks [ edit ] In every society, people belong to groups, such as businesses, families, churches, athletic groups, or neighborhoods. The structure inside of these groups mirrors that of the whole society. There are networks and ties between groups, as well as inside of each of the groups, which create social order.

Status groups [ edit ] " Status groups " can be based on a person's characteristics such as race , ethnicity , sexual orientation , religion , caste , region , occupation, physical attractiveness , gender , education , age, etc. They are defined as "a subculture having a rather specific rank (or status) within the stratification system. That is, societies tend to include a hierarchy of status groups, some enjoying high ranking and some low." [ 2 ] One example of this hierarchy is the prestige of a university professor compared to that of a garbage man .

A certain lifestyle usually distinguishes the members of different status groups. For example, around the holidays a Jewish family may celebrate Hanukkah while a Christian family may celebrate Christmas . Other cultural differences such as language and cultural rituals identify members of different status groups.

Smaller groups exist inside of one status group. For instance, one can belong to a status group based on one's race and a social class based on financial ranking. This may cause strife for the individual in this situation when they feel they must choose to side with either their status group or their social class. For example, a wealthy African American man who feels he has to take a side on an issue on which the opinions of poor African Americans and wealthy white Americans are divided and finds his class and status group opposed.

Values and norms [ edit ] Values can be defined as "internal criteria for evaluation". (Uses "evaluation" with its root-word "value" to define the word "value") Values are also split into two categories, there are individual values, which pertains to something that we think has worth and then there are social values. Social values are our desires modified according to ethical principles or according to the group, we associate with: friends, family, or co-workers.
Norms tell us what people ought to do in a given situation. Unlike values, norms are enforced externally – or outside of oneself. A society as a whole determines norms, and they can be passed down from generation to generation.

Power and authority [ edit ] An exception to the idea of values and norms as social order-keepers is deviant behavior . Not everyone in a society abides by a set of personal values or the group's norms all the time. For this reason, it is generally deemed necessary for a society to have authority. The adverse opinion holds that the need for authority stems from social inequality.

In a class society , those who hold positions of power and authority are among the upper class . Norms differ for each class because the members of each class were raised differently and hold different sets of values. Tension can form, therefore, between the upper class and lower class when laws and rules are put in place that do not conform to the values of both classes.

Spontaneous order [ edit ] The order does not necessarily need to be controlled by the government.  Individuals pursuing self-interest can make predictable systems.  These systems, being planned by more than one person, may actually be preferable to those planned by a single person.  This means that predictability may be possible to achieve without a central government's control.  These stable expectations do not necessarily lead to individuals behaving in ways that are considered beneficial to group welfare.  Considering this, Thomas Schelling studied neighborhood racial segregation. His findings suggest that interaction can produce predictability, but it does not always increase social order.  In his researching, he found that "when all individuals pursue their own preferences, the outcome is segregation rather than integration," as stated in "Theories of Social Order", edited by Michael Hechter and Christine Horne.

[ citation needed ] Social honor [ edit ] Social honor can also be referred to as social status. It is considered the distribution of prestige or "the approval, respect, admiration, or deference a person or group is able to command by virtue of his or its imputed qualities or performances". The case most often is that people associate social honor with the place a person occupies with material systems of wealth and power. Since most of the society finds wealth and power desirable, they respect or envy people that have more than they do. When social honor is referred to as social status, it deals with the rank of a person within the stratification system. Status can be achieved, which is when a person position is gained on the basis of merit or in other words by achievement and hard work or it can be ascribed, which is when a person position is assigned to individuals or groups without regard for merit but because of certain traits beyond their control, such as race, sex, or parental social standing. An example of ascribed status is Kate Middleton who married a prince. An example of achieved status is Oprah Winfrey, an African American woman from poverty who worked her way to being a billionaire.

[ 3 ] Attainment [ edit ] Two different theories exist that explain and attempt to account for social order. The first theory is "order results from a large number of independent decisions to transfer individual rights and liberties to a coercive state in return for its guarantee of security for persons and their property, as well as its establishment of mechanisms to resolve disputes," as stated in Theories of Social Order by Hechter and Horne. The next theory is that "the ultimate source of social order as residing not in external controls but in a concordance of specific values and norms that individuals somehow have managed to internalize." also stated in Theories of Social Order by Hechter and Horne. Both arguments for how social order is attained are very different. One argues that it is achieved through outside influence and control, and the other argues that it can only be attained when the individual willingly follows norms and values that they have grown accustomed to and internalized. Weber's insistence on the importance of domination and symbolic systems in social life was retained by Pierre Bourdieu , who developed the idea of social orders, ultimately transforming it into a theory of fields.

See also [ edit ] Society portal Conservatism portal Anti-social behaviour Antinomianism Conformity Norm (sociology) Organic crisis Social hierarchy References [ edit ] ^ Deji, Olanike F. (2011).

Gender and Rural Development: Introduction . LIT Verlag Münster.

ISBN 978-3643901033 – via Google Books.

^ Sociology: Tenth Edition by Rodney Stark, 114 ^ Joseph R. Gusfield (1986).

Symbolic crusade: status politics and the American temperance movement . University of Illinois Press. p. 14.

ISBN 978-0252013126 – via Google Books.

Further reading [ edit ] Hechter, M.; Horne, C. (2003).

Theories of Social Order. A Reader . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 9780804746113 .

Hobbes, T.

Leviathan or The Matter, Forme and Power of a Common Wealth Ecclesiasticall and Civil .

Stark, Rodney (2006).

Sociology (10th ed.). Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0495093442 .

Weber, Max (1968).

Economy and Society .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_order&oldid=1272257183 " Categories : Sociological terminology Structural functionalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 This page was last edited on 27 January 2025, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social order 22 languages Add topic

