Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Details 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Causal adequacy principle 4 languages فارسی Italiano Nederlands کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e The causal adequacy principle ( CAP ), or causal reality principle , is a philosophical claim made by René Descartes that  the cause of an object must contain at least as much reality as the object itself, whether formally or eminently.

Overview [ edit ] Descartes defends CAP by quoting Roman philosopher Lucretius :
"Ex nihilo nihil fit", meaning " Nothing comes from nothing ".—Lucretius [ 1 ] : 146–482 In his meditations, Descartes uses the CAP to support his trademark argument for the existence of God.

[ 2 ] : 430 Descartes' assertions were disputed by Thomas Hobbes in his "Third Set of Objections" published in 1641.

[ 3 ] : 379 René Descartes was not the founder of this philosophical claim.

[ 4 ] : 54–56 It is used in the classical metaphysics of Plato and Aristotle , and features eminently in the works of Thomas Aquinas .

Details [ edit ] A "cause" is that which brings something into effect.

If an item has the quality X formally, it has it in the literal or strict sense.

If an item has the quality X eminently, it has it in a higher or grander form.

To demonstrate this, a person can possess money formally by holding it on their person, or by storing it in a bank account. Similarly, a person can eminently possess money by owning assets that could readily be exchanged for it.

[ 5 ] : 155–156 Descartes offers two explanations of his own: [ 6 ] : 28 Heat cannot be produced in an object which was not previously hot, except by something of at least the same order of perfection as heat.

A stone, for example, which previously did not exist, cannot begin to exist unless it is produced by something which contains, either formally or eminently everything to be found in the stone.

Descartes goes on to claim that the CAP not only applies to stones, but also the realm of ideas, and the features that are seen as part of the objective reality of an idea.

[ 7 ] : 33–35 References [ edit ] ^ Carus, T. L., De Rerum Natura (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1947), pp. 146–482.

^ Miles, M. L., Inroads: Paths in Ancient and Modern Western Philosophy ( Toronto : University of Toronto Press , 2003), p. 430 .

^ Craig, E.

, ed., The Shorter Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge , 2005), p. 379 .

^ Campbell, M., Time and Narrative in Descartes’s Meditations, dissertation under the tutelage of profs. P. Magee and A. Dickerson, University of Canberra , January 2018, pp. 54–56 Archived 2019-12-21 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Feser, E.

, Scholastic Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction ( Neunkirchen-Seelscheid : Editiones Scholasticae, 2014), pp. 155–156 .

^ Cottingham, J.

, Stoothoff, R., & Murdoch, D., trans., The Philosophical Writings of Descartes ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press , 1984), p. 28 .

^ Jolley, N., Causality and Mind: Essays on Early Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 33–35 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dicker, G.

, Descartes: An Analytical and Historical Introduction ( Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2013), pp. 118ff .

Jolley, N., Causality and Mind: Essays on Early Modern Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Causal_adequacy_principle&oldid=1222467360 " Categories : Metaphysical principles René Descartes Hidden category: Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 6 May 2024, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Causal adequacy principle 4 languages Add topic

