Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Recruitment and training 3 Life at work 4 Bombing and aftermath 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Calutron Girls 2 languages Español Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Women working on the Manhattan Project Calutron Girls photographed by Ed Westcott at their calutron control panels at Y-12 The Calutron Girls were a group of young women—mostly high school graduates—who had joined the Manhattan Project at the Y-12 National Security Complex located at Oak Ridge, Tennessee , from 1943 to 1945. Although they were not allowed to know at the time, they were monitoring dials and watching meters for calutrons , mass spectrometers adapted for separation of uranium isotopes for the development of nuclear weapons for use during World War II . The enriched uranium was used to make the " Little Boy " atomic bomb for the Hiroshima nuclear bombing on August 6, 1945.

Background [ edit ] Main articles: Manhattan Project and Calutron During World War II , the United States established the Manhattan Project to develop nuclear weapons . This required uranium-235 (U 235 ), the fissionable isotope of uranium. However, the vast majority of uranium mined from the ground is uranium-238 , while only 0.7% is U 235 . Scientists developed several processes for separating the isotopes of uranium, including electromagnetic separation and gaseous diffusion.

[ 1 ] The Y-12 factory was built in Oak Ridge, Tennessee , to house 1,152 calutrons , a machine used for isotope separation.

[ 2 ] The word "calutron" is a portmanteau of California University Cyclotron .

[ 2 ] Calutrons, a variation on mass spectrometers , work by combining uranium with chlorine to make uranium tetrachloride , which is then ionized and put in a vacuum chamber with a magnetic field . When the charged particles move through the magnetic field, they move in a curve, the radius of which is proportional to the mass of the particles. The two isotopes differ in mass by about 1% and can thus be separated.

[ 1 ] The operation was relatively simple, but it required people to constantly monitor the calutrons.

[ 2 ] Due to a labor shortage, there were not enough scientists to operate all of them, and many young men were fighting in the war overseas, so the government recruited farm girls to operate the calutrons instead.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Local women were recruited because they were readily available, accustomed to hard work and were expected not to ask excessive questions and to be loyal and docile.

[ 4 ] Recruitment and training [ edit ] The Tennessee Eastman Company , which ran the Y-12 site, recruited around 10,000 local women between 1943 and 1945 to operate the calutrons. They proposed to train operators with only a high school education, and they used a large local advertising campaign to recruit workers. One ad read, "When you're a grandmother you'll brag about working at Tennessee Eastman".

[ 4 ] Several workers heard about the jobs from friends.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Reasons for applying included needing the money, having few other employment opportunities, youthful wanderlust, and wanting to help the war effort.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 6 ] [ 9 ] Training lasted three weeks.

[ 4 ] Life at work [ edit ] A billboard at Oak Ridge encouraging secrecy among workers A calutron operator Secrecy and confidentiality were a strict requirement of their employment.

[ 10 ] According to Gladys Owens, who was one of the Calutron Girls, a manager at the facility once told them: "We can train you how to do what is needed, but cannot tell you what you are doing. I can only tell you that if our enemies beat us to it, God have mercy on us!" [ 11 ] Testimonies said women who talked about what they were doing disappeared .

[ 8 ] One young woman who disappeared was said to have "died from drinking some poison moonshine".

[ 11 ] If they were too nosy about what they were working on, they were replaced.

[ 3 ] Cars going in and out were searched, and letters were opened and read.

[ 6 ] The workers sat on high stools for 8-hour shifts, seven days per week, monitoring gauges and adjusting knobs to keep the needles where they were supposed to be and recording readings.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The knobs were labeled with cryptic letters. The women did not know what the letters stood for, but they learned rules such as "if you got your M voltage up and your G voltage up, then Product would hit the birdcage in the E box at the top of the unit and if that happened, you'd get the Q and R you wanted".

[ 12 ] They had to make sure the machine remained at the correct temperature; if it got too hot, they used liquid nitrogen to cool it down.

[ 6 ] If the needles reached a point where they could not control them, they had to call someone else to come help.

[ 2 ] Former Calutron Girl Wynona Arrington Butner said, "We all wore little fountain-pen-sized dosimeters . Part of signing out of the plant was to check the amount of radiation that you had absorbed every day." [ 6 ] Civilian workers paid $2.50 per month (single)  or $5.00 per month (family) for medical insurance.

[ 13 ] Another calutron installation at a University of California at Berkeley laboratory was led by physicist Ernest O. Lawrence and operated by trained professional physicists. As the Y-12 calutron facility at Oak Ridge became operational, Lawrence desired that it be also run by physicists. Because of the labor shortage during WWII, the staffing went to farm girls instead.

[ 3 ] As each new unit was completed by Stone & Webster , Lawrence and a team of Berkeley scientists operated it to eliminate any bugs, then transferred it to Tennessee Eastman; this gave the scientists first-hand knowledge regarding any needed improvements.

Kenneth Nichols compared production data for units and pointed out to Lawrence that the young ” hillbilly ” girl operators were outproducing his scientists. Lawrence claimed that his men were experimenting with ways to improve operations. But when he agreed to a weeklong “production  race,” he lost.

[ 4 ] Nichols wrote that “the girls won because they were trained like soldiers “to do or not to do – not to reason why”.

[ 3 ] But the scientists could not refrain from time-consuming investigations of even minor fluctuations of the dials. This little contest provided a big boost in morale for the Tennessee Eastman workers and supervisors.

[ 14 ] Some Calutron Girls had more of a sense of what they were working on than others. Butner, who had some training in chemistry, said she and others with a similar background had some sense of what they were doing. They knew they were producing "the Product", and they guessed it was somewhere near the bottom of the periodic table.

[ 6 ] Willie Baker, on the other hand, said, "Even when somebody let it slip that we were building a bomb, I didn’t know what they meant. I was just a country girl. I had no understanding of what an atomic bomb was." [ 4 ] Bombing and aftermath [ edit ] Over two years, the calutrons at Y-12 had produced about 140 lb (64 kg) of U 235 . This was enough to make the first atomic bomb (enough uranium for a second Little Boy would have been available by December 1945).

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] On August 6, 1945, when the US dropped the first bomb , "Little Boy," on Hiroshima, Japan, the Calutron Girls were finally told what they had been working on.

[ 5 ] Some women were working and others were in their dorm rooms when someone came and told them that an atomic bomb had been dropped on Japan, and everyone there had played a part in making it.

[ 17 ] [ 5 ] Several Calutron Girls had mixed feelings about their part in the bomb. Ruth Huddleston said she was really happy at the time, because her boyfriend was stationed in Germany, and this would bring him back. It bothered her that she had a part in killing so many people, but she accepted that "if the bomb hadn’t been dropped, then probably more people would have been killed. ... But even today, if I think too much about it, it bothers me." [ 16 ] Butner had a similar experience: at the time, she was happy that the war was over and people she knew in the service could come home, but over time, she began to question whether it was the right thing to do.

[ 6 ] As of 2020, only a few elderly Calutron Girls remained. Some, such as Huddleston, regularly shared their stories with the public, often alongside Oak Ridge historian Ray Smith.

[ 2 ] The women are the subject of the nonfiction book The Girls of Atomic City by Denise Kiernan and the novel The Atomic City Girls by Janet Beard.

[ 3 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Clinton Engineer Works Rosie the Riveter Women in World War II References [ edit ] ^ a b Nickell, Duane S. (2010).

Guidebook for the Scientific Traveler: Visiting Physics and Chemistry Sites Across America .

Rutgers University Press . pp.

141– 142.

ISBN 978-0-8135-4730-5 .

^ a b c d e f Henderson, Nancy (April 30, 2020).

"Girl Power, Circa 1940: Building The Bomb (and Not Knowing It) in East Tennessee" .

blueridgecountry.com . LeisureMedia360 . Retrieved September 9, 2021 .

^ a b c d e Huxen, Keith (March 25, 2020).

"A Book Review of The Girls of Atomic City by Denise Kiernan" .

nationalww2museum.org . National World War II Museum . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ a b c d e Freeman, Lindsey A. (April 13, 2015).

Longing for the Bomb: Oak Ridge and Atomic Nostalgia .

University of North Carolina Press . pp.

71– 73.

ISBN 978-1-4696-2238-5 .

^ a b c d Lee, Tena (July 24, 2021).

"County honors 96-year-old 'Calutron Girl' " .

Hendersonville Standard . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h Smith, Ray (August 17, 2016).

"Wynona Arrington Butner – Calutron Girl" .

Oak Ridger . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ Inman, Katie (January 12, 2022).

"A Century of Stories: Oak Ridge calutron girl turning 100 years old" .

WBIR . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ a b "Calutron Girls" .

Tennessee Encyclopedia . Tennessee Historical Society. August 23, 2021 [October 29, 2019] . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ " "What's going on over there?" -- The Manhattan Project in Oak Ridge, Tennessee" .

YouTube . September 25, 2015.

^ "Who Were the Calutron Girls of Oak Ridge?" .

exploreoakridge.com . Oak Ridge CVB. September 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 7, 2021 .

^ a b Smith, Ray.

"The Calutron Girls" .

smithdray1.net . Ray Smith . Retrieved August 22, 2021 .

^ Kiernan, Denise (2013).

The Girls of Atomic City: The Untold Story of the Women who Helped Win World War II . New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. p. 115.

ISBN 9781451617542 .

^ Nichols 1987 , p. 124.

^ Nichols 1987 , p. 131.

^ Nichols 1987 , p. 175.

^ a b Smith, Ray (June 15, 2020).

"Atomic bombs dropped 75 years ago: A 'Calutron Girl' remembers" .

Oak Ridger . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ "Short Circuit: Ruth's Story" .

Energy.gov . June 5, 2017 . Retrieved February 19, 2022 .

^ Lida, Gretchen (January 12, 2018).

"The Atomic City Girls: A Novel" .

Washington Independent Review of Books . Retrieved February 21, 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Calutron .

Kiernan, Denise (March 11, 2014).

The Girls of Atomic City: The Untold Story of the Women Who Helped Win World War II .

Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4516-1753-5 .

Nichols, Kenneth (1987).

The Road to Trinity: A Personal Account of How America's Nuclear Policies Were Made . New York: William Morrow and Company.

ISBN 0-688-06910-X .

Smith, Ray (February 9, 2013).

2006 Historically Speaking: As published in the Oak Ridger Newspaper . Lulu.com. pp. 133–.

ISBN 978-1-257-23331-1 .

[ permanent dead link ] "Gladys Evans' Interview" .

Voices of the Manhattan Project . September 21, 2005.

"Ruth Huddleston's Interview" .

Voices of the Manhattan Project . April 25, 2018.

v t e Manhattan Project Timeline Sites Ames Berkeley Chicago ( Site A ) Dayton Hanford Inyokern Los Alamos Montreal New York Oak Ridge Salt Wells Pilot Plant Trinity Wendover Heavy water sites Administrators Vannevar Bush Arthur Compton James B. Conant Priscilla Duffield Thomas Farrell Leslie Groves John Lansdale Ernest Lawrence James Marshall Franklin Matthias Dorothy McKibbin Kenneth Nichols Robert Oppenheimer Deak Parsons Boris Pash William Purnell Frank Spedding Charles Thomas Paul Tibbets Bud Uanna Harold Urey Stafford Warren Ed Westcott Roscoe Wilson Scientists Luis Alvarez Robert Bacher Hans Bethe Aage Bohr Niels Bohr Norris Bradbury James Chadwick John Cockcroft Charles Critchfield Harry Daghlian John R. Dunning Enrico Fermi Richard Feynman Val Fitch James Franck Klaus Fuchs Maria Goeppert Mayer George Kistiakowsky George Koval Willard Libby Edwin McMillan Mark Oliphant George B. Pegram Norman Ramsey Jr.

Isidor Isaac Rabi James Rainwater Bruno Rossi Glenn Seaborg Emilio Segrè Louis Slotin Henry DeWolf Smyth Leo Szilard Edward Teller Stanisław Ulam John von Neumann John Wheeler Eugene Wigner Robert Wilson Leona Woods Chien-Shiung Wu Operations Alsos Mission Bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Operation Crossroads Operation Peppermint Project Alberta Silverplate 509th Composite Group Enola Gay Bockscar The Great Artiste Weapons Fat Man Little Boy Pumpkin bomb Thin Man Related topics African Americans Atomic Energy Act of 1946 Bismuth phosphate process B Reactor British contribution Calutron Girls Chicago Pile-1 Chicago Pile-3 Demon core Einstein–Szilard letter Feed materials Franck Report Interim Committee K-25 Project Los Alamos Primer Nobel Prize laureates Oppenheimer security hearing Plutonium Quebec Agreement RaLa Experiment S-1 Executive Committee S-50 Project Smyth Report Uranium X-10 Graphite Reactor Y-12 Project Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Calutron_Girls&oldid=1299511442 " Categories : Isotope separation Oak Ridge, Tennessee Women in Tennessee Women's organizations based in the United States Women on the Manhattan Project American women civilians in World War II American military personnel of World War II Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2022 Good articles Commons category link is locally defined All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 21:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Calutron Girls 2 languages Add topic

