Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nature of origin myths 2 Social function 3 Founding myth 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Origin myth 35 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Български Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of myth This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An origin myth is a type of myth that explains the beginnings of a natural or social aspect of the world.

Creation myths are a type of origin myth narrating the formation of the universe. However, numerous cultures have stories that take place after the initial origin. These stories aim to explain the origins of natural phenomena or human institutions within an already existing world. In Greco-Roman scholarship, the terms founding myth or etiological myth (from Ancient Greek : αἴτιον aition 'cause') are occasionally used to describe a myth that clarifies an origin, particularly how an object or custom came into existence.

In modern political discourse the terms "founding myth",  "foundational myth", etc. are often used as critical references to official or widely accepted narratives about the origins (or early history) of a nation, a society, or a culture.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Nature of origin myths [ edit ] Origin myths are narratives that explain how a particular reality came into existence.

[ 3 ] They often serve to justify the established order by attributing its establishment to sacred forces [ 3 ] (see § Social function ). The line between cosmogonic myths which describe the origin of the world and origin myths is not always clear. A myth about the origin of a specific part of the world assumes the existence of the world itself, which often relies on a cosmogonic myth.

[ 3 ] Therefore, origin myths can be seen as expanding upon and building upon their cultures' cosmogonic myths. In traditional cultures, it is common for the recitation of an origin myth to be preceded by the recitation of a cosmogonic myth.

[ 4 ] Within academic circles, the term myth is often used specifically to refer to origin and cosmogonic myths. Folklorists, for example, reserve the term myth for stories that describe creation. Stories that do not primarily focus on origins are categorized as legend or folk tale , which are distinct from myths according to folklorists.

[ 5 ] Mircea Eliade , a historian, argues that in many traditional cultures, almost every sacred story can be considered an origin myth. Traditional societies often pattern their behavior after sacred events and view their lives as a cyclical return to a mythical age. As a result, nearly every sacred story portrays events that establish a new framework for human behavior, making them essentially stories of creation.

[ 6 ] Social function [ edit ] See also: Myth and ritual and Eternal return (Eliade) This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Origin myth" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) An origin myth often functions to justify the current state of affairs. In traditional cultures, the entities and forces described in origin myths are often considered sacred. Thus, by attributing the state of the universe to the actions of these entities and forces, origin myths give the current order an aura of sacredness: "[M]yths reveal that the World, man, and life have a supernatural origin and history, and that this history is significant, precious, and exemplary".

[ 7 ] Many cultures instill the expectation that people take mythical gods and heroes as their role models , imitating their deeds and upholding the customs they established: When the missionary and ethnologist C. Strehlow asked the Australian Arunta why they performed certain ceremonies, the answer was always: "Because the ancestors so commanded it." The Kai of New Guinea refused to change their way of living and working, and they explained: "It was thus that the Nemu (the Mythical Ancestors) did, and we do likewise." Asked the reason for a particular detail in a ceremony, a Navaho chanter answered: "Because the Holy People did it that way in the first place." We find exactly the same justification in the prayer that accompanies a primitive Tibetan ritual: "As it has been handed down from the beginning of the earth’s creation, so must we sacrifice. … As our ancestors in ancient times did—so do we now." [ 8 ] Founding myths unite people and tend to include mystical events along the way to make "founders" seem more desirable and heroic. Ruling monarchs or aristocracies may allege descent from mythical founders, gods or heroes in order to legitimize their control. For example, Julius Caesar and his relatives claimed Aeneas (and through Aeneas, the goddess Venus ) as an ancestor.

Founding myth [ edit ] The Dispute of Minerva and Neptune ( c.

1689 or 1706) by René-Antoine Houasse , depicting the founding myth of Athens A founding myth or etiological myth (Greek aition ) explains either: the origins of a ritual or the founding of a city the ethnogenesis of a group presented as a genealogy [ 9 ] with a founding father , and thus the origin of a nation ( natio 'birth') the spiritual origins of a belief, philosophy, discipline, or idea – presented as a narrative Beginning in prehistorical times, many civilizations and kingdoms adopted some version of a heroic model national origin myth, including the Hittites and Zhou dynasty in the Bronze Age; the Scythians , Wusun , Romans and Goguryeo in antiquity ; Turks and Mongols during the Middle Ages; and the Dzungar Khanate in the early modern period .

[ 10 ] In the founding myth of the Zhou dynasty in China, Lady Yuan makes a ritual sacrifice to conceive, then becomes pregnant after stepping into the footprint of the King of Heaven. She gives birth to a son, Hou Ji , whom she leaves alone in dangerous places where he is protected by sheep, cattle, birds, and woodcutters. Convinced that he is a supernatural being, she takes him back and raises him. When he grows to adulthood, he takes the position of Master of Horses in the court of Emperor Yao , and becomes successful at growing grains, gourds and beans. According to the legend, he becomes founder of the Zhou dynasty after overthrowing the evil ruler of Shang.

[ 11 ] Like other civilizations, the Scythians also claimed descent from the son of the god of heaven. One day, the daughter of the god of the Dnieper River stole a young man's horses while he was herding his cattle , and forced him to lie with her before returning them. From this union, she conceived three sons, giving them their father's greatbow when they came of age. The son who could draw the bow would become king. All tried, but only the youngest was successful. On his attempt, three golden objects fell from the sky: a plow and yoke, a sword, and a cup. When the eldest two tried to pick them up, fire prevented them. After this, it was decided the youngest son, Scythes, would become king, and his people would be known as Scythians.

[ 11 ] The Torah (or Pentateuch, as biblical scholars sometimes call it) is the collective name for the first five books of the Bible: Genesis , Exodus , Leviticus , Numbers , and Deuteronomy . It forms the charter myth of Israel, the story of the people's origins and the foundations of their culture and institutions, and it is a fundamental principle of Judaism that the relationship between God and his chosen people was set out on Mount Sinai through the Torah.

A founding myth may serve as the primary exemplum , as the myth of Ixion was the original Greek example of a murderer rendered unclean by his crime, who needed cleansing ( catharsis ) of his impurity.

Founding myths feature prominently in Greek mythology . "Ancient Greek rituals were bound to prominent local groups and hence to specific localities", Walter Burkert has observed, [ 12 ] "i.e., the sanctuaries and altars that had been set up for all time". Thus Greek and Hebrew founding myths established the special relationship between a deity and local people, who traced their origins from a hero and authenticated their ancestral rights through the founding myth. Greek founding myths often embody a justification for the ancient overturning of an older, archaic order, reformulating a historical event anchored in the social and natural world to valorize current community practices, creating symbolic narratives of "collective importance" [ 13 ] enriched with metaphor to account for traditional chronologies, and constructing an etiology considered to be plausible among those with a cultural investment.

[ 14 ] In the Greek view, the mythic past had deep roots in historic time, its legends treated as facts, as Carlo Brillante has noted, [ 15 ] its heroic protagonists seen as links between the "age of origins" and the mortal, everyday world that succeeded it. A modern translator of Apollonius of Rhodes ' Argonautica has noted, of the many aitia embedded as digressions in that Hellenistic epic, that "crucial to social stability had to be the function of myths in providing explanations, authorization or empowerment for the present in terms of origins: this could apply, not only to foundations or charter myths and genealogical trees (thus supporting family or territorial claims) but also to personal moral choices." [ 16 ] In the period after Alexander the Great expanded the Hellenistic world, Greek poetry— Callimachus wrote a whole work simply titled Aitia —is replete with founding myths. Simon Goldhill employs the metaphor of sedimentation in describing Apollonius' laying down of layers "where each object, cult, ritual, name, may be opened... into a narrative of origination, and where each narrative, each event, may lead to a cult, ritual, name, monument." [ 17 ] A notable example is the myth of the foundation of Rome—the tale of Romulus and Remus , which Virgil in turn broadens in his Aeneid with the odyssey of Aeneas and his razing of Lavinium , and his son Iulus 's later relocation and rule of the famous twins' birthplace Alba Longa , and their descent from his royal line, thus fitting perfectly into the already established canon of events. Similarly, the Old Testament's story of the Exodus serves as the founding myth for the community of Israel, telling how God delivered the Israelites from slavery and how they therefore belonged to him through the Covenant of Mount Sinai .

[ 18 ] During the Middle Ages, founding myths of the medieval communes of northern Italy manifested the increasing self-confidence of the urban population and the will to find a Roman origin, however tenuous and legendary. In 13th-century Padua , when each commune looked for a Roman founder – and if one was not available, invented one—a legend had been current in the city, attributing its foundation to the Trojan Antenor .

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Creation myth – Symbolic narrative of how the world began Dindsenchas – Class of onomastic text in early Irish literature Etiology – Study of causation, or origination Just-so story – Unverifiable narrative explanation List of national founders – List of people credited with creating the state Mythomoteur – Constitutive myth of an ethnic group National myth – Inspiring narrative about a nation's past Origin story – Plot device Pourquoi story – Narrative that explains why something is the way it is, generally fabulous or mythical References [ edit ] ^ Anthony D. Smith , Myths and Memories of the Nation ^ Heike Paul [ de ] , The Myths That Made America: An Introduction to American Studies , 2014 ^ a b c Eliade 1963, p. 21 ^ Eliade 1963, pp. 21–24 ^ Segal, p. 5 ^ For example Eliade 1963, pp. 17–19 ^ Eliade 1963, p. 19 ^ Eliade 1963, pp. 6–7 ^ Herwig Wolfram , The History of the Goths , Thomas J. Dunlap, tr., especially "Gothic history as historical ethnography", 1988:1–18.

^ Beckwith 2009 , p. 2.

^ a b Beckwith 2009 , p. 3.

^ Burkert, Homo Necans (1972) 1983:83.

^ Myth as "narratives of collective importance" is often part of the definition of myth, both Greek and other; see Walter Burkert , Structure and history in Greek mythology and ritual , 1982:23; Jan N. Bremmer, Interpretations of Greek mythology , "What is a Greek myth?" 1987:1; Mark P. O. Morford and Robert J. Lenardon, Classical Mythology 1999:12.

^ These structures of Greek foundation myths within their historical and cultural contexts, and the particular example of the founding of Cyrene , are analysed, in terms first laid out by Georges Dumézil , by Claude Calame , Myth and History in Ancient Greece: the symbolic creation of a colony rev. tr. of Mythe et histoire dans l'antiquité grecque , 2003.

^ Brillante, "Myth and history: the historical interpretation of myth" in L. Edmunds, Approaches to Greek Myth (1991, pp. 91–140.

^ Peter Green, Introduction to Argonautika , expanded ed. 2007, p. 15.

^ Goldhill, "The paradigms of epic: Apollonius Rhodius and the examples of the past", in The Poet's Voice: Essays on Poetics and Greek Literature (1991), ch. 5, pp. 284–333, noted in Peter Green 2007, note on Argonautica I.1070–1077, p. 226.

^ Kenton L. Sparkes, Genre Criticism , in Thomas Dozeman (ed), "Methods for Exodus", CUP, 2010, p. 73.

^ Roberto Weiss , The Renaissance Discovery of Classical Antiquity (Oxford: Blackwell) 1973:18.

Sources [ edit ] Beckwith, Christopher I. (2009).

Empires of the Silk Road:A History of Central Eurasia from the Bronze Age to the Present . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691135892 .

Eliade, Mircea.

Myth and Reality . Trans. Willard Trask. New York: Harper & Row, 1963.

Further reading [ edit ] Belayche, Nicole. "Foundation myths in Roman Palestine. Traditions and reworking", in Ton Derks, Nico Roymans (ed.), Ethnic Constructs in Antiquity: The Role of Power and Tradition (Amsterdam, Amsterdam University Press, 2009) (Amsterdam Archaeological Studies, 13), 167–188.

Campbell, Joseph .

The Masks of God: Primitive Mythology . New York: Penguin Books, 1976.

Campbell, Joseph.

Transformations of Myth through Time . New York: Harper and Row, 1990.

Darshan, Guy.

The Origins of the Foundation Stories Genre in the Hebrew Bible and Ancient Eastern Mediterranean , JBL , 133,4 (2014), 689–709.

Darshan, Guy.

Stories of Origins in the Bible and Ancient Mediterranean Literature . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2023.

Eliade, Mircea .

A History of Religious Ideas: Volume 1: From the Stone Age to the Eleusinian Mysteries . 1976. Trans. Willard R. Trask. Chicago: The U of Chicago P, 1981.

Encyclopedia of Ancient Myths and Culture . London: Quantum, 2004.

Lincoln, Bruce .

Discourse and the Construction of Society: Comparative Studies of Myth, Ritual, and Classification . 1989. Repr. New York: Oxford U P, 1992.

Long, Charles H.

Alpha: The Myths of Creation . New York: George Braziller, 1963.

Paden, William E.

Interpreting the Sacred: Ways of Viewing Religion . 1992. Boston: Beacon P, 2003.

Ricoeur, Paul . "Introduction: The Symbolic Function of Myths.” Theories of Myth: From Ancient Israel and Greece to Freud, Jung, Campbell, and Levi-Strauss . Ed. Robert A. Segal. New York & London: Garland, 1996. 327–340.

Schilbrack, Kevin. Ed.

Thinking Through Myths: Philosophical Perspectives . London & New York: Routledge, 2002.

Segal, Robert A.

Joseph Campbell: An Introduction . 1987. Repr. New York: Penguin 1997.

Segal, Robert A.

Myth: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004.

Segal, Robert A.

Theories of Myth: From Ancient Israel and Greece to Freud, Jung, Campbell, and Levi-Strauss: Philosophy, Religious Studies, and Myth . Vol. 3. New York & London: Garland, 1996.

Segal, Robert A.

Theorizing about Myth . Amherst: U of Massachusetts P, 1999.

Spence, Lewis .

The Outlines of Mythology: The Thinker’s Library—No. 99 . 1944. Whitefish, MT: Kessinger, 2007.

von Franz, Marie-Louise .

Creation Myths: Revised Edition . Boston: Shambhala, 1995.

Wright, M.R. “Models, Myths, and Metaphors.” Cosmology in Antiquity . 1995.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Myth of origins at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qjrxs
Cached time: 20250814220537
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.552 seconds
Real time usage: 0.735 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2661/1000000
Revision size: 17596/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44506/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1465/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25545/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.360/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15787862/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  638.228      1 -total
 17.17%  109.601      1 Template:Langx
 13.95%   89.019      1 Template:Cite_book
 12.04%   76.826      1 Template:Ethnicity
 11.72%   74.771      1 Template:Navbox
 11.46%   73.122      9 Template:Annotated_link
 10.71%   68.380      1 Template:Short_description
  9.12%   58.209      2 Template:Ambox
  7.39%   47.166      1 Template:Original_research
  6.07%   38.742      1 Template:See_also Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12797709:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220537 and revision id 1302185503. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Origin_myth&oldid=1302185503 " Categories : Origin myths Cultural anthropology Literary concepts History of religion Cosmogony Hidden categories: Articles containing French-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from November 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 22:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Origin myth 35 languages Add topic

