Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Analog modulation methods 2 Digital modulation methods Toggle Digital modulation methods subsection 2.1 Fundamental digital modulation methods 2.2 Modulator and detector principles of operation 2.3 List of common digital modulation techniques 2.4 Automatic digital modulation recognition (ADMR) 2.5 Digital baseband modulation 3 Pulse modulation methods 4 Miscellaneous modulation techniques 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Signal modulation 61 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Modulation ) Process of varying one or more properties of a periodic waveform This article is about the electronic method to imprint data on a transmitted carrier wave. For other uses of 'Modulation', see Modulation (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Signal modulation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Passband modulation Analog modulation AM SM SSB Angle modulation FM PM QAM Digital modulation ASK APSK CPM FSK MFSK MSK OOK PPM PSK QAM SC-FDE TCM TC-PAM WDM Hierarchical modulation QAM WDM Spread spectrum CSS DSSS FHSS THSS See also Capacity-approaching codes Demodulation Line coding Modem AnM PoM PAM PCM PDM PWM ΔΣM OFDM FDM Multiplexing v t e Categorization for signal modulation based on data and carrier types Signal modulation is the process of varying one or more properties of a periodic waveform in electronics and telecommunication for the purpose of transmitting information.

The process encodes information in form of the modulation or message signal onto a carrier signal to be transmitted.

[ 1 ] For example, the message signal might be an audio signal representing sound from a microphone , a video signal representing moving images from a video camera , or a digital signal representing a sequence of binary digits, a bitstream from a computer.

This carrier wave usually has a much higher frequency than the message signal does. This is because it is impractical to transmit signals with low frequencies. Generally, receiving a radio wave requires a radio antenna with a length that is one-fourth of the wavelength of the transmitted wave.

[ 2 ] For low frequency radio waves, wavelength is on the scale of kilometers and building such a large antenna is not practical.

Another purpose of modulation is to transmit multiple channels of information through a single communication medium , using frequency-division multiplexing (FDM). For example, in cable television (which uses FDM), many carrier signals, each modulated with a different television channel , are transported through a single cable to customers. Since each carrier occupies a different frequency, the channels do not interfere with each other. At the destination end, the carrier signal is demodulated to extract the information bearing modulation signal.

A modulator is a device or circuit that performs modulation. A demodulator (sometimes detector ) is a circuit that performs demodulation , the inverse of modulation. A modem (from mod ulator– dem odulator), used in bidirectional communication, can perform both operations. The lower frequency band occupied by the modulation signal is called the baseband , while the higher frequency band occupied by the modulated carrier is called the passband .

[ 3 ] Signal modulation techniques are fundamental methods used in wireless communication to encode information onto a carrier wave by varying its amplitude, frequency, or phase. Key techniques and their typical applications Types of Signal Modulation [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Category Modulation Type Key Features Example Uses Analog Modulation AM Varies Amplitude of Carrier AM Radio FM Varies Frequency of Carrier FM and Two-way Radio PM Varies Phase of Carrier Analog TV and Satellite Digital Modulation ASK Amplitude represents binary data RFID, Optical Comm FSK Frequency shift encodes data Modems, Bluetooth PSK Phase of carrier encodes bits Wi-Fi, Satellite QPSK 4 phase states: two bits per symbol DVB, LTE QAM Both amplitude and phase vary; can transmit multiple bits Cable TV, Wi-Fi OFDM Multiple carriers, each modulated separately 4G/5G, Wi-Fi Pulse Modulation PWM Pulse width represents amplitude Motor Control, Audio PPM Pulse position within a time slot represents data Optical Comm., Radar Spread Spectrum DSSS Signal bandwidth spread using code sequence CDMA, GPS FHSS Carrier hops between different frequencies Bluetooth, Military •Amplitude Shift Keying (ASK): Varies the amplitude of the carrier signal to represent data. Simple and energy efficient, but vulnerable to noise. Used in RFID and sensor networks.

[ 8 ] •Frequency Shift Keying (FSK): Changes the frequency of the carrier signal to encode information. Resistant to noise, simple in implementation, often used in telemetry and paging systems.

[ 8 ] •Phase Shift Keying (PSK): Modifies the phase of the carrier signal based on data. Common forms include Binary PSK (BPSK) and Quadrature PSK (QPSK), used in Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and cellular networks. Offers good spectral efficiency and robustness against interference.

[ 8 ] •Quadrature Amplitude Modulation (QAM): Simultaneously varies both amplitude and phase to transmit multiple bits per symbol, increasing data rates. Used extensively in Wi-Fi, cable television, and LTE systems.

[ 8 ] •Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (OFDM): Splits the data across multiple, closely spaced sub-carriers, each modulated separately (often with QAM or PSK). Provides high spectral efficiency and robustness in multipath environments and is widely used in WLAN, LTE, and WiMAX.

[ 8 ] •Other advanced techniques: •Amplitude Phase Shift Keying (APSK): Combines features of PSK and QAM, mainly used in satellite communications for improved power efficiency.

•Spread Spectrum (e.g., DSSS): Spreads the signal energy across a wide band for robust, low probability of intercept transmission.

In analog modulation , an analog modulation signal is "impressed" on the carrier. Examples are amplitude modulation (AM) in which the amplitude (strength) of the carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal, and frequency modulation (FM) in which the frequency of the carrier wave is varied by the modulation signal. These were the earliest types of modulation [ citation needed ] , and are used to transmit an audio signal representing sound in AM and FM radio broadcasting . More recent systems use digital modulation , which impresses a digital signal consisting of a sequence of binary digits (bits), a bitstream , on the carrier, by means of mapping bits to elements from a discrete alphabet to be transmitted. This alphabet can consist of a set of real or complex numbers , or sequences, like oscillations of different frequencies, so-called frequency-shift keying (FSK) modulation. A more complicated digital modulation method that employs multiple carriers, orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM), is used in WiFi networks, digital radio stations and digital cable television transmission.

Analog modulation methods [ edit ] A low-frequency message signal (top) may be carried by an AM or FM radio wave.

Waterfall plot of a 146.52 MHz radio carrier, with amplitude modulation by a 1,000 Hz sinusoid. Two strong sidebands at + and - 1 kHz from the carrier frequency are shown.

A carrier, frequency modulated by a 1,000 Hz sinusoid. The modulation index has been adjusted to around 2.4, so the carrier frequency has small amplitude. Several strong sidebands are apparent; in principle an infinite number are produced in FM but the higher-order sidebands are of negligible magnitude.

In analog modulation, the modulation is applied continuously in response to the analog information signal. Common analog modulation techniques include: Amplitude modulation (AM) (here the amplitude of the carrier signal is varied in accordance with the instantaneous amplitude of the modulating signal) Double-sideband modulation (DSB) Double-sideband modulation with carrier (DSB-WC) (used on the AM radio broadcasting band) Double-sideband suppressed-carrier transmission (DSB-SC) Double-sideband reduced carrier transmission (DSB-RC) Single-sideband modulation (SSB, or SSB-AM) Single-sideband modulation with carrier (SSB-WC) Single-sideband modulation suppressed carrier modulation (SSB-SC) Vestigial sideband modulation (VSB, or VSB-AM) Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) Angle modulation , which is approximately constant envelope Frequency modulation (FM) (here the frequency of the carrier signal is varied in accordance with the instantaneous amplitude of the modulating signal) Phase modulation (PM) (here the phase shift of the carrier signal is varied in accordance with the instantaneous amplitude of the modulating signal) Transpositional Modulation (TM), in which the waveform inflection is modified resulting in a signal where each quarter cycle is transposed in the modulation process. TM is a pseudo-analog modulation (AM). Where an AM carrier also carries a phase variable phase f(ǿ). TM is f(AM,ǿ) Digital modulation methods [ edit ] In digital modulation, an analog carrier signal is modulated by a discrete signal. Digital modulation methods can be considered as digital-to-analog conversion and the corresponding demodulation or detection as analog-to-digital conversion. The changes in the carrier signal are chosen from a finite number of M alternative symbols (the modulation alphabet ).

Schematic of 4 baud, 8 bit/s data link containing arbitrarily chosen values A simple example: A telephone line is designed for transferring audible sounds, for example, tones, and not digital bits (zeros and ones). Computers may, however, communicate over a telephone line by means of modems, which are representing the digital bits by tones, called symbols. If there are four alternative symbols (corresponding to a musical instrument that can generate four different tones, one at a time), the first symbol may represent the bit sequence 00, the second 01, the third 10 and the fourth 11. If the modem plays a melody consisting of 1000 tones per second, the symbol rate is 1000 symbols/second, or 1000 baud . Since each tone (i.e., symbol) represents a message consisting of two digital bits in this example, the bit rate is twice the symbol rate, i.e. 2000 bits per second.

According to one definition of digital signal , [ 9 ] the modulated signal is a digital signal. According to another definition, the modulation is a form of digital-to-analog conversion . Most textbooks would consider digital modulation schemes as a form of digital transmission , synonymous to data transmission; very few would consider it as analog transmission .

[ citation needed ] Fundamental digital modulation methods [ edit ] The most fundamental digital modulation techniques are based on keying : PSK (phase-shift keying) : a finite number of phases are used.

FSK (frequency-shift keying) : a finite number of frequencies are used.

ASK (amplitude-shift keying) : a finite number of amplitudes are used.

QAM (quadrature amplitude modulation) : a finite number of at least two phases and at least two amplitudes are used.

In QAM, an in-phase signal (or I, with one example being a cosine waveform) and a quadrature phase signal (or Q, with an example being a sine wave) are amplitude modulated with a finite number of amplitudes and then summed. It can be seen as a two-channel system, each channel using ASK. The resulting signal is equivalent to a combination of PSK and ASK.

In all of the above methods, each of these phases, frequencies or amplitudes are assigned a unique pattern of binary bits . Usually, each phase, frequency or amplitude encodes an equal number of bits. This number of bits comprises the symbol that is represented by the particular phase, frequency or amplitude.

If the alphabet consists of M = 2 N {\displaystyle M=2^{N}} alternative symbols, each symbol represents a message consisting of N bits. If the symbol rate (also known as the baud rate ) is f S {\displaystyle f_{S}} symbols/second (or baud ), the data rate is N f S {\displaystyle Nf_{S}} bit/second.

For example, with an alphabet consisting of 16 alternative symbols, each symbol represents 4 bits. Thus, the data rate is four times the baud rate.

In the case of PSK, ASK or QAM, where the carrier frequency of the modulated signal is constant, the modulation alphabet is often conveniently represented on a constellation diagram , showing the amplitude of the I signal at the x-axis, and the amplitude of the Q signal at the y-axis, for each symbol.

Modulator and detector principles of operation [ edit ] PSK and ASK, and sometimes also FSK, are often generated and detected using the principle of QAM. The I and Q signals can be combined into a complex-valued signal I + jQ (where j is the imaginary unit ). The resulting so called equivalent lowpass signal or equivalent baseband signal is a complex-valued representation of the real-valued modulated physical signal (the so-called passband signal or RF signal ).

These are the general steps used by the modulator to transmit data: Group the incoming data bits into codewords, one for each symbol that will be transmitted.

Map the codewords to attributes, for example, amplitudes of the I and Q signals (the equivalent low pass signal), or frequency or phase values.

Adapt pulse shaping or some other filtering to limit the bandwidth and form the spectrum of the equivalent low pass signal, typically using digital signal processing.

Perform digital to analog conversion (DAC) of the I and Q signals (since today all of the above is normally achieved using digital signal processing , DSP).

Generate a high-frequency sine carrier waveform, and perhaps also a cosine quadrature component. Carry out the modulation, for example by multiplying the sine and cosine waveform with the I and Q signals, resulting in the equivalent low pass signal being frequency shifted to the modulated passband signal or RF signal. Sometimes this is achieved using DSP technology, for example direct digital synthesis using a waveform table , instead of analog signal processing. In that case, the above DAC step should be done after this step.

Amplification and analog bandpass filtering to avoid harmonic distortion and periodic spectrum.

At the receiver side, the demodulator typically performs: Bandpass filtering.

Automatic gain control , AGC (to compensate for attenuation , for example fading ).

Frequency shifting of the RF signal to the equivalent baseband I and Q signals, or to an intermediate frequency (IF) signal, by multiplying the RF signal with a local oscillator sine wave and cosine wave frequency (see the superheterodyne receiver principle).

Sampling and analog-to-digital conversion (ADC) (sometimes before or instead of the above point, for example by means of undersampling ).

Equalization filtering, for example, a matched filter , compensation for multipath propagation, time spreading, phase distortion and frequency selective fading, to avoid intersymbol interference and symbol distortion.

Detection of the amplitudes of the I and Q signals, or the frequency or phase of the IF signal.

Quantization of the amplitudes, frequencies or phases to the nearest allowed symbol values.

Mapping of the quantized amplitudes, frequencies or phases to codewords (bit groups).

Parallel-to-serial conversion of the codewords into a bit stream.

Pass the resultant bit stream on for further processing such as removal of any error-correcting codes.

As is common to all digital communication systems, the design of both the modulator and demodulator must be done simultaneously. Digital modulation schemes are possible because the transmitter-receiver pair has prior knowledge of how data is encoded and represented in the communications system. In all digital communication systems, both the modulator at the transmitter and the demodulator at the receiver are structured so that they perform inverse operations.

Asynchronous methods do not require a receiver reference clock signal that is phase synchronized with the sender carrier signal . In this case, modulation symbols (rather than bits, characters, or data packets) are asynchronously transferred. The opposite is synchronous modulation .

List of common digital modulation techniques [ edit ] The most common digital modulation techniques are: Phase-shift keying (PSK) Binary PSK (BPSK), using M=2 symbols Quadrature PSK (QPSK), using M=4 symbols 8PSK, using M=8 symbols 16PSK, using M=16 symbols Differential PSK (DPSK) Differential QPSK (DQPSK) Offset QPSK ( OQPSK ) π/4–QPSK Frequency-shift keying (FSK) Audio frequency-shift keying (AFSK) Multi-frequency shift keying (M-ary FSK or MFSK) Dual-tone multi-frequency signaling (DTMF) Amplitude-shift keying (ASK) On-off keying (OOK), the most common ASK form M-ary vestigial sideband modulation , for example 8VSB Quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), a combination of PSK and ASK Polar modulation like QAM a combination of PSK and ASK [ citation needed ] Continuous phase modulation (CPM) methods Minimum-shift keying (MSK) Gaussian minimum-shift keying (GMSK) Continuous-phase frequency-shift keying (CPFSK) Orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) modulation Discrete multitone (DMT), including adaptive modulation and bit-loading Wavelet modulation Trellis coded modulation (TCM), also known as Trellis modulation Spread spectrum techniques Direct-sequence spread spectrum (DSSS) Chirp spread spectrum (CSS) according to IEEE 802.15.4a CSS uses pseudo-stochastic coding Frequency-hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) applies a special scheme for channel release MSK and GMSK are particular cases of continuous phase modulation. Indeed, MSK is a particular case of the sub-family of CPM known as continuous-phase frequency-shift keying (CPFSK) which is defined by a rectangular frequency pulse (i.e. a linearly increasing phase pulse) of one-symbol-time duration (total response signaling).

OFDM is based on the idea of frequency-division multiplexing (FDM), but the multiplexed streams are all parts of a single original stream. The bit stream is split into several parallel data streams, each transferred over its own sub-carrier using some conventional digital modulation scheme. The modulated sub-carriers are summed to form an OFDM signal. This dividing and recombining help with handling channel impairments. OFDM is considered as a modulation technique rather than a multiplex technique since it transfers one bit stream over one communication channel using one sequence of so-called OFDM symbols. OFDM can be extended to multi-user channel access method in the orthogonal frequency-division multiple access (OFDMA) and multi-carrier code-division multiple access (MC-CDMA) schemes, allowing several users to share the same physical medium by giving different sub-carriers or spreading codes to different users.

Of the two kinds of RF power amplifier , switching amplifiers ( Class D amplifiers ) cost less and use less battery power than linear amplifiers of the same output power. However, they only work with relatively constant-amplitude-modulation signals such as angle modulation (FSK or PSK) and CDMA , but not with QAM and OFDM. Nevertheless, even though switching amplifiers are completely unsuitable for normal QAM constellations, often the QAM modulation principle are used to drive switching amplifiers with these FM and other waveforms, and sometimes QAM demodulators are used to receive the signals put out by these switching amplifiers.

Automatic digital modulation recognition (ADMR) [ edit ] Automatic digital modulation recognition in intelligent communication systems is one of the most important issues in software-defined radio and cognitive radio . According to incremental expanse of intelligent receivers, automatic modulation recognition becomes a challenging topic in telecommunication systems and computer engineering. Such systems have many civil and military applications. Moreover, blind recognition of modulation type is an important problem in commercial systems, especially in software-defined radio . Usually in such systems, there are some extra information for system configuration, but considering blind approaches in intelligent receivers, we can reduce information overload and increase transmission performance. Obviously, with no knowledge of the transmitted data and many unknown parameters at the receiver, such as the signal power, carrier frequency and phase offsets, timing information, etc., blind identification of the modulation is made fairly difficult. This becomes even more challenging in real-world scenarios with multipath fading, frequency-selective and time-varying channels.

[ 10 ] There are two main approaches to automatic modulation recognition. The first approach uses likelihood-based methods to assign an input signal to a proper class. Another recent approach is based on feature extraction.

Digital baseband modulation [ edit ] Digital baseband modulation changes the characteristics of a baseband signal, i.e., one without a carrier at a higher frequency.

This can be used as equivalent signal to be later frequency-converted to a carrier frequency, or for direct communication in baseband. The latter methods both involve relatively simple line codes , as often used in local buses, and complicated baseband signalling schemes such as used in DSL .

Pulse modulation methods [ edit ] Pulse modulation schemes aim at transferring a narrowband analog signal over an analog baseband channel as a two-level signal by modulating a pulse wave . Some pulse modulation schemes also allow the narrowband analog signal to be transferred as a digital signal (i.e., as a quantized discrete-time signal ) with a fixed bit rate, which can be transferred over an underlying digital transmission system, for example, some line code . These are not modulation schemes in the conventional sense since they are not channel coding schemes, but should be considered as source coding schemes, and in some cases analog-to-digital conversion techniques.

Analog-over-analog methods Pulse-amplitude modulation (PAM) Pulse-width modulation (PWM) and pulse-depth modulation (PDM) Pulse-frequency modulation (PFM) Pulse-position modulation (PPM) Analog-over-digital methods Pulse-code modulation (PCM) Differential PCM (DPCM) Adaptive DPCM (ADPCM) Delta modulation (DM or Δ-modulation) Delta-sigma modulation (ΣΔ) Continuously variable slope delta modulation (CVSDM), also called adaptive delta modulation (ADM) Pulse-density modulation (PDM) Miscellaneous modulation techniques [ edit ] The use of on-off keying to transmit Morse code at radio frequencies is known as continuous wave (CW) operation.

Adaptive modulation Space modulation is a method whereby signals are modulated within airspace such as that used in instrument landing systems .

The microwave auditory effect has been pulse modulated with audio waveforms to evoke understandable spoken numbers.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Modulation .

Channel access methods Channel coding Codec Demodulation Electrical resonance Heterodyne Line code Modem Modulation order Neuromodulation RF modulator Ring modulation Types of radio emissions References [ edit ] ^ "How does modulation work? | Tait Radio Academy" .

Tait Radio Academy . 2014-10-22 . Retrieved 2024-06-17 .

^ Herrera, Rodrigo "Rod" (April 23, 2024).

"General Antennas: What antenna length do I need for which frequency?" .

wimo.com . Retrieved June 19, 2024 .

^ "What is Modem?" .

GeeksforGeeks . 2023-09-11 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ Technology, Electrical (2019-01-29).

"Types of Modulation - AM, FM, PM Modulation & Modulated Signals" .

ELECTRICAL TECHNOLOGY . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Modulation Schemes, Coding Rates, and 4G/5G Data Speeds" .

Waveform . 2024-07-11 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Wireless Fundamentals: Modulation" .

Cisco Meraki Documentation . 2020-10-05 . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Modulation Methods | Electronics Basics | ROHM" .

www.rohm.com . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ a b c d e "Modulation Methods | Electronics Basics | ROHM" .

www.rohm.com . Retrieved 2025-07-20 .

^ "Modulation Methods | Electronics Basics | ROHM" .

www.rohm.com . Retrieved 2020-05-15 .

^ Dobre, Octavia A., Ali Abdi, Yeheskel Bar-Ness, and Wei Su. Communications, IET 1, no. 2 (2007): 137–156. (2007).

"Survey of automatic modulation classification techniques: classical approaches and new trends" (PDF) .

IET Communications .

1 (2): 137– 156.

doi : 10.1049/iet-com:20050176 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Lin, James C. (August 20, 2021).

Auditory Effects of Microwave Radiation . Chicago: Springer. p. 326.

ISBN 978-3030645434 .

^ Justesen, Don (March 1, 1975).

"Microwaves and Behavior" (PDF) .

American Psychologist . Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-09-10 . Retrieved October 5, 2021 .

^ Justesen, Don (March 1, 1975). "Microwaves and Behavior".

American Psychologist . Vol. 30, no. 3. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. pp.

391– 401.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066x.30.3.391 .

PMID 1137231 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bryant, James; Analog Devices (2013).

"Multipliers vs. Modulators" (PDF) .

Analog Dialogue .

47 (2): 3.

External links [ edit ] Interactive presentation of soft-demapping for AWGN-channel in a web-demo Institute of Telecommunications, University of Stuttgart Modem (Modulation and Demodulation) CodSim 2.0: Open source Virtual Laboratory for Digital Data Communications Model Department of Computer Architecture, University of Malaga. Simulates Digital line encodings and Digital Modulations. Written in HTML for any web browser.

v t e Telecommunications History Beacon Broadcasting Cable protection system Cable TV Communications satellite Computer network Data compression audio DCT image video Digital media Internet video online video platform social media streaming Drums Edholm's law Electrical telegraph Fax Heliographs Hydraulic telegraph Information Age Information revolution Internet Mass media Mobile phone Smartphone Optical telecommunication Optical telegraphy Pager Photophone Prepaid mobile phone Radio Radiotelephone Satellite communications Semaphore Phryctoria Semiconductor device MOSFET transistor Smoke signals Telecommunications history Telautograph Telegraphy Teleprinter (teletype) Telephone The Telephone Cases Television digital streaming Undersea telegraph line Videotelephony Whistled language Wireless revolution Pioneers Nasir Ahmed Edwin Howard Armstrong Mohamed M. Atalla John Logie Baird Paul Baran John Bardeen Alexander Graham Bell Emile Berliner Tim Berners-Lee Francis Blake Jagadish Chandra Bose Charles Bourseul Walter Houser Brattain Vint Cerf Claude Chappe Yogen Dalal Donald Davies Daniel Davis Jr.

Amos Dolbear Thomas Edison Philo Farnsworth Reginald Fessenden Lee de Forest Elisha Gray Oliver Heaviside Robert Hooke Erna Schneider Hoover Harold Hopkins Gardiner Greene Hubbard Bob Kahn Dawon Kahng Charles K. Kao Narinder Singh Kapany Hedy Lamarr Roberto Landell Innocenzo Manzetti Guglielmo Marconi Robert Metcalfe Antonio Meucci Samuel Morse Jun-ichi Nishizawa Charles Grafton Page Radia Perlman Alexander Stepanovich Popov Tivadar Puskás Johann Philipp Reis Claude Shannon Almon Brown Strowger Henry Sutton Charles Sumner Tainter Nikola Tesla Camille Tissot Alfred Vail Thomas A. Watson Charles Wheatstone Vladimir K. Zworykin Internet pioneers Transmission media Coaxial cable Fiber-optic communication optical fiber Free-space optical communication Molecular communication Radio waves wireless Transmission line telecommunication circuit Network topology and switching Bandwidth Links Network switching circuit packet Nodes terminal Telephone exchange Multiplexing Space-division Frequency-division Time-division Polarization-division Orbital angular-momentum Code-division Concepts Communication protocol Computer network Data transmission Store and forward Telecommunications equipment Types of network Cellular network Ethernet ISDN LAN Mobile NGN Public Switched Telephone Radio Television Telex UUCP WAN Wireless network Notable networks ARPANET BITNET CYCLADES FidoNet Internet Internet2 JANET NPL network TANet Toasternet Usenet Locations Africa Americas North South Antarctica Asia Europe Oceania Global telecommunications regulation bodies Telecommunication portal Category Outline Commons v t e Analog and digital audio broadcasting Terrestrial Radio modulation AM FM COFDM Frequency allocations LW ( LF ) MW ( MF ) SW ( HF ) VHF ( low / mid / high ) L band ( UHF ) Digital systems CAM-D DAB/DAB+ DRM/DRM+ ISDB-Tsb FMeXtra HD Radio CDR DVB-T2 Lite Satellite Frequency allocations C band K u band L band S band Digital systems ADR DAB-S DVB-SH S-DMB SDR Commercial radio providers SiriusXM Canada Codecs AAC AMR-WB+ HDC HE-AAC MPEG-1 Audio Layer II DRA+ Subcarrier signals AMSS DirectBand PAD RDS/RBDS SCA/SCMO DARC Related topics Technical (audio) Audio data compression Audio signal processing Technical ( AM stereo formats) Belar C-QUAM Harris Kahn-Hazeltine Magnavox Technical (emission) AM broadcasting AM expanded band Cable radio Digital radio Error detection and correction FM broadcast band FM broadcasting FM extended band in Brazil Multipath propagation Shortwave relay station Cultural History of radio International broadcasting Radio portal Comparison of radio systems Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Signal_modulation&oldid=1303559644 " Categories : Frequency mixers Radio technology Television technology Physical layer protocols Radio modulation modes Telecommunication theory Television terminology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from February 2017 All articles that are too technical Articles needing additional references from June 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Signal modulation 61 languages Add topic

