Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recording 2 Live performances 3 Personnel 4 References Toggle the table of contents '39 18 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the song. For years of this name and other uses, see 39 .

1976 song by Queen " ' 39" The back sleeve of the Italian single sleeve for "You're My Best Friend" Song by Queen from the album A Night at the Opera A-side " You're My Best Friend " Published Queen Music Ltd.

Released 18 June 1976 Recorded August–November 1975 Genre Progressive rock [ 1 ] pop rock [ 2 ] folk [ 3 ] skiffle [ 4 ] Length 3 : 30 Label EMI Elektra Songwriter(s) Brian May Producer(s) Roy Thomas Baker Queen " ' 39 " is a song by British rock band Queen . Composed by lead guitarist Brian May , it is the fifth track on their fourth studio album A Night at the Opera . The song was also the B-side to " You're My Best Friend ".

Inspired by May's studies in astrophysics , the song relates the tale of a group of astronauts who embark on what is, from their perspective, a year-long voyage. Upon their return, however, they realise that a hundred years have passed on Earth due to the effects of time dilation from traveling at relativistic speeds, and the loved ones they left behind are now all dead or aged.

[ 5 ] Recording [ edit ] I felt a little like that about my home at the time, having been away and seen this vastly different world of rock music which was totally different from the way I was brought up. People may not generally admit it but I think that when most people write songs there is more than one level to them – they'll be about one thing on the surface, but underneath they're probably trying, maybe even unconsciously, to say something about their own life, their own experience – and in nearly all my stuff, there is a personal feeling.

Brian May, on the meaning of " ' 39" [ 6 ] May sings lead vocal on the studio recording of the song, one of his few lead vocals on Queen recordings.

May had asked bassist John Deacon to play double bass as a joke but a couple of days later he found Deacon in the studio with the instrument, and he had already learned to play it.

[ 7 ] May had been working on his thesis in astrophysics , but eventually abandoned his studies to pursue his career with Queen. In 2006, he resumed his studies and eventually completed his thesis, titled A Survey of Radial Velocities in the Zodiacal Dust Cloud , and received his PhD in 2008.

[ 8 ] Since Queen had named their albums A Night at the Opera and A Day at the Races after two of the Marx Brothers ' most popular films, surviving brother Groucho Marx invited Queen to visit him at his Los Angeles home in March 1977 (five months before he died). The band thanked him, and performed " ' 39" a cappella.

[ 9 ] The song is the 39th album track released by the band when counting each album track from the debut album onwards.

Live performances [ edit ] The song was a live favourite throughout the 1970s, often being used as a singalong in concert.

[ 10 ] It was first performed in Edinburgh in September 1976 and remained in setlists until December 1979, although the song was briefly performed in 1984. Instead of May singing the lead vocals live, Mercury did.

The Guardian later commented that live performances of the song were played as "a raucous, rollicking sea shanty".

[ 6 ] The version recorded at concert at Festhalle Frankfurt on 2 February 1979  is featured on the live album Live Killers .

[ 11 ] George Michael performed " ' 39" at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert in April 1992.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Michael cited this song as his favourite Queen song, claiming he used to busk it on the London Underground .

[ 14 ] Later the song was included  by Queen on the setlists of their Queen + Adam Lambert tours in 2012 and 2014–2015 featuring Adam Lambert [ 15 ] & both Queen + Paul Rodgers Tours, which were Queen + Paul Rodgers Tour & Rock the Cosmos featuring Paul Rodgers ; as on the album, it is sung by May.

Personnel [ edit ] Information is taken from the album's Liner Notes [ 16 ] except where noted Brian May – lead vocals, backing vocals, 12-string acoustic guitar , electric guitar Freddie Mercury – backing vocals Roger Taylor – tambourine, [ 17 ] bass drum, backing vocals John Deacon – double bass References [ edit ] ^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas .

"A Night at the Opera - Queen | Songs, Reviews, Credits" .

AllMusic . Retrieved 17 September 2015 .

^ Nicholson, Kris (8 April 1976).

"A Night at the Opera" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved 26 February 2018 .

^ Erlewine, Stephen Thomas .

"A Day at the Races - Queen | Songs, Reviews, Credits" .

AllMusic . Retrieved 26 February 2018 .

^ Rivadavia, Eduardo (21 November 2015).

"Revisiting Queen's Masterpiece, 'A Night at the Opera' " .

Ultimate Classic Rock . Retrieved 26 February 2018 .

^ " '39" . Songfacts . Retrieved 30 March 2016 .

^ a b "Old Music: Queen - '39" .

The Guardian . 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ May, Brian.

"Queen Legends" .

Queen.musichall.cz .

^ "Queen's Homage to Space Exploration: '39" .

Best Classic Bands . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ Queen: The Ultimate Illustrated History of the Crown Kings of Rock . Voyageur Press. 2009. p. 96.

^ Eder, Bruce.

" '39 - Queen" .

AllMusic . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

^ Fricke, David (6 September 1979).

"Live Killers" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved 9 May 2021 .

^ "The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert" .

Ultimate Queen . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ Bignardi, Francesco (9 November 2008).

"Queen & George Michael – '39 (Freddie Mercury Tribute)" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "A Night At The Opera" .

QueenZone.com . 17 August 2007. Archived from the original on 10 May 2015 . Retrieved 6 July 2011 .

^ "Queen + Adam Lambert Set List: Calgary, Saddledome" .

Queen Online . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

^ A Night at the Opera (Media notes). EMI Records. 1975. EMTC 103.

^ "Album Analysis: A Night At The Opera" .

Queensongs.info . Archived from the original on 13 June 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

v t e Queen songs Queen " Keep Yourself Alive " " Liar " Queen II " Seven Seas of Rhye " Sheer Heart Attack " Killer Queen " " Now I'm Here " " Flick of the Wrist " " Lily of the Valley " " Stone Cold Crazy " " Brighton Rock " A Night at the Opera " Bohemian Rhapsody " " You're My Best Friend " " Death on Two Legs (Dedicated to...) " " I'm in Love with My Car " " '39 " " Sweet Lady " " The Prophet's Song " " Love of My Life " " Good Company " " God Save the Queen " A Day at the Races " Somebody to Love " " Tie Your Mother Down " " Teo Torriatte (Let Us Cling Together) " " Good Old-Fashioned Lover Boy " " Long Away " News of the World " We Will Rock You " " We Are the Champions " " Spread Your Wings " " It's Late " " Sheer Heart Attack " Jazz " Bicycle Race " " Fat Bottomed Girls " " Don't Stop Me Now " " Mustapha " " Jealousy " The Game " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " " Save Me " " Play the Game " " Another One Bites the Dust " " Need Your Loving Tonight " Flash Gordon " Flash's Theme " Hot Space " Under Pressure " " Body Language " " Las Palabras de Amor (The Words of Love) " " Calling All Girls " " Staying Power " " Back Chat " The Works " Radio Ga Ga " " I Want to Break Free " " It's a Hard Life " " Hammer to Fall " " Is This the World We Created...?

" A Kind of Magic " One Vision " " A Kind of Magic " " Princes of the Universe " " Friends Will Be Friends " " Pain Is So Close to Pleasure " " Who Wants to Live Forever " " One Year of Love " The Miracle " I Want It All " " Breakthru " " The Invisible Man " " Scandal " " The Miracle " Innuendo " Innuendo " " I'm Going Slightly Mad " " Headlong " " These Are the Days of Our Lives " " The Show Must Go On " " I Can't Live with You " " Ride the Wild Wind " Made in Heaven " Heaven for Everyone " " A Winter's Tale " " Too Much Love Will Kill You " " I Was Born to Love You " " Let Me Live " " You Don't Fool Me " " Made in Heaven " " Mother Love " Queen Rocks " No-One but You (Only the Good Die Young) " Queen Forever " Let Me in Your Heart Again " " Love Kills " " There Must Be More to Life Than This " Other songs " Thank God It's Christmas " " Face It Alone " Category Authority control databases MusicBrainz work Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%2739&oldid=1303156194 " Categories : Queen (band) songs 1975 songs English folk songs Skiffle songs Songs about outer space Song recordings produced by Roy Thomas Baker Songs written by Brian May Fiction about time travel Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Use British English from March 2015 Articles with hAudio microformats This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 10:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents '39 18 languages Add topic

