Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Components of IT infrastructure 1.3 IT Infrastructure types 1.4 Skills 1.5 Future 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents IT infrastructure 9 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of information technology components that are the foundation of an IT service A server is a physical component to IT Infrastructure.

Information technology infrastructure is defined broadly as a set of information technology (IT) components that are the foundation of an IT service; typically physical components ( computer and networking hardware and facilities), but also various software and network components.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to the ITIL Foundation Course Glossary, IT Infrastructure can also be termed as “All of the hardware, software, networks, facilities, etc., that are required to develop, test, deliver, monitor, control or support IT services. The term IT infrastructure includes all of the Information Technology but not the associated People, Processes and documentation.” [ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] In IT Infrastructure, the above technological components contribute to and drive business functions. Leaders and managers within the IT field are responsible for ensuring that both the physical hardware and software networks and resources are working optimally. IT infrastructure can be looked at as the foundation of an organization's technology systems, thereby playing an integral part in driving its success.

[ 4 ] All organizations who rely on technology to do their business can benefit from having a robust, interconnected IT Infrastructure. With the current speed that technology changes and the competitive nature of businesses, IT leaders have to ensure that their IT Infrastructure is designed such that changes can be made quickly and without impacting the business continuity.

[ 5 ] While traditionally companies used to typically rely on physical data centers or colocation facilities to support their IT Infrastructure, cloud hosting has become more popular as it is easier to manage and scale. IT Infrastructure can be managed by the company itself or it can be outsourced to another company that has consulting expertise to develop robust infrastructures for an organization.

[ 6 ] With advances in online outreach availability, it has become easier for end users to access technology. As a result, IT infrastructures have become more complex and therefore, it is harder for managers to oversee the end to end operations. In order to mitigate this issue, strong IT Infrastructures require employees with varying skill sets. The fields of IT management and IT service management rely on IT infrastructure, and the ITIL framework was developed as a set of best practices with regard to IT infrastructure. The ITIL framework assists companies with the ability to be responsive to technological market demands. Technology can often be thought of as an innovative product which can incur high production costs. However, the ITIL framework helps address these issues and allows the company to be more cost effective which helps IT managers to keep the IT Infrastructure functioning.

[ 7 ] Background [ edit ] Even though the IT infrastructure has been around for over 60 years, there have been incredible advances in technology in the past 15 years.

[ 8 ] Components of IT infrastructure [ edit ] Network switch The primary components of an IT Infrastructure are the physical systems such as hardware, storage, any kind of routers/switches and the building itself but also networks and software .

[ 9 ] In addition to these components, there is the need for “IT Infrastructure Security”. Security keeps the network and its devices safe in order to maintain the integrity within the overall infrastructure of the organization.

[ 10 ] Specifically, the first three layers are directly involved with IT Infrastructure. The physical layer serves as the fundamental layer for hardware. The second and third layers (Data Link and Network), are essential for communication to and from hardware devices. Without this, networking is not possible. Therefore, in a sense, the internet itself would not be possible.

[ 11 ] It's important to emphasize that fiber optics play a crucial role in a network infrastructure. Fiber optics [ 12 ] serve as the primary means for connecting network equipment and establishing connections between buildings.

IT Infrastructure types [ edit ] Starlink Different types of technological tasks may require a tailored approach to the infrastructure. These can be achieved through a traditional, cloud or hyper converged IT Infrastructure.

[ 13 ] Skills [ edit ] There are many functioning parts that go into the health of an IT infrastructure. In order to contribute positively to the organization, employees can acquire abilities to benefit the company. These include key technical abilities such as cloud, network, and data administration skills and soft abilities such as collaboration and communication skills.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Future [ edit ] As data storage and management becomes more digitized, IT Infrastructure is moving towards the cloud. Infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS) provides the ability to host on a server and is a platform for cloud computing.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Converged infrastructure Cyber infrastructure Dynamic infrastructure Hyper-converged infrastructure Information infrastructure Event management (ITIL) Infrastructure as a service Infrastructure as code Software-defined infrastructure References [ edit ] ^ techopedia.com: IT Infrastructure Quote: "...IT infrastructure refers to the composite hardware, software, network resources and services required for the existence, operation and management of an enterprise IT environment...", backup ^ gartner.com: IT Infrastructure Quote: "...IT infrastructure is the system of hardware, software, facilities and service components that support the delivery of business systems and IT-enabled processes...", backup ^ "ITIL® V3 Foundation Course Glossary" (PDF) .

^ "What is IT Infrastructure?" .

www.ecpi.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "Beginner's Guide to IT Infrastructure Management" .

Smartsheet . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is infrastructure (IT infrastructure)? - Definition from WhatIs.com" .

SearchDataCenter . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is ITIL 4? ITIL 4 Framework & Processes Explained" .

BMC Blogs . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ Hardware, Marco Ceppi 2018-03-29T10:30:38 87Z.

"The evolution of IT infrastructure – from mainframe to server-less" .

ITProPortal . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "What is IT Infrastructure?" .

www.ecpi.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is infrastructure (IT infrastructure)? - Definition from WhatIs.com" .

SearchDataCenter . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is the OSI Model?" .

^ Barbut, Cornel (June 2018).

"Fiber Optic Deployments in Romania between Metropolitan Fiber Optic Networks and Indoor Fiber Optic Infrastructure" .

2018 10th International Conference on Electronics, Computers and Artificial Intelligence (ECAI) . IEEE. pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1109/ECAI.2018.8679021 .

ISBN 978-1-5386-4901-5 .

^ "What is IT infrastructure?" .

www.redhat.com . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "10 IT Infrastructure Skills You Should Master" .

InformationWeek . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is IT Infrastructure?" .

www.ecpi.edu . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

^ "What is infrastructure (IT infrastructure)? - Definition from WhatIs.com" .

SearchDataCenter . Retrieved 2019-11-28 .

Sources [ edit ] Simon, Errol (1996).

Distributed information systems: from client/server to distributed multimedia .

McGraw-Hill .

ISBN 9780077090760 .

Laan, Sjaak (2011).

IT Infrastructure Architecture: Infrastructure Building Blocks and Concepts .

Lulu Press .

ISBN 9781447881285 .

van der Veen, Annelies; van Bon, Jan (2007).

Foundations of ITIL V3 . Van Haren Publishing.

ISBN 978-90-8753-057-0 .

Rouse, Margaret (2017). " A DevOps primer: Start, improve and extend your DevOps teams" , "TechTarget Search Data Center". Retrieved 28 September 2019.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=IT_infrastructure&oldid=1299462250 " Categories : IT infrastructure Information technology management Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents IT infrastructure 9 languages Add topic

