Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Geography 3 Tourism 4 Transport 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Policastro Bussentino 11 languages العربية Cebuano Español Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Polski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°04′00″N 15°31′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.06667°N 15.51667°E ﻿ / 40.06667; 15.51667 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Town in Campania, Italy Frazione in Campania, Italy Policastro Bussentino Frazione Policastro Bussentino Location of Policastro Bussentino in Italy Coordinates: 40°04′00″N 15°31′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.06667°N 15.51667°E ﻿ / 40.06667; 15.51667 Country Italy Region Campania Province Salerno (SA) Comune Santa Marina Elevation 4 m (13 ft) Population 2011 • Total 1,625 [ 1 ] Demonym Policastresi Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 84067 Dialing code (+39) 0974 Gulf of Policastro.

Defensive walls.

Policastro Bussentino (or simply Policastro ) is an Italian town and hamlet ( frazione ) of the municipality of Santa Marina (of which it is its seat) in the province of Salerno , Campania region. It is a former bishopric, now titular see, and has a population of 1,625.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The town was founded in Magna Graecia in 470 or 471 BC as Pyxus or Pixous ( Ancient Greek : Πυξοῦς ), by Micythus ( Ancient Greek : Μίκυθος ), the tyrant of Rhegion and Messena .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It has been a Latin Rite bishopric twice, as Bussento ( Latin : Buxentum ) and as Policastro, and remains a Catholic titular see as "Capo della Foresta".

[ 4 ] During the fascist period, with the union of municipalities of Ispani and Santa Marina , Policastro became a hamlet of Capitello .

Geography [ edit ] The town is located on the southern side of Cilento , not too far from the national park , in the middle of the Gulf of Policastro on the Tyrrhenian Sea . Situated by the estuary of river Bussento , it is 10 km far (north) from Sapri , 5 from Santa Marina , 4 from Scario ( hamlet of San Giovanni a Piro ), 25 from Marina di Camerota ( hamlet of Camerota ), and almost 90 from Salerno . The nearest villages by the sea are Capitello ( hamlet of Ispani , far 2 km) and Villammare ( hamlet of Vibonati , far 4 km).

Tourism [ edit ] Policastro attracts visitors, especially in summer, due to the quality of its water, its rural surroundings and a good rail link and for camping.

Transport [ edit ] The railway station is situated in the middle of the town, by the main line Rome - Naples - Reggio Calabria - Palermo / Catania . Regional trains run every hour.
The town recently inaugurated (2006) as the final track of national road SS18, which runs from Salerno - Battipaglia - Paestum - Agropoli - Vallo della Lucania - Palinuro to Sapri . Policastro has another carriageway, a variation of SS 517 that reaches Padula and the A2 Motorway [ 5 ] exit Padula- Buonabitacolo , via Sanza .

See also [ edit ] Cilento Cilento and Vallo di Diano National Park Roman Catholic Diocese of Policastro Roman Catholic Diocese of Teggiano-Policastro List of ancient Greek cities Magna Graecia Santa Marina References [ edit ] ^ a b (in Italian) Infos on italia.indettaglio.it ^ (in Italian) "Pixunte" on the Italian Encyclopedia Treccani ^ Mogens Herman Hansen & Thomas Heine Nielsen, An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis , Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 289.

^ GCatholic - former bishopric of Buxentum and titular see of Capo della Foresta ^ Naples - Salerno - Cosenza - Reggio Calabria External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Policastro .

Gulf and town of Policastro ( IT ) Policastro on Cilento portal ( IT ) v t e Towns, villages and zones of Cilentan Coast Torre Kernot Laura Paestum Licinella Mattine Agropoli Tresino Santa Maria San Marco Licosa Ogliastro Marina Case del Conte Agnone Cilento Mezzatorre Acciaroli Pioppi Marina di Casalvelino Velia Marina di Ascea Marina di Pisciotta Caprioli Palinuro Cape Palinuro Marina di Camerota Porto Infreschi Scario Policastro Bussentino Capitello Villammare Sapri Authority control databases International VIAF National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Policastro_Bussentino&oldid=1253317790 " Categories : Frazioni of the Province of Salerno Colonies of Magna Graecia Localities of Cilento Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 10:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Policastro Bussentino 11 languages Add topic

