Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Consolidated Toggle Consolidated subsection 1.1 Residual 2 Unconsolidated Toggle Unconsolidated subsection 2.1 Ice-transported 2.1.1 Glacial till (Morrainal) 2.1.2 Glacio-lacustrine 2.1.3 Glacio-fluvial 2.1.4 Glacio-marine 2.2 Water-transported 2.2.1 Alluvium 2.2.2 Lacustrine 2.2.3 Marine 2.3 Gravity-transported 2.4 Wind-transported 2.4.1 Loess 2.4.2 Aeolian 2.4.3 Volcanic tephra 3 Organic 4 Climate and weathering 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Parent material 14 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی 한국어 ქართული Қазақша Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Underlying geological material in which soil horizons form This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Parent material" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Parent material is the underlying geological material (generally bedrock or a superficial or drift deposit) in which soil horizons form.  Soils typically inherit a great deal of structure and minerals from their parent material, and, as such, are often classified based upon their contents of consolidated or unconsolidated mineral material that has undergone some degree of physical or chemical weathering and the mode by which the materials were most recently transported.

Consolidated [ edit ] Parent materials that are predominantly composed of consolidated rock are termed residual parent material . The consolidated rocks consist of igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic rock, etc.

[ 1 ] Residual [ edit ] Soil developed in residual parent material is that which forms in consolidated geologic material.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Unconsolidated [ edit ] This parent material is loosely arranged, particles are not cemented together, and not stratified. This parent material is classified by its last means of transport.  For example, Material that was transported to a location by glacier, then deposited elsewhere by streams, is classified as stream-transported parent material, or glacial fluvial parent material.

Ice-transported [ edit ] Glacial till (Morrainal) [ edit ] A macro photo of basal till parent material A macro photo of ablation till parent material The material dragged with a moving ice sheet. Because it is not transported with liquid water, the material is not sorted by size. There are two kinds of glacial till: Basal till – carried at the base of the glacier and laid underneath it. This till is typically very compacted and does not allow for quick water infiltration.

Ablation till – carried on or in the glacier and is laid down as the glacier melts. This till is typically less compacted than basal till.

[ citation needed ] Glacio-lacustrine [ edit ] A macro photo of glacio-lacustrine parent material with clear varves Parent material that is created from the sediments coming into lakes that come from glaciers. The lakes are typically ice margin lakes or other types formed from glacial erosion or deposition. The bedload of the rivers, containing the larger rocks and stones is deposited near the lake edge, while the suspended sediments are settle out all over the lake bed.

Glacio-fluvial [ edit ] A macro photo of glacio-fluvial parent material Consist of boulders , gravel , sand , silt and clay from ice sheets or glaciers . They are transported, sorted and deposited by streams of water. The deposits are formed beside, below or downstream from the ice.

Glacio-marine [ edit ] These sediments are created when sediments have been transported to the oceans by glaciers or icebergs. They may contain large boulders, transported by and dropped from icebergs, in the midst of fine-grained sediments.

Water-transported [ edit ] Within water-transported parent material there are several important types. A macro photo of glacio-lacustrine parent material with clear varves from annual deposition of material.

Alluvium [ edit ] A macro photo of fluvial parent material Parent material transported by streams of which there are three main types.

Floodplains are the parts of river valleys that are covered with water during floods. Due to their seasonal nature, floods create stratified layers in which larger particles tend to settle nearer the channel and smaller particles settle nearer the edges of A macro photo of marine parent material showcasing deposition of manganese. Cracks present in the photo are due to drying, but would be massive in the field.the flooding area.

[ 1 ] Alluvial fans are sedimentary areas formed by narrow valley streams that suddenly drop to lowlands and widen dramatically. Sedimentary in these types of deposits tend to be larger closer to the uplands and finer near the edges of the fan.

[ 1 ] Delta deposits, the third of type of alluvium, are finer sediments that are discharged from streams into lakes and eventually settle near the mouth of the river.

[ 1 ] Lacustrine [ edit ] A macro photo of lacustrine parent material Parent material deposited by a lake. Beach ridges may be present where ancient lakes once washed up sand. Lacustrine material is well sorted and fine-textured, having finer silts and clays . Soils formed from lacustrine parent material have low permeability in part because of this high clay content.

Marine [ edit ] A macro photo of marine parent material showcasing deposition of manganese. The cracks present in the photo would not be present in the field.

Ocean deposited parent materials, called marine sediments, are collections of material that have been carried by rivers and streams to the ocean and eventually sink to the bottom. Such materials can vary in texture.

[ 1 ] Gravity-transported [ edit ] A macro photo of colluvial material Colluvium or colluvial debris is the collection of large rock fragments that have traveled downslope by gravity.

[ 1 ] Wind-transported [ edit ] Parent materials can also be transported by wind. There are three important types.

Loess [ edit ] Silt -sized sediments transported by the wind.

Aeolian [ edit ] Sand -sized particles transported by the wind, typically as dunes .

Volcanic tephra [ edit ] The most common parent material coming from volcanoes is volcanic ash carried away by the wind and settling at various distances from the volcano.

[ citation needed ] Organic [ edit ] Organic deposits (or cumulose deposits) are developed in place from plant residue (for example sphagnum moss) that has typically been preserved by a high water table, or potentially due to another factor that slows decomposition.

Climate and weathering [ edit ] Climate is generally considered the most important factor influencing physical and chemical weathering processes.

[ citation needed ] Physical weathering is significant during the early stages of soil development. Rock can be disintegrated by changes in temperature, which produces differential expansion and contraction. Temperature changes can also cause water to freeze. The forces created by water freezing can be as great as 2.1 × 10 5 kPa, which can split rocks apart, wedge rocks upward in the soil, and heave and churn soil material.

Chemical weathering : The principal agent is percolating rainwater charged with carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The acidic solution hydrolyzes parent material to produce minerals and release cations.

See also [ edit ] Saprolite Soil production function References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Barnes, Burton; Zak, Donald; Denton, Shirley; Spurr, Stephen (1980).

Forest Ecology . New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-471-30822-5 .

^ Brady, Nyle; Weil, Ray (1996).

The Nature and Properties of Soils . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-016763-7 .

v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parent_material&oldid=1302411893 " Category : Pedology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 07:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parent material 14 languages Add topic

