Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Philosophy of science 2.2 Philosophical logic 2.3 Bayesian epistemology 3 Books 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bas van Fraassen 16 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from The Scientific Image ) American philosopher (born 1941) In this Dutch name , the surname is Van Fraassen , not Fraassen .

In this article, Dutch  capitalization is used for tussenvoegsels in Dutch family names . The first letter in Van Fraassen  is capitalized unless it is preceded by a name, initial or title of nobility.

Bas van Fraassen Born ( 1941-04-05 ) 5 April 1941 (age 84) Goes , German-occupied Netherlands Education Alma mater University of Alberta University of Pittsburgh Thesis Foundations of the Causal Theory of Time (1966) Doctoral advisor Adolf Grünbaum Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Instrumentalism [ 1 ] Doctoral students Paul Thagard [ 5 ] Main interests Philosophy of science Bayesian epistemology Philosophical logic Free logic Notable ideas Constructive empiricism Empiricist structuralism Distinction between a theory's representing-as and representing-that [ 2 ] Supervaluationism [ 3 ] Epistemological voluntarism [ 4 ] ( reflection principle ) Bastiaan Cornelis " Bas " van Fraassen ( / b ɑː s v ɑː n ˈ f r ɑː s ən / ; [ 6 ] Dutch: [bɑs vɑn ˈfraːsə(n)] ; born 5 April 1941) is a Dutch-American philosopher noted for his contributions to philosophy of science , epistemology and formal logic . He is a Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at San Francisco State University and the McCosh Professor of Philosophy Emeritus at Princeton University .

Biography and career [ edit ] Van Fraassen was born in the German-occupied Netherlands on 5 April 1941. His father, a steam fitter , was forced by the Nazis to work in a factory in Hamburg . After the war, the family reunited and, in 1956, emigrated to Edmonton , in western Canada .

[ 7 ] Van Fraassen earned his B.A.

(1963) from the University of Alberta and his M.A.

(1964) and Ph.D.

(1966, under the direction of Adolf Grünbaum ) from the University of Pittsburgh .  He previously taught at Yale University , the University of Southern California , the University of Toronto and, from 1982 to 2008, at Princeton University , where he is now emeritus.

[ 8 ] Since 2008, Van Fraassen has taught at San Francisco State University , where he teaches courses in the philosophy of science , philosophical logic , and the role of modeling in scientific practice .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Van Fraassen is an adult convert to the Roman Catholic Church [ 11 ] and is one of the founders of the Kira Institute . He is a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences; an overseas member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences since 1995; [ 12 ] and a member of the International Academy of Philosophy of Science .

[ 13 ] In 1986, Van Fraassen received the Lakatos Award for his contributions to the philosophy of science and, in 2012, the Philosophy of Science Association 's inaugural Hempel Award for lifetime achievement in philosophy of science.

[ 14 ] Among his many students are the philosophers Elisabeth Lloyd at Indiana University , Anja Jauernig at New York University , Jenann Ismael at Johns Hopkins University, Ned Hall at Harvard University, Alan Hajek at the Australian National University and Professor of Mathematics Jukka Keranen at UCLA .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Philosophy of science [ edit ] Van Fraassen coined the term " constructive empiricism " in his 1980 book The Scientific Image , in which he argued for agnosticism about the reality of unobservable entities.  That book was "widely credited with rehabilitating scientific anti-realism ." [ 15 ] According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : The constructive empiricist follows the logical positivists in rejecting metaphysical commitments in science, but parts with them regarding their endorsement of the verificationist criterion of meaning, as well as their endorsement of the suggestion that theory-laden discourse can and should be removed from science. Before van Fraassen's The Scientific Image , some philosophers had viewed scientific anti-realism as dead, because logical positivism was dead. Van Fraassen showed that there were other ways to be an empiricist with respect to science, without following in the footsteps of the logical positivists.

[ 15 ] Paul M. Churchland , one of Van Fraassen's critics, contrasted Van Fraassen's idea of unobservable phenomena with the idea of merely unobserved phenomena.

[ 16 ] In his 1989 book Laws and Symmetry , Van Fraassen attempted to lay the ground-work for explaining physical phenomena without assuming that such phenomena are caused by rules or laws which can be said to cause or govern their behavior. Focusing on the problem of underdetermination , he argued for the possibility that theories could have empirical equivalence but differ in their ontological commitments. He rejects the notion that the aim of science is to produce an account of the physical world that is literally true and instead maintains that its aim is to produce theories that are empirically adequate.

[ 17 ] Van Fraassen has also studied the philosophy of quantum mechanics , philosophical logic, and Bayesian epistemology .

Philosophical logic [ edit ] Van Fraassen has been the editor of the Journal of Philosophical Logic and co-editor of the Journal of Symbolic Logic .

[ 8 ] In logic, Van Frassen is best known for his work on free logic and his introduction of the supervaluation semantics . In his paper "Singular Terms, Truth-value Gaps, and Free Logic", [ 18 ] Van Fraassen opens with a very brief introduction of the problem of non-referring names .

Instead of any unique formalization, though, he simply adjusts the axioms of a standard predicate logic such as that found in Willard Van Orman Quine 's Methods of Logic .  Instead of an axiom like ∀ ∀ x P x ⇒ ⇒ ∃ ∃ x P x {\displaystyle \forall x\,Px\Rightarrow \exists x\,Px} he uses ( ∀ ∀ x P x ∧ ∧ ∃ ∃ x ( x = a ) ) ⇒ ⇒ ∃ ∃ x P x {\displaystyle (\forall x\,Px\land \exists x\,(x=a))\Rightarrow \exists x\,Px} ; this will naturally be true  if the existential claim of the antecedent is false.  If a name fails to refer, then the atomic sentence containing it can be assigned a truth value arbitrarily, provided that it is not an identity statement. Free logic is proved to be complete under this interpretation.

He indicates that, however, he sees no good reason to call statements which employ them either true or false.  Some have attempted to solve this problem by means of many-valued logics ;  Van Fraassen offers in their stead the use of supervaluations . Questions of completeness change when supervaluations are admitted, since they allow for valid arguments that do not correspond to logically true conditionals.

His paper "Facts and tautological entailment" (J Phil 1969) is now regarded as the beginning of truth-maker semantics.

Bayesian epistemology [ edit ] In "Belief and the Will", Van Fraassen proposed what is now known as Van Fraassen's reflection principle : "to satisfy the principle, the agent's present subjective probability for proposition A , on the supposition that his subjective probability for this proposition will equal r at some later time, must equal this same number r ".

[ 19 ] Within Bayesian epistemology this principle is recognized as an important synchronic norm ; however Van Fraassen points out that a Dutch Book argument can be made against the principle.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Books [ edit ] Scientific Representation: Paradoxes of Perspective , OUP, 2008.

The Empirical Stance , Yale University Press, 2002.

Quantum Mechanics: An Empiricist View , Oxford University Press, 1991.

Laws and Symmetry , Oxford University Press 1989.

The Scientific Image , Oxford University Press 1980.

Derivation and Counterexample: An Introduction to Philosophical Logic (with Karel Lambert), Dickenson Publishing Company, Inc. 1972.

Formal Semantics and Logic , Macmillan, New York 1971.

An Introduction to the Philosophy of Time and Space , Random House, New York 1970.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Scientific Realism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ David Marshall Miller, Representing Space in the Scientific Revolution , Cambridge University Press, 2014, p. 4 n. 2.

^ Free Logic (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ Sandy Boucher, "Stances and Epistemology: Values, Pragmatics, and Rationality", Metaphilosophy 49 (4), July 2018, pp. 521–547.

^ "Doctoral Dissertations, 1977".

The Review of Metaphysics .

31 (1): 174. 1977.

ISSN 2154-1302 .

JSTOR 20127042 .

^ SCI PHI Podcast: Episode 28 - Bas Van Fraassen on YouTube ^ Why Science Should Stay Clear of Metaphysics , Nautilus ^ a b Bas C. van Fraassen, Curriculum Vitae ^ "SF State News at SFSU" . Archived from the original on 2012-06-17 . Retrieved 2009-08-03 .

^ "SF State Campus Memo: New tenure-track faculty 2008-09" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-09 . Retrieved 2009-09-20 .

^ New Blackfriars Vol. 80, No. 938, 1999.

^ "B.C. van Fraassen" . Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on 2 December 2020 . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

^ LES MEMBRES ACTUELS DE L'A.I.P.S.

Archived 2013-09-19 at the Wayback Machine ^ Hempel Award recipients ^ a b Monton, Bradley; Mohler, Chad (3 May 2017) [First published 1 October 2008].

"Constructive Empiricism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2017 ed.).

Stanford University : The Metaphysics Research Lab. Introduction and "Contrast with Logical Positivism".

ISSN 1095-5054 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

^ Churchland, Paul M. (1982).

"The Anti-Realist Epistemology of van Fraassen's The Scientific Image" .

Pacific Philosophical Quarterly .

63 (3): 226– 235.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0114.1982.tb00101.x .

ISSN 0279-0750 .

^ Jarrett Leplin (1984), Scientific Realism , University of California Press, p. 1, ISBN 0-520-05155-6 ^ B. C. van Fraassen, "Singular Terms, Truth-value Gaps, and Free Logic", The Journal of Philosophy 63 (17), September 1966:481–495.

^ Fraassen, Bas C. van (1984). "Belief and the Will".

Journal of Philosophy .

81 (5): 235– 256.

doi : 10.2307/2026388 .

JSTOR 2026388 .

^ Talbott, William (12 October 2016) [First published 12 July 2001].

"Bayesian Epistemology" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2016 ed.).

Stanford University : The Metaphysics Research Lab. Other Principles of Bayesian Epistemology.

ISSN 1095-5054 . Retrieved 31 May 2018 .

A. Other principles of synchronic coherence.

Are the probability laws the only standards of synchronic coherence for degrees of belief? Van Fraassen has proposed an additional principle (Reflection or Special Reflection), which he now regards as a special case of an even more general principle (General Reflection).

^ W. J. Talbott, "Two Principles of Bayesian Epistemology", Philosophical Studies 62 (2), May 1991, pp. 135–150.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Bas van Fraassen .

Van Fraassen's homepage at Princeton.

Van Fraassen's faculty page (2009) at the Department of Philosophy, San Francisco State University.

v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet Artists MusicBrainz People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bas_van_Fraassen&oldid=1305604364#Philosophical_work " Categories : 1941 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Dutch male writers 20th-century Dutch non-fiction writers 20th-century Dutch philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers 21st-century Dutch male writers 21st-century Dutch non-fiction writers 21st-century Dutch philosophers 21st-century Roman Catholics Academic staff of the University of Toronto American epistemologists American logicians American male non-fiction writers American philosophy academics American Roman Catholic writers Analytic philosophers Catholic philosophers Converts to Roman Catholicism Corresponding fellows of the British Academy Dutch logicians Dutch male non-fiction writers Dutch Roman Catholic writers Lakatos Award winners Members of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences People from Goes Philosophers of physics Philosophers of time Princeton University faculty San Francisco State University faculty University of Alberta alumni University of Pittsburgh alumni University of Southern California faculty Yale University faculty Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Dutch IPA This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bas van Fraassen 16 languages Add topic

