Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contemporary epigraphic sources 2 Later copies and literary compositions 3 Archaeology 4 Dating and periodization Toggle Dating and periodization subsection 4.1 Timeline of rulers 5 History and development of the empire Toggle History and development of the empire subsection 5.1 Pre-Sargonic Akkad 5.2 Sargon of Akkad 5.3 Rimush and Manishtushu 5.4 Naram-Sin 5.5 Submission of Sumerian kings 5.6 Collapse 5.6.1 Natural causes: drought, seasonal weather patterns 6 Government 7 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 7.1 Foreign trade 8 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 8.1 Akkadian art 8.1.1 Seals 8.2 Language 8.3 Poet–priestess Enheduanna 9 Technology 10 See also 11 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 11.1 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Akkadian Empire 87 languages Afrikaans Аԥсшәа العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 33°6′N 44°6′E ﻿ / ﻿ 33.100°N 44.100°E ﻿ / 33.100; 44.100 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Akkadians ) State in Mesopotamia (c. 2334–2154 BC) Akkadian Empire 𒆳𒌵𒆠 ( Akkadian ) māt Akkadi 𒀀𒂵𒉈𒆠 ( Sumerian ) a-ga-de 3 KI c.

2334 – c.

2154 BC Map of the Akkadian Empire (brown) and the directions in which military campaigns were conducted (yellow arrows) Capital Akkad Official languages Akkadian (de jure) Sumerian (honorific and liturgical) Common languages Akkadian (dominant) Sumerian ( vernacular ) Religion Ancient Mesopotamian Polytheism Government Imperial Monarchy Šarrum (Kings) • c.

2334–2279 BC Sargon (first) • c.

2168–2154 BC Shu-turul (last) Historical era Bronze Age • Established c.

2334 BC • Conquests of Sargon of Akkad c.

2340 – c.

2284 BC • Disestablished c.

2154 BC Area 2350 BC [ 1 ] 30,000 km 2 (12,000 sq mi) 2300 BC [ 1 ] 650,000 km 2 (250,000 sq mi) 2250 BC [ 1 ] 800,000 km 2 (310,000 sq mi) 2200 BC [ 1 ] 250,000 km 2 (97,000 sq mi) Preceded by Succeeded by Early Dynastic Period Gutian Period (Sumer) Today part of Iraq Iran Syria Turkey Kuwait The Akkadian Empire ( / ə ˈ k eɪ d i ən / ) [ 2 ] was the first known empire , [ 3 ] succeeding the long-lived city-states of Sumer . Centered on the city of Akkad ( / ˈ æ k æ d / or / ˈ ɑː k ɑː d / ) [ 4 ] and its surrounding region, the empire united Akkadian and Sumerian speakers under one rule and exercised significant influence across Mesopotamia , the Levant , and Anatolia , sending military expeditions as far south as Dilmun and Magan (modern United Arab Emirates , Saudi Arabia , Bahrain , Kuwait , Qatar and Oman ) in the Arabian Peninsula .

[ 5 ] [ page needed ] Established by Sargon of Akkad after defeating the Sumerian king Lugal-zage-si , it replaced the system of independent Sumerian city-states and unified a vast region, stretching from the Mediterranean to Iran and from Anatolia to the Persian Gulf , under a centralized government . Sargon and his successors, especially his grandson Naram-Sin , expanded the empire through military conquest , administrative reforms , and cultural integration . Naram-Sin took the unprecedented step of declaring himself a living god and adopted the title "King of the Four Quarters." The Akkadian language became the empire’s lingua franca , although Sumerian remained important in religion and literature. The empire was documented through inscriptions, administrative tablets, and seals, including notable sources like the Bassetki Statue .

Enheduanna , Sargon’s daughter, served as high priestess and is recognized as the first known named author in history.

The Akkadian Empire reached its political peak between the 24th and 22nd centuries BC, following the conquests by its founder Sargon. Under Sargon and his successors, the Akkadian language was briefly imposed on neighboring conquered states such as Elam and Gutium . Akkad is sometimes regarded as the first empire in history, though the meaning of this term is not precise, and there are earlier Sumerian claimants.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Akkadian state was characterized by a planned economy supported by agriculture, taxation, and conquest. It also saw developments in art, technology, and long-distance trade, including connections with the Indus Valley . Despite its strength, the empire faced internal revolts, dynastic instability, and external invasions. Sargon’s sons, Rimush and Manishtushu , struggled to maintain control; both died violently. Naram-Sin’s successors were weaker, leading to fragmentation and vulnerability. The empire eventually collapsed due to a combination of internal unrest, invasions by the Gutians and severe environmental stress. A major drought associated with the 4.2-kiloyear climate event led to crop failures, famine, urban decline, and population displacement.

Contemporary epigraphic sources [ edit ] Epigraphic sources from the Sargonic (Akkadian Empire) period are uncommon, partly because the capital Akkad , like the capitals of the later Mitanni and Sealand , has not yet been located, though there has been much speculation.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Some cuneiform tablets have been excavated at cities under Akkadian Empire control such as Eshnunna and Tell Agrab .

[ 10 ] Other tablets have become available on the antiquities market and are held in museums and private collections such as those from the Akkadian governor in Adab .

[ 11 ] Internal evidence allows their dating to the Sargonic period and sometimes to the original location. Archives are especially important to historians and only a few have become available.

[ 12 ] The Me-sag Archive, which commenced publication in 1958, is considered one of the most significant collections. The tablets, about 500 in number with about half published, are held primarily at the Babylonian Collection of the Yale University and Baghdad Museum with a few others scattered about. The tablets date to the period of late in the reign of Naram-Sin to early in the reign of Shar-kali-shari. They are believed to be from a town between Umma and Lagash and Me-sag to be the governor of Umma.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] An archive of 47 tablets was found at the excavation of Tell Suleimah in the Hamrin Basin.

[ 16 ] Various royal inscriptions by the Akkadian rulers have also been found. Most of the original examples are short, or very fragmentary like the Victory Stele of Naram-Sin and the Sargonic victory stele from Telloh.

[ 17 ] A few longer ones are known because of later copies made, often from the much later Old Babylonian period. While these are assumed to be mostly accurate, it is difficult to know if they had been edited to reflect current political conditions.

[ 18 ] One of the longer surviving examples is the Bassetki Statue , the copper base of a Narim-Sin statue: "Naram-Sin, the mighty, king  of  Agade, when the four quarters together revolted against him, through the love which the goddess Astar showed him, he was victorious in nine battles in one in 1                                                                          year, and the kings whom they (the rebels[?]) had                                                                         raised (against  him), he captured. In view of the fact that he protected                                                             the foundations of his city from danger, (the citizens of his city requested from Astar in Eanna, Enlil in Nippur, Dagan in Tuttul, Ninhursag in Kes, Ea in Eridu, Sin in Ur, Samas in Sippar, (and) Nergal in Kutha, that (Naram-Sin) be (made) the god of their city, and  they built within Agade a temple (dedicated) to him. As for the one who removes this inscription, may the gods Samas, Astar, Nergal, the bailiff of the king, namely all those gods (mentioned  above) tear out his foundations and destroy his progeny." [ 18 ] A number of fragments of royal statues of Manishtushu all bearing portions of a "standard inscription". Aside from a few minor short inscriptions this is the only known contemporary source for this ruler.

[ 19 ] An excerpt: "Man-istusu, king of the world: when he conquered Ansan and Sirihum, had ... ships cross the Lower Sea. The cities across the Sea, thirty-two (in number), assembled for battle, but he was victorious (over them). Further, he conquered their cities, [st]ru[c]k down their rulers and aft[er] he [roused them (his troops)], plundered as far as the Silver Mines. He quarried the black stone of the mountains across the Lower Sea, loaded (it) on ships, and moored (the ships) at the quay of Agade" [ 18 ] Manishtushu Obelisk , with close-up of the text. 2270–2255 BC, Louvre Museum Before the Akkadian Empire, calendar years were marked by Regnal Numbers. During Sargonic times, a system of year-names was used. This practice continued until the end of the Old Babylonian period, for example, "Year in which the divine Hammu[rabi] the king Esznunna destroyed by a flood.” [ 20 ] Afterwards, Regnal Numbers were used by all succeeding kingdoms.

[ 21 ] During the Akkadian Empire 3 of the presumed 40 Sargon year-names are known, 1 (presumed 9) of Rimush, 20 (presumed 56) of Naram-Sin, and 18 (presumed 18) of Shar-kali-shari.

[ 22 ] Recently, a single year-name had been found "In the year that Dūr-Maništusu was established.” [ 23 ] There are also, perhaps, a dozen more known, which cannot be firmly linked to a ruler. Especially with the paucity of other inscriptions, year-names are extremely important in determining the history of the Akkadian Empire. As an example, from one year-name, we know that the empire was in conflict with the Gutians long before its end.  It attests the name of a Gutian ruler and marks the construction of two temples in Babylon as recognition of Akkadian victory.

"In the year in which Szarkaliszarri laid the foundations of the temples of the goddess Annunitum and of the god Aba in Babylon and when he defeated Szarlak, king of Gutium" [ 24 ] The final contemporary source are seals and their sealing dates. These are especially important here, as markers, with the shortage of other Akkadian Empire epigraphics and very useful to historians. As an example, two seals and one sealing were found in the Royal Cemetery at Ur which contained the name of Sargons's daughter En-hedu-ana. This provided confirmation of her existence. The seals read "En-hedu-ana, daughter of Sargon: Ilum-pal[il] (is) her coiffeur" and "Adda, estate supervisor/majordomo of En-hedu-ana".

[ 18 ] At Tell Mozan (ancient Urkesh) brought to light a clay sealing of Tar'am-Agade (Akkad loves <her>), a previously unknown daughter of Naram-Sin , who was possibly married to an unidentified local endan (ruler).

[ 25 ] Later copies and literary compositions [ edit ] Bronze head of an Akkadian ruler, discovered in Nineveh in 1931, presumably depicting either Sargon or, more probably, Sargon's grandson Naram-Sin .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] So great was the Akkadian Empire, especially Sargon and Narim-Sin, that its history was passed down for millennia. This ranged on one end to purported copies of still existing Sargonic period inscriptions to literary tales made up from the whole cloth at the other.

[ 28 ] A few examples: Great Rebellion Against Naram-Sin – At one point in his reign much of the Empire, especially in the old mainly Sumerian city-states, rose up against Naram-Sin. The revolt was crushed but the echoes of the event were passed down in history. Some of the tales, like "Naram-Sin and the Enemy Hordes" (Old Babylonian – purported to be a copy of an inscription at the temple of Nergal in Cutha) and "Gula-AN and the Seventeen Kings against Naram-Sin" were literary compositions which further developed and changed the themes. The earliest examplar, from the Old Babylonian period, is found in several incomplete tablets and fragments, which differ somewhat, purporting to be copies of an inscription on a statue of Naram-Sin standing in the Ekur temple of Enlil at Nippur . Because it aligns with known contemporary inscriptions and year name it is considered authentic, which the usual Mesopotamian slant that something  going wrong means you displeased the gods.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] "... By the verdict of the goddess Astar-Annunltum, Naram-Sin, the mighty, [was vic]torious over the Kisite in battle at TiWA. [Further], Ili-resi, the general; Ilum-muda, Ibbi-Zababa, Imtalik, (and) Puzur-Asar, captains of Kis; and Puzur-Ningal, governor of TiWA; Ili-re'a, his captain; Kullizum, captain of Eres; Edam'u, captain of Kutha ..." [ 18 ] Cursing of Agade – A purely literary composition which was handed down for millennia in Mesopotamia. Composed in the Ur III period, a century or at most two after the events, it is essentially artistic propaganda. After a long period of Akkadian dominance the Sumerians from the south are back in ascendancy. The Ur rule is sometimes called the Neo-Sumerian Empire. This composition lays all the troubles before the rise of Ur at the feet of the Akkadian Empire (because Naram-Sin leveled the Ekur temple of Enlil while rebuilding it causing the eight chief deities of Mesopotamia to withdraw their support and protection from Akkad). While basically fiction, it is still useful to historians.

[ 32 ] "...Enlil brought out of the mountains those who do not resemble other people, who are not reckoned as part of the Land, the Gutians, an unbridled people, with human intelligence but canine instincts and monkeys' features. Like small birds they swooped on the ground in great flocks. Because of Enlil, they stretched their arms out across the plain like a net for animals. Nothing escaped their clutches, no one left their grasp. Messengers no longer traveled the highways, the courier's boat no longer passed along the rivers. The Gutians drove the trusty (?) goats of Enlil out of their folds and compelled their herdsmen to follow them, they drove the cows out of their pens and compelled their cowherds to follow them. Prisoners manned the watch. Brigands occupied the highways. The doors of the city gates of the Land lay dislodged in mud, and all the foreign lands uttered bitter cries from the walls of their cities ..." [ 33 ] [ 34 ] There were a number of these, passed down as part of scribel tradition including The  Birth Legend of Sargon ( Neo-Assyrian ), Weidner Chronicle, and the Geographical Treatise on Sargon of Akkad's Empire.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Archaeology [ edit ] Identifying architectural remains is hindered by the fact that there are sometimes no clear distinctions between features thought to stem from the preceding Early Dynastic period , and those thought to be Akkadian. Likewise, material that is thought to be Akkadian continues to be in use into the Ur III period .

[ 39 ] There is a similar issue with cuneiform tablets. In the early Akkadian Empire tablets and the signs on them are much like those from earlier periods, before developing into the much different Classical Sargonic style.

[ 12 ] With the capital, Akkad, still unlocated, archaeological remains of the empire are still to be found, mainly at the cities where they established regional governors. An example is Adab where Naram-Sin established direct imperial control after Adab joined the "great revolt".

[ 40 ] After destroying the city of Mari the Akkadian Empire rebuilt it as an administrative center with an imperial governor.

[ 41 ] The city of Nuzi was established by the Akkadians and a number of economic and administrative texts were found there.

[ 42 ] Similarly, there are Marad , Nippur , Tutub and Ebla .

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Excavation at the modern site of Tell Brak has suggested that the Akkadians rebuilt a city ("Brak" or "Nagar") on this site, for use as an administrative center. The city included two large buildings including a complex with temple, offices, courtyard, and large ovens.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Dating and periodization [ edit ] The Akkadian period is generally dated to 2,334–2,154 BC (according to the middle chronology ). The short-chronology dates of 2,270–2,083 BC are now considered less likely. It was preceded by the Early Dynastic Period of Mesopotamia (ED) and succeeded by the Ur III Period , although both transitions are blurry. For example, it is likely that the rise of Sargon of Akkad coincided with the late ED Period and that the final Akkadian kings ruled simultaneously with the Gutian kings alongside rulers at the city-states of both Uruk and Lagash . The Akkadian Period is contemporary with EB IV (in Israel ), EB IVA and EJ IV (in Syria), and EB IIIB (in Turkey ).

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Timeline of rulers [ edit ] Main article: List of kings of Akkad The relative order of Akkadian kings is clear, while noting that the Ur III version of the Sumerian King List inverts the order of Rimush and Manishtushu.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The absolute dates of their reigns are approximate (as with all dates prior to the Late Bronze Age collapse c.

1200 BC).

[ 51 ] Ruler Middle chronology All dates BC Family tree Sargon 2334–2279 Rimush 2278–2270 Manishtushu 2269–2255 Naram-Sin 2254–2218 Shar-Kali-Sharri 2217–2193 Dudu 2189–2169 Shu-turul 2168–2154 History and development of the empire [ edit ] Pre-Sargonic Akkad [ edit ] Akkad before expansion (in green). The territory of Sumer under its last king Lugal-Zage-Si appears in orange. Circa 2350 BC Sargon on his victory stele, with a royal hair bun , holding a mace and wearing a flounced royal coat on his left shoulder with a large belt (left), followed by an attendant holding a royal umbrella.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The name of Sargon in cuneiform ("King Sargon") appears faintly in front of his face.

[ 52 ] [ 54 ] Louvre Museum .

Akkadian official in the retinue of Sargon of Akkad, holding an axe The Akkadian Empire takes its name from the region and the city of Akkad, both of which were localized in the general confluence area of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers. Although the city of Akkad has not yet been identified on the ground, it is known from various textual sources. Among these is at least one text predating the reign of Sargon. Together with the fact that the name Akkad is of non- Akkadian origin, this suggests that the city of Akkad may have already been occupied in pre-Sargonic times.

[ 8 ] [ 55 ] Sargon of Akkad [ edit ] Main article: Sargon of Akkad The earliest records in the Akkadian language date to the time of Sargon of Akkad, who defeated the Sumerian king Lugal-zage-si at the Battle of Uruk and conquered his former territory, establishing the Akkadian Empire. Sargon was claimed to be the son of a gardener in the Sumerian King List . Later legends named his father as La'ibum or Itti-Bel and his birth mother as a priestess (or possibly even a hierodule ) of Ishtar , the Akkadian equivalent of the Sumerian goddess Inanna . One legend of Sargon from Neo-Assyrian times quotes him as saying My mother was a changeling , my father I knew not. The brothers of my father loved the hills. My city is Azurpiranu (the wilderness herb fields), which is situated on the banks of the Euphrates. My changeling mother conceived me, in secret she bore me. She set me in a basket of rushes, with bitumen she sealed my lid. She cast me into the river which rose not over me. The river bore me up and carried me to Akki, the drawer of water. Akki, the drawer of water, took me as his son and reared me. Akki the drawer of water, appointed me as his gardener. While I was gardener Ishtar granted me her love, and for four and (fifty?) ... years I exercised kingship.

[ 56 ] Later claims made on behalf of Sargon were that his mother was an " entu " priestess (high priestess). The claims might have been made to ensure a pedigree of nobility, since only a highly placed family could achieve such a position.

[ 57 ] Originally a cupbearer ( Rabshakeh ) to a king of Kish with a Semitic name, Ur-Zababa , Sargon thus became a gardener, responsible for the task of clearing out irrigation canals. The royal cupbearer at this time was in fact a prominent political position, close to the king and with various high level responsibilities not suggested by the title of the position itself.

[ 58 ] This gave him access to a disciplined corps of workers, who also may have served as his first soldiers. Displacing Ur-Zababa, Sargon was crowned king, and he entered upon a career of foreign conquest.

[ 59 ] Four times he invaded Syria and Canaan , and he spent three years thoroughly subduing the countries of "the west" to unite them with Mesopotamia "into a single empire".

However, Sargon took this process further, conquering many of the surrounding regions to create an empire that reached westward as far as the Mediterranean Sea and perhaps Cyprus ( Kaptara ); northward as far as the mountains (a later Hittite text asserts he fought the Hattian king Nurdaggal of Burushanda , well into Anatolia ); eastward over Elam ; and as far south as Magan ( Oman ) — a region over which he reigned for purportedly 56 years, though only four "year-names" survive. He consolidated his dominion over his territories by replacing the earlier opposing rulers with noble citizens of Akkad, his native city where loyalty was thus ensured.

[ 60 ] Prisoners escorted by a soldier, on a victory stele of Sargon of Akkad, circa 2300 BC.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] The hairstyle of the prisoners (curly hair on top and short hair on the sides) is characteristic of Sumerians, as also seen on the Standard of Ur .

[ 63 ] Louvre Museum .

Trade extended from the silver mines of Anatolia to the lapis lazuli mines in modern Afghanistan , the cedars of Lebanon and the copper of Magan . This consolidation of the city-states of Sumer and Akkad reflected the growing economic and political power of Mesopotamia. The empire's breadbasket was the rain-fed agricultural system and a chain of fortresses was built to control the imperial wheat production.

Images of Sargon were erected on the shores of the Mediterranean, in token of his victories, and cities and palaces were built at home with the spoils of the conquered lands. Elam and the northern part of Mesopotamia were also subjugated, and rebellions in Sumer were put down. Contract tablets have been found dated in the years of the campaigns against Canaan and against Sarlak , king of Gutium . He also boasted of having subjugated the "four-quarters" — the lands surrounding Akkad to the north, the south (Sumer), the east (Elam), and the west ( Martu ). Some of the earliest historiographic texts ( ABC 19, 20 ) suggest he rebuilt the city of Babylon ( Bab-ilu ) in its new location near Akkad.

[ 64 ] Troubles multiplied toward the end of his reign. A later Babylonian text states: In his old age, all the lands revolted against him, and they besieged him in Akkad (the city) [but] he went forth to battle and defeated them, he knocked them over and destroyed their vast army.

It refers to his campaign in "Elam", where he defeated a coalition army led by the King of Awan and forced the vanquished to become his vassals.

[ 65 ] Also shortly after, another revolt took place: the Subartu the upper country—in their turn attacked, but they submitted to his arms, and Sargon settled their habitations, and he smote them grievously.

Rimush and Manishtushu [ edit ] Main articles: Rimush and Manishtushu Akkadian soldiers slaying enemies, circa 2300 BC, possibly from a Victory Stele of Rimush.

[ 66 ] Sargon had crushed opposition even at old age. These difficulties broke out again in the reign of his sons, where revolts broke out during the nine-year reign of Rimush (2278–2270 BC), who fought hard to retain the empire, and was successful until he was assassinated by some of his own courtiers. According to his inscriptions, he faced widespread revolts, and had to reconquer the cities of Ur , Umma , Adab , Lagash , Der , and Kazallu from rebellious ensis : [ 67 ] Rimush introduced mass slaughter and large scale destruction of the Sumerian city-states, and maintained meticulous records of his destructions. Most of the major Sumerian cities were destroyed, and Sumerian human losses were enormous: [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Sumerian casualties from the campaigns of Rimush [ 67 ] Destroyed cities: Adab and Zabala Umma and KI.AN Ur and Lagash Kazallu (Three battles in Sumer ) TOTAL Killed 15,718 8,900 8,049 12,052 11,322 56,041 Captured and enslaved 14,576 3,540 5,460 5,862 _ 29,438 "Expelled and annihilated" _ 5,600 5,985 _ 14,100 25,685 Rimush's elder brother, Manishtushu (2269–2255 BC) succeeded him. The latter seems to have fought a sea battle against 32 kings who had gathered against him and took control over their pre- Arab country, consisting of modern-day United Arab Emirates and Oman . Despite the success, like his brother he seems to have been assassinated in a palace conspiracy.

[ 69 ] [ 67 ] Naram-Sin [ edit ] Main article: Naram-Sin of Akkad Portrait of Naram-Sin, with inscription in his name Manishtushu's son and successor, Naram-Sin (2254–2218 BC), due to vast military conquests, assumed the imperial title "King Naram-Sin, king of the four-quarters " ( Lugal Naram-Sîn, Šar kibrat 'arbaim ), the four-quarters as a reference to the entire world. He was also for the first time in Sumerian culture, addressed as "the god (Sumerian = DINGIR, Akkadian = ilu ) of Agade" (Akkad), in opposition to the previous religious belief that kings were only representatives of the people towards the gods.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] He also faced revolts at the start of his reign, [ 72 ] but quickly crushed them.

Victory Stele of Naram-Sin , celebrating victory against the Lullubi from Zagros 2260 BC. He is wearing a horned helmet, a symbol of divinity, and is also portrayed in a larger scale in comparison to others to emphasize his superiority.

[ 70 ] Brought back from Sippar to Susa as war prize in the 12th century BC.

Naram-Sin also recorded the Akkadian conquest of Ebla as well as Armanum and its king.

[ 73 ] Palace of Naram-Sin at Tell Brak .

To better police Syria, he built a royal residence at Tell Brak, a crossroads at the heart of the Khabur River basin of the Jezirah . Naram-Sin campaigned against Magan which also revolted; Naram-Sin "marched against Magan and personally caught Mandannu, its king", where he instated garrisons to protect the main roads. The chief threat seemed to be coming from the northern Zagros Mountains, the Lulubis and the Gutians. A campaign against the Lullubi led to the carving of the "Victory Stele of Naram-Suen", now in the Louvre .

Hittite sources claim Naram-Sin of Akkad even ventured into Anatolia , battling the Hittite and Hurrian kings Pamba of Hatti , Zipani of Kanesh , and 15 others.

The economy was highly planned. Grain was cleaned, and rations of grain and oil were distributed in standardized vessels made by the city's potters. Taxes were paid in produce and labour on public walls, including city walls, temples, irrigation canals and waterways, producing huge agricultural surpluses.

[ 74 ] This newfound Akkadian wealth may have been based upon benign climatic conditions, huge agricultural surpluses and the confiscation of the wealth of other peoples.

[ 75 ] In later Assyrian and Babylonian texts, the name Akkad , together with Sumer , appears as part of the royal title, as in the Sumerian LUGAL KI-EN-GI KI-URI or Akkadian Šar māt Šumeri u Akkadi , [ 51 ] translating to "king of Sumer and Akkad".

[ 76 ] This title was assumed by the king who seized control of Nippur , the intellectual and religious center of southern Mesopotamia.

During the Akkadian period, the Akkadian language became the lingua franca of the Middle East, and was officially used for administration, although Sumerian remained as a spoken and literary language. The spread of Akkadian stretched from Syria to Elam, and even the Elamite language was temporarily written in Mesopotamian cuneiform . Akkadian texts later found their way to far-off places, from Egypt (in the Amarna Period ) and Anatolia , to Persia ( Behistun ).

Submission of Sumerian kings [ edit ] The submission of some Sumerian rulers to the Akkadian Empire, is recorded in the seal inscriptions of Sumerian rulers such as Lugal-ushumgal , governor ( ensi ) of Lagash ("Shirpula"), circa 2230–2210 BC. Several inscriptions of Lugal-ushumgal are known, particularly seal impressions, which refer to him as governor of Lagash and at the time a vassal ( 𒀵 , arad , "servant" or "slave") of Naram-Sin, as well as his successor Shar-kali-sharri .

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] One of these seals proclaims: “Naram-Sin, the mighty God of Agade, king of the four corners of the world, Lugal-ushumgal, the scribe, ensi of Lagash , is thy servant.” — Seal of Lugal-ushumgal as vassal of Naram-sin .

[ 78 ] [ 81 ] It can be considered that Lugal-ushumgal was a collaborator of the Akkadian Empire, as was Meskigal , ruler of Adab .

[ 82 ] Later however, Lugal-ushumgal was succeeded by Puzer-Mama who, as Akkadian power waned, achieved independence from Shar-Kali-Sharri , assuming the title of "King of Lagash" and starting the illustrious Second Dynasty of Lagash.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Collapse [ edit ] The Gutians capturing a Babylonian city, as the Akkadians are making a stand outside of their city. 19th century illustration.

See also: Gutian dynasty of Sumer The empire of Akkad likely fell in the 22nd century BC, within 180 years of its founding, ushering in a " Dark Age " with no prominent imperial authority until the Third Dynasty of Ur . The region's political structure may have reverted to the status quo ante of local governance by city-states .

[ 85 ] By the end of Sharkalisharri's reign, the empire had begun to unravel.

[ 86 ] After several years of chaos (and four kings), Shu-turul and Dudu appear to have restored some centralized authority for several decades; however, they were unable to prevent the empire from eventually collapsing outright, eventually ceding power to Gutians , based in Adab, who had been conquered by Akkad during the reign of Sharkalisharri.

[ 87 ] Little is known about the Gutian period, or how long it endured. Cuneiform sources suggest that the Gutians' administration showed little concern for maintaining agriculture, written records, or public safety; they reputedly released all farm animals to roam about Mesopotamia freely and soon brought about famine and rocketing grain prices. The Sumerian king Ur-Nammu (2112–2095 BC) cleared the Gutians from Mesopotamia during his reign.

The Sumerian King List , describing the Akkadian Empire after the death of Shar-kali-shari, states: Who was king? Who was not king? Irgigi the king; Nanum, the king; Imi the king; Ilulu, the king—the four of them were kings but reigned only three years. Dudu reigned 21 years; Shu-Turul, the son of Dudu, reigned 15 years. ... Agade was defeated and its kingship carried off to Uruk. In Uruk, Ur-ningin reigned 7 years, Ur-gigir, son of Ur-ningin, reigned 6 years; Kuda reigned 6 years; Puzur-ili reigned 5 years, Ur-Utu reigned 6 years. Uruk was smitten with weapons and its kingship carried off by the Gutian hordes.

However, there are no known year-names or other archaeological evidence verifying any of these later kings of Akkad or Uruk, apart from several artefact referencing king Dudu of Akkad and Shu-turul .

[ 88 ] The named kings of Uruk may have been contemporaries of the last kings of Akkad, but in any event could not have been very prominent.

In the Gutian hordes, (first reigned) a nameless king; (then) Imta reigned 3 years as king; Shulme reigned 6 years; Elulumesh reigned 6 years; Inimbakesh reigned 5 years; Igeshuash reigned 6 years; Iarlagab reigned 15 years; Ibate reigned 3 years; ... reigned 3 years; Kurum reigned 1 year; ... reigned 3 years; ... reigned 2 years; Iararum reigned 2 years; Ibranum reigned 1 year; Hablum reigned 2 years; Puzur-Sin son of Hablum reigned 7 years; Iarlaganda reigned 7 years; ... reigned 7 years; ... reigned 40 days. Total 21 kings reigned 91 years, 40 days.

"Cylinder Seal with King or God and Vanquished Lion" (Old Akkadian).

[ 89 ] The Walters Art Museum.

The period between c.

2112 BC and 2004 BC is known as the Ur III period. Documents again began to be written in Sumerian , although Sumerian was becoming a purely literary or liturgical language, much as Latin later became in Medieval Europe .

[ 56 ] One explanation for the end of the Akkadian empire is simply that the Akkadian dynasty could not maintain its political supremacy over other independently powerful city-states.

[ 85 ] [ 90 ] Natural causes: drought, seasonal weather patterns [ edit ] Main article: 4.2-kiloyear event One theory, which remains controversial, associates regional decline at the end of the Akkadian period (and of the First Intermediary Period following the Old Kingdom in Ancient Egypt ) with rapidly increasing aridity, and failing rainfall in the region of the Ancient Near East, caused by a global centennial-scale drought , sometimes called the 4.2 kiloyear event .

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Harvey Weiss has shown that [A]rchaeological and soil-stratigraphic data define the origin, growth, and collapse of Subir, the third millennium rain-fed agriculture civilization of northern Mesopotamia on the Habur Plains of Syria. At 2200 BC, a marked increase in aridity and wind circulation, subsequent to a volcanic eruption, induced a considerable degradation of land-use conditions. After four centuries of urban life, this abrupt climatic change evidently caused abandonment of Tell Leilan, regional desertion, and the collapse of the Akkadian empire based in southern Mesopotamia. Synchronous collapse in adjacent regions suggests that the impact of the abrupt climatic change was extensive.

[ 92 ] Peter B. de Menocal has shown "there was an influence of the North Atlantic Oscillation on the streamflow of the Tigris and Euphrates at this time, which led to the collapse of the Akkadian Empire".

[ 94 ] More recent analysis of simulations from the HadCM3 climate model indicate that there was a shift to a more arid climate on a timescale that is consistent with the collapse of the empire.

[ 95 ] Impression of a cylinder seal of the time of Akkadian King Sharkalisharri (c. 2200 BC), with central inscription: "The Divine Sharkalisharri Prince of Akkad, Ibni-Sharrum the Scribe his servant". The long-horned buffalo is thought to have come from the Indus Valley , and testifies to exchanges with Meluhha (the Indus Valley civilization ) in a case of Indus-Mesopotamia relations . Circa 2217–2193 BC.

Louvre Museum .

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Excavation at Tell Leilan suggests that this site was abandoned soon after the city's massive walls were constructed, its temple rebuilt and its grain production reorganized. The debris, dust, and sand that followed show no trace of human activity. Soil samples show fine wind-blown sand, no trace of earthworm activity, reduced rainfall and indications of a drier and windier climate. Evidence shows that skeleton-thin sheep and cattle died of drought, and up to 28,000 people abandoned the site, presumably seeking wetter areas elsewhere. Tell Brak shrank in size by 75%. Trade collapsed.

Nomadic herders such as the Amorites moved herds closer to reliable water suppliers, bringing them into conflict with Akkadian populations. This climate-induced collapse seems to have affected the whole of the Middle East, and to have coincided with the collapse of the Egyptian Old Kingdom.

[ 92 ] This collapse of rain-fed agriculture in the Upper Country meant the loss to southern Mesopotamia of the agrarian subsidies which had kept the Akkadian Empire solvent. Water levels within the Tigris and Euphrates fell 1.5 meters beneath the level of 2600 BC, and although they stabilized for a time during the following Ur III period, rivalries between pastoralists and farmers increased. Attempts were undertaken to prevent the former from herding their flocks in agricultural lands, such as the building of a 180 km (112 mi) wall known as the "Repeller of the Amorites" between the Tigris and Euphrates under the Ur III ruler Shu-Sin . Such attempts led to increased political instability; meanwhile, severe depression occurred to re-establish demographic equilibrium with the less favorable climatic conditions.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] Richard Zettler has critiqued the drought theory, observing that the chronology of the Akkadian empire is very uncertain and that available evidence is not sufficient to show its economic dependence on the northern areas excavated by Weiss and others. He also criticizes Weiss for taking Akkadian writings literally to describe certain catastrophic events.

[ 102 ] According to Joan Oates , at Tell Brak, the soil "signal" associated with the drought lies below the level of Naram-Sin's palace. However, evidence may suggest a tightening of Akkadian control following the Brak 'event', for example, the construction of the heavily fortified 'palace' itself and the apparent introduction of greater numbers of Akkadian as opposed to local officials, perhaps a reflection of unrest in the countryside of the type that often follows some natural catastrophe. Furthermore, Brak remained occupied and functional after the fall of the Akkadians.

[ 103 ] In 2019, a study by Hokkaido University on fossil corals in Oman provides an evidence that prolonged winter shamal seasons led to the salinization of the irrigated fields; hence, a dramatic decrease in crop production triggered a widespread famine and eventually the collapse of the ancient Akkadian Empire.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Government [ edit ] Akkadian Empire soldiers on the Victory Stele of Naram-Sin , circa 2250 BC Main article: History of institutions in Mesopotamia The Akkadian government formed a "classical standard" with which all future Mesopotamian states compared themselves. Traditionally, the ensi was the highest functionary of the Sumerian city-states . In later traditions, one became an ensi by marrying the goddess Inanna, legitimising the rulership through divine consent.

Initially, the monarchical lugal ( lu = man, gal =Great) was subordinate to the priestly ensi , and was appointed at times of troubles, but by later dynastic times, it was the lugal who had emerged as the preeminent role, having his own "é" (= house) or "palace", independent from the temple establishment. By the time of Mesalim , whichever dynasty controlled the city of Kish was recognised as šar kiššati (= king of Kish), and was considered preeminent in Sumer, possibly because this was where the two rivers approached, and whoever controlled Kish ultimately controlled the irrigation systems of the other cities downstream.

As Sargon extended his conquest from the "Lower Sea" (Persian Gulf), to the "Upper Sea" (Mediterranean), it was felt that he ruled "the totality of the lands under heaven", or "from sunrise to sunset", as contemporary texts put it. Under Sargon, the ensi s generally retained their positions, but were seen more as provincial governors. The title šar kiššati became recognised as meaning "lord of the universe". Sargon is even recorded as having organised naval expeditions to Dilmun ( Bahrain ) and Magan, amongst the first organised military naval expeditions in history. Whether he also did in the case of the Mediterranean with the kingdom of Kaptara (possibly Cyprus ), as claimed in later documents, is more questionable.

With Naram-Sin, Sargon's grandson, this went further than with Sargon, with the king not only being called "Lord of the Four-Quarters (of the Earth)", but also elevated to the ranks of the dingir (= gods), with his own temple establishment. Previously a ruler could, like Gilgamesh , become divine after death but the Akkadian kings, from Naram-Sin onward, were considered gods on earth in their lifetimes. Their portraits showed them of larger size than mere mortals and at some distance from their retainers.

[ 106 ] One strategy adopted by both Sargon and Naram-Sin, to maintain control of the country, was to install their daughters, Enheduanna and Emmenanna respectively, as high priestess to Sin, the Akkadian version of the Sumerian moon deity, Nanna, at Ur, in the extreme south of Sumer; to install sons as provincial ensi governors in strategic locations; and to marry their daughters to rulers of peripheral parts of the Empire ( Urkesh and Marhashe). A well documented case of the latter is that of Naram-Sin's daughter Tar'am-Agade at Urkesh.

[ 107 ] Records at the Brak administrative complex suggest that the Akkadians appointed locals as tax collectors .

[ 108 ] Economy [ edit ] Cylinder seal of the scribe Kalki, showing Prince Ubil-Eshtar, probable brother of Sargon, with dignitaries (an archer in front, the scribe holding a tablet following the Prince, and two dignitaries with weapons).

[ 54 ] The population of Akkad, like nearly all pre-modern states, was entirely dependent upon the agricultural systems of the region, which seem to have had two principal centres: the irrigated farmlands of southern Iraq that traditionally had a yield of 30 grains returned for each grain sown and the rain-fed agriculture of northern Iraq, known as the "Upper Country." Southern Iraq during Akkadian period seems to have been approaching its modern rainfall level of less than 20 mm (0.8 in) per year, with the result that agriculture was totally dependent upon irrigation. Before the Akkadian period, the progressive salinisation of the soils, produced by poorly drained irrigation, had been reducing yields of wheat in the southern part of the country, leading to the conversion to more salt-tolerant barley growing. Urban populations there had peaked already by 2,600 BC, and demographic pressures were high, contributing to the rise of militarism apparent immediately before the Akkadian period (as seen in the Stele of the Vultures of Eannatum ).

Warfare between city states had led to a population decline, from which Akkad provided a temporary respite.

[ 109 ] It was this high degree of agricultural productivity in the south that enabled the growth of the highest population densities in the world at this time, giving Akkad its military advantage.

Sea shell of a murex bearing the name of Rimush , king of Kish, c.

2270 BC, Louvre , traded from the Mediterranean coast where it was used by Canaanites to make a purple dye.

The water table in this region was very high and replenished regularly—by winter storms in the headwaters of the Tigris and Euphrates from October to March and from snow-melt from March to July. Flood levels, that had been stable from about 3,000 to 2,600 BC, had started falling, and by the Akkadian period were a half-meter to a meter lower than recorded previously. Even so, the flat country and weather uncertainties made flooding much more unpredictable than in the case of the Nile; serious deluges seem to have been a regular occurrence, requiring constant maintenance of irrigation ditches and drainage systems. Farmers were recruited into regiments for this work from August to October—a period of food shortage—under the control of city temple authorities, thus acting as a form of unemployment relief.

Gwendolyn Leick has [ 110 ] suggested that this was Sargon's original employment for the king of Kish, giving him experience in effectively organising large groups of men; a tablet reads, "Sargon, the king, to whom Enlil permitted no rival—5,400 warriors ate bread daily before him".

[ 111 ] Harvest was in the late spring and during the dry summer months.

Nomadic Amorites from the northwest pastured their flocks of sheep and goats to graze on the crop residue and were watered from the river and irrigation canals. For this privilege, they had to pay a tax in wool , meat , milk , and cheese to the temples, who distributed these products to the bureaucracy and priesthood. In good years, all went well, but in bad years, wild winter pastures were in short supply, nomads sought to pasture their flocks in the grain fields, resulting in conflicts with farmers. It appeared that the subsidizing of southern populations by the import of wheat from the north of the Empire temporarily overcame this problem, [ 112 ] and it seems to have allowed economic recovery and a growing population within this region.

Foreign trade [ edit ] Location of foreign lands for the Mesopotamians, including Elam , Magan , Dilmun , Marhashi and Meluhha .

See also: Indus–Mesopotamia relations As a result of their economic and agricultural policies, Sumer and Akkad had a surplus of agricultural products but was short of almost everything else, particularly metal ores, timber and building stone, all of which had to be imported. The spread of the Akkadian state as far as the "silver mountain" (possibly the Taurus Mountains ), the "cedars" of Lebanon, and the copper deposits of Magan, was largely motivated by the goal of securing control over these imports. One tablet, an Old Babylonian Period copy of an original inscription, reads: "Sargon, the king of Kish, triumphed in thirty-four battles (over the cities) up to the edge of the sea (and) destroyed their walls. He made the ships from Meluhha , the ships from Magan (and) the ships from Dilmun tie up alongside the quay of Agade. Sargon the king prostrated himself before (the god) Dagan (and) made supplication to him; (and) he (Dagan) gave him the upper land, namely Mari, Yarmuti, (and) Ebla, up to the Cedar Forest (and) up to the Silver Mountain" — Inscription by Sargon of Akkad (ca.2270–2215 BC) [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] International trade developed during the Akkadian period.

Indus–Mesopotamia relations also seem to have expanded: Sargon of Akkad (circa 2300 or 2250 BC), was the first Mesopotamian ruler to make an explicit reference to the region of Meluhha , which is generally understood as being the Balochistan or the Indus area.

[ 115 ] Culture [ edit ] Akkadian art [ edit ] Nasiriyah Victory Stele of Naram-Sin Soldier with sword, naked captives, on the Nasiriyah stele of Naram-Sin .

[ 117 ] In art, there was a great emphasis on the kings of the dynasty, alongside much that continued earlier Sumerian art. Little architecture remains. In large works and small ones such as seals, the degree of realism was considerably increased, [ 118 ] but the seals show a "grim world of cruel conflict, of danger and uncertainty, a world in which man is subjected without appeal to the incomprehensible acts of distant and fearful divinities who he must serve but cannot love. This sombre mood ... remained characteristic of Mesopotamian art..." [ 119 ] Akkadian sculpture is remarkable for its fineness and realism, which shows a clear advancement compared to the previous period of Sumerian art .

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] The Bassetki statue , another example of Akkadian artistic realism The Manishtushu statue Statue of an Akkadian ruler. From Assur, Iraq, c. 2300 BC. Pergamon Museum.

Fragment of the statue of a devotee, with inscription in the name of Naram-Sin: "To the god Erra, for the life of Naram-Sin, the powerful, his companion, the king of the four regions, Shu'astakkal, the scribe, the majordomo, has dedicated his statue".

[ 122 ] Seals [ edit ] The Akkadians used visual arts as a vehicle of ideology. They developed a new style for cylinder seals by reusing traditional animal decorations but organizing them around inscriptions, which often became central parts of the layout. The figures also became more sculptural and naturalistic. New elements were also included, especially in relation to the rich Akkadian mythology.

Inscription "Adda, the scribe", hunting god with bow and an arrow, Ishtar with weapons rising from her shoulders, emerging sun-god Shamash , Zu bird of destiny, water god Ea with bull between legs, two-faced attendant god Usimu with right hand raised.

[ 123 ] Akkadian seal depicting an agricultural scene. Louvre Museum Summer God and Dumuzi . Louvre Museum Ea wrestling with a water buffalo, and bull-man Enkidu fighting with a lion.

Language [ edit ] See also: Sumerian language and Akkadian language During the 3rd millennium BC, there developed a very intimate cultural symbiosis between the Sumerians and the Akkadians, which included widespread bilingualism .

[ 124 ] The influence of Sumerian on Akkadian (and vice versa) is evident in all areas, from lexical borrowing on a massive scale, to syntactic, morphological, and phonological convergence.

[ 124 ] This has prompted scholars to refer to Sumerian and Akkadian in the third millennium as a sprachbund .

[ 124 ] Akkadian gradually replaced Sumerian as a spoken language somewhere around 2000 BC (the exact dating being a matter of debate), [ 125 ] but Sumerian continued to be used as a sacred, ceremonial, literary, and scientific language in Mesopotamia until the 1st century AD.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Poet–priestess Enheduanna [ edit ] Enheduanna , daughter of Sargon of Akkad , circa 2300 BC Sumerian literature continued in rich development during the Akkadian period.

Enheduanna , the "wife (Sumerian dam = high priestess) of Nanna [the Sumerian moon god] and daughter of Sargon" [ 128 ] of the temple of Sin at Ur, who lived c.

2285 –2250 BC, is the first poet in history whose name is known. Her known works include hymns to the goddess Inanna , the Exaltation of Inanna and In-nin sa-gur-ra . A third work, the Temple Hymns , a collection of specific hymns, addresses the temples and their occupants, the deities to whom they were consecrated. The works of this poet are significant, because although they start out using the third person, they shift to the first person voice of the poet herself, and they mark a significant development in the use of cuneiform. As poet, princess, and priestess, she was a person who, according to William W. Hallo, "set standards in all three of her roles for many succeeding centuries" [ 129 ] In the Exultation of Inanna , Enheduanna depicts Inanna as disciplining mankind as a goddess of battle. She thereby unites the warlike Akkadian Ishtar's qualities to those of the gentler Sumerian goddess of love and fecundity. She likens Inanna to a great storm bird who swoops down on the lesser gods and sends them fluttering off like surprised bats. Then, in probably the most interesting part of the hymn, Enheduanna herself steps forward in the first person to recite her own past glories, establishing her credibility, and explaining her present plight. She has been banished as high priestess from the temple in the city of Ur and from Uruk and exiled to the steppe. She begs the moon god Nanna to intercede for her because the city of Uruk, under the ruler Lugalanne, has rebelled against Sargon. The rebel, Lugalanne, has even destroyed the temple Eanna, one of the greatest temples in the ancient world, and then made advances on his sister-in-law.

[ 130 ] Goddess Ishtar on an Akkadian seal, 2350–2150 BC The kings of Akkad were legendary among later Mesopotamian civilizations, with Sargon understood as the prototype of a strong and wise leader, and his grandson Naram-Sin considered the wicked and impious leader ( Unheilsherrscher(ruler of mischief) in the analysis of Hans Gustav Güterbock ) who brought ruin upon his kingdom.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] Technology [ edit ] A tablet from the periods reads, "(From the earliest days) no-one had made a statue of lead, (but) Rimush king of Kish, had a statue of himself made of lead. It stood before Enlil; and it recited his (Rimush's) virtues to the idu of the gods". The copper Bassetki Statue , cast with the lost wax method, testifies to the high level of skill that craftsmen achieved during the Akkadian period.

[ 51 ] See also [ edit ] List of cities of the ancient Near East List of Mesopotamian deities History of Mesopotamia List of Mesopotamian dynasties Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Taagepera, Rein (1978).

"Size and Duration of Empires Growth-Decline Curves, 3000 to 600 B.C." (PDF) .

Social Science Research : 186.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Akkadian : URU Akkad KI ; Hittite cuneiform : KUR A.GA.DÈ.KI "land of Akkad"; Biblical Hebrew : אַכַּד Akkad .

^ Kirby, Mayson (2018).

History of Civilizations . EDTECH. p. 116.

ISBN 978-1-83947-277-0 .

^ "Akkad" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

"Akkad" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

Sumerian : Agade ^ Mish, Frederick C., Editor in Chief. "Akkad" Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary . ninth ed. Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster 1985.

ISBN 0-87779-508-8 ).

^ F Leo Oppenhiem – Ancient Mesopotamia ^ Liverani (1993), p. 3. "The factual criticism is that empires existed even before Akkad: or more properly that the term and concept of 'empire' has been recently applied (on not worse grounds than in the case of Akkad) to other older cases, from the Uruk of the late-Uruk period to the Ebla of the royal archives, to the very state formations of the Sumerian south in the period called in fact 'proto-imperial'. In no case is the Akkad empire an absolute novelty [...] 'Akkad the first empire' is therefore subject to criticism not only as for the adjective 'first' but especially as for the noun 'empire'.

^ a b Wall-Romana, Christophe (1990). "An Areal Location of Agade".

Journal of Near Eastern Studies .

49 (3): 205– 245.

doi : 10.1086/373442 .

JSTOR 546244 .

S2CID 161165836 .

^ Weiss, Harvey (1975), "Kish, Akkad and Agade", Journal of the American Oriental Society , 95 (3): 434– 453, doi : 10.2307/599355 , JSTOR 599355 ^ [1] I.J. Gelb, "Sargon Texts from the Diyala Region", Materials for the Assyrian Dictionary, vol. 1, Chicago, 1961 ^ M. Molina, "Sargonic Cuneiform Tablets in the Real Academia de la Historia : The Carl L. Lippmann Collection", Real Academia de la Historia, 2014 ISBN 978-8415069713 ^ a b Foster, Benjamin R., "Archives and Record-keeping in Sargonic Mesopotamia", ZAVA, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 1–27, 1982 ^ Markina, Ekaterina, "Akkadian of the Me-ság Archive", in Babel und Bibel 6, edited by Leonid E. Kogan, N. Koslova, S. Loesov and S. Tishchenko, University Park, US: Penn State University Press, pp. 169–188, 2012 ^ Susan Jane Bridges, The Mesag Archive: A Study of Sargonic Society and Economy, Yale University Dissertation, 1981 ^ Robson, Eleanor, and Gábor Zólyomi, "Mesag reports a murder: cuneiform tablets in the collections of Norwich Castle Museum and Cambridge University Library", Iraq 76, pp. 189–203, 2014 ^ Visicato, Giuseppe, "The Sargonic Archive of Tell El-Suleimah", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 51, pp. 17–30, 1999 ^ Foster, Benjamin R., "The Sargonic Victory Stele from Telloh", Iraq, vol. 47, pp. 15–30, 1985 ^ a b c d e Douglas R. Frayne, The Sargonic and Gutian Periods (2334–2113), University of Toronto Press, 1993, ISBN 0-8020-0593-4 ^ Eppihimer, Melissa, "Assembling King and State: The Statues of Manishtushu and the Consolidation of Akkadian Kingship", American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 365–80, 2010 ^ Ebeling, E. and Meissner, B., "Reallexikon der Assyriologie (RIA-2), Berlin, 1938 ^ Horsnell, Malcolm J. A., "Why Year-Names? An Exploration into the Reasons for Their Use", Orientalia, vol. 72, no. 2, pp. 196–203, 2003 ^ Marcel Sigrist and Peter Damerow, "Mesopotamian Year Names", Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative, 2001 ^ Alkhafaji, Nashat Ali Omran, "A Double Date Formula of the Old Akkadian King Manishtusu", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 71, pp. 3–9, 2019 ^ Lambert, Wilfred G., "Babylon: Origins". Babylon: Wissenskultur in Orient und Okzident", edited by Eva Cancik-Kirschbaum, Margarete van Ess and Joachim Marzahn, Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, pp. 71–76, 2011 ^ Buccellati, Giorgio; Kelly-Buccellati, Marilyn (2002).

"Tar'am-Agade, Daughter of Naram-Sin, at Urkesh" (PDF) . In Al-Gailani Werr, Lamia (ed.).

Of Pots and Plans. Papers on the Archaeology and History of Mesopotamia and Syria presented to David Oates in Honour of his 75th Birthday . London: Nabu. pp.

11– 31.

ISBN 978-1897750629 .

^ Mallowan, M. E. L. (1936). "The Bronze Head of the Akkadian Period from Nineveh".

Iraq .

3 (1): 104– 110.

doi : 10.2307/4241589 .

JSTOR 4241589 .

S2CID 130446624 .

^ Kidner, Frank L.; Bucur, Maria; Mathisen, Ralph; McKee, Sally; Weeks, Theodore R. (2007).

Making Europe: People, Politics, and Culture . Cengage Learning. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-618-00479-9 .

^ Westenholz, Joan Goodnick, "Heroes of Akkad", Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 103, no. 1, pp. 327–36, 1983 ^ Tinney, Steve, "A New Look at Naram-Sin and the ‘Great Rebellion’", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 47, pp. 1–14, 1995 ^ Michalowski, Piotr, "New Sources Concerning the Reign of Naram-Sin", Journal of Cuneiform Studies, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 233–46, 1980 ^ Westenholz, Joan Goodnick, "Naram-Sin and the Enemy Hordes": The “Cuthean Legend” of Naram-Sin", Legends of the Kings of Akkade: The Texts, University Park, USA: Penn State University Press, pp. 263–368, 1997 ^ "The Electronic Text Corpus of Sumerian Literature" .

^ Cooper, Jerrold S., The Curse of Agade., The Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore/London, 1983 ^ Jacobsen, Thorkild, The Harps that Once .... Sumerian Poetry in Translation. Yale University Press: New Haven/London, 1987 ^ Lenzi, Alan, "Legends of Akkadian Kings", in An Introduction to Akkadian Literature: Contexts and Content, University Park, US: Penn State University Press, pp. 123–132, 2019 ^ E. A. Speiver, "Akkadian Myths and Epics", in Ancient Near Eastern Texts Relating to the Old Testament with Supplement, edited by James B. Pritchard, Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp. 60–119, 1955 ^ Albright, W. F., "A Babylonian Geographical Treatise on Sargon of Akkad's Empire", Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 45, pp. 193–245, 1925 ^ Al-Rawi, F. N. H. “Tablets from the Sippar Library. I. The ‘Weidner Chronicle’: A Supposititious Royal Letter Concerning a Vision.” Iraq, vol. 52, pp. 1–13, 1990 ^ [2] Augusta McMahon, "Nippur V. The Early Dynastic to Akkadian Transition: The Area WF Sounding at Nippur", Oriental Institute Publications 129, Chicago: The Oriental Institute, 2006 ISBN 1-885923-38-4 ^ [3] M. Molina, "The palace of Adab during the Sargonic period", D. Wicke (ed.), Der Palast im antiken und islamischen Orient, Colloquien der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft 9, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, pp. 151–20, 2019 ^ Margueron, Jean-Claude, "The Kingdom of Mari", In Crawford, Harriet (ed.). The Sumerian World. Translated by Crawford, Harriet. Routledge, 2013 ISBN 978-1-136-21912-2 ^ Freedman, Nadezhda, "The Nuzi Ebla", The Biblical Archaeologist, 40 (1), pp. 32–33, 1977 ^ Archi, Alfonso, "Ebla and Its Archives: Texts, History, and Society", Walter de Gruyter, 2015 ISBN 978-1-61451-788-7 ^ Gibson, McGuire, "A Re-Evaluation of the Akkad Period in the Diyala Region on the Basis of Recent Excavations at Nippur and in the Hamrin", American Journal of Archaeology, vol. 86, no. 4, pp. 531–38, 1982 ^ J. Oates (2004), pp.

5 –8. "Following the destruction of the city sometime in the twenty-third century BC, Nagar was rebuilt by officials of the Akkadian Dynasty as a major centre of their provincial administration, a fact clearly attested in the cuneiform documents from this site." ^ Oates, David; Oates, Joan (1989). "Akkadian Buildings at Tell Brak".

Iraq .

51 : 193– 211.

doi : 10.2307/4200303 .

JSTOR 4200303 .

S2CID 162449952 .

^ Schrakamp, Ingo (2013). "Sargon of Akkad and his dynasty". In Bagnall, Roger S. (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Ancient History . Chicago: Blackwell. pp.

6045– 6047.

doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah24182 .

ISBN 9781444338386 .

^ Pruß, Alexander (2004), "Remarks on the Chronological Periods", in Lebeau, Marc; Sauvage, Martin (eds.), Atlas of Preclassical Upper Mesopotamia , Subartu, vol. 13, pp.

7– 21, ISBN 978-2503991207 ^ Steinkeller, P., "An Ur III manuscript of the Sumerian King List", in: W. Sallaberger [e.a.] (ed.), Literatur, Politik und Recht in Mesopotamien. Festschrift fü r Claus Wilcke. OBC 14. Wiesbaden, 267–29, 2003 ^ Thomas, Ariane. "The Akkadian Royal Image: On a Seated Statue of Manishtushu" Zeitschrift für Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archäologie, vol. 105, no. 1-2, 2015, pp. 86–117 ^ a b c van de Mieroop, M.

(2007).

A History of the Ancient Near East, ca. 3000–323 BC . Malden: Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-631-22552-2 .

^ a b Foster, Benjamin R. (2015).

The Age of Agade: Inventing Empire in Ancient Mesopotamia . Routledge. p. 3.

ISBN 9781317415527 .

^ Nigro, Lorenzo (1998). "The Two Steles of Sargon: Iconology and Visual Propaganda at the Beginning of Royal Akkadian Relief".

Iraq .

60 . British Institute for the Study of Iraq: 92.

doi : 10.2307/4200454 .

hdl : 11573/109737 .

JSTOR 4200454 .

S2CID 193050892 .

^ a b Nigro, Lorenzo (1998). "The Two Steles of Sargon: Iconology and Visual Propaganda at the Beginning of Royal Akkadian Relief".

Iraq .

60 . British Institute for the Study of Iraq: 93– 94.

doi : 10.2307/4200454 .

hdl : 11573/109737 .

JSTOR 4200454 .

S2CID 193050892 .

^ Foster, Benjamin R. (2013), "Akkad (Agade)", in Bagnall, Roger S. (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Ancient History , Chicago: Blackwell, pp.

266– 267, doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah01005 , ISBN 9781444338386 ^ a b Georges Roux (1996), Ancient Iraq (3rd Edition)(Penguin Harmondsworth) ^ Stiebing, H. William Jr. (2009).

Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture . Pearson Longman; University of New Orleans. p. 69.

^ Sargon , doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e1101500 ^ Samuel Noah Kramer, The Sumerians , Chicago University Press, 1971, ISBN 0-226-45238-7 ^ Stiebing, H. William Jr. (2009).

Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture . Pearson Longman; University of New Orleans. p. 70.

^ Potts, D. T. (1999).

The Archaeology of Elam: Formation and Transformation of an Ancient Iranian State . Cambridge University Press. p. 104.

ISBN 9780521564960 .

^ Harper, Prudence O. (1992).

Royal City of Susa: Ancient Near Eastern Treasures in the Louvre . Metropolitan Museum of Art. pp.

162 –163.

^ Nigro, Lorenzo (1998). "The Two Steles of Sargon: Iconology and Visual Propaganda at the Beginning of Royal Akkadian Relief".

Iraq .

60 . British Institute for the Study of Iraq: 85– 102.

doi : 10.2307/4200454 .

hdl : 11573/109737 .

JSTOR 4200454 .

S2CID 193050892 .

^ Dalley proposes that these sources may have originally referred to Sargon II of the Assyria rather than Sargon of Akkad. Stephanie Dalley, "Babylon as a Name for Other Cities Including Nineveh", in [4] Archived 30 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine Proceedings of the 51st Rencontre Assyriologique Internationale , Oriental Institute SAOC 62, pp. 25–33, 2005 ^ Stiebing, H. William Jr. (2009).

Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture . Pearson Longman; University of New Orleans. p. 71.

^ "Musée du Louvre-Lens – Portail documentaire – Stèle de victoire du roi Rimush (?)" .

ressources.louvrelens.fr (in French).

^ a b c d Hamblin, William J. (2006).

Warfare in the Ancient Near East to 1600 BC: Holy Warriors at the Dawn of History . Routledge. pp.

93– 94.

ISBN 978-1-134-52062-6 .

^ Crowe, D. (2014).

War Crimes, Genocide, and Justice: A Global History . Springer. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-137-03701-5 .

^ Stiebing, H. William Jr. (2009).

Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture . Pearson Longman; University of New Orleans. p. 72.

^ a b Stiebing, H. William Jr. (2009).

Ancient Near Eastern History and Culture . Pearson Longman. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-321-42297-2 .

^ [5] Piotr Michalowski, "The Mortal Kings of Ur: A Short Century of Divine Rule in Ancient Mesopotamia", in Religion and Power: Divine Kingship in the Ancient World and Beyond – Nicole Brisch ed., pp. 33–45, Oriental Institute Seminars 4, Chicago: The Oriental Institute, 2012 ISBN 978-1-885923-55-4 ^ Tinney, Steve (1995). "A New Look at Naram-Sin and the Great Rebellion".

Journal of Cuneiform Studies .

47 : 1– 14.

doi : 10.2307/1359810 .

JSTOR 1359810 .

S2CID 163629316 .

^ Otto, Adelheid (2006). "Archaeological Perspectives on the Localization of Naram-Sin's Armanum".

Journal of Cuneiform Studies .

58 : 1– 26.

doi : 10.1086/JCS40025220 .

S2CID 163490130 .

^ Fagan, Brian (2004).

The Long Summer: how climate changed civilisation . Granta Books.

ISBN 1-86207-644-8 .

^ Burroughs, William J. (2008).

Climate Change in Prehistory: The end of the age of chaos . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-07010-2 .

^ Ulanowski, Krzysztof, "The Rituals of Power: The Akkadian Tradition in Neo-Assyrian Policy", Tradition and Innovation in the Ancient Near East. Ed. by A. Arch, Winona Lake, Indiana Eisenbrauns, pp. 237-250, 2015 ^ "Sumerian Dictionary" .

oracc.iaas.upenn.edu .

^ a b Radau, Hugo (2005).

Early Babylonian History: Down to the End of the Fourth Dynasty of Ur . Wipf and Stock Publishers. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 978-1-59752-381-3 .

^ Woolley, Leonard (1938).

The Summerians . p.

83 .

^ The Art Of Ancient Mesopotamia ( Art Ebook) . p. 53.

^ "CDLI-Archival View RT 165" .

cdli.ucla.edu .

^ The Cambridge Ancient History . Cambridge University Press. 1971. p. 436.

ISBN 9780521077910 .

^ Álvarez-Mon, Javier; Basello, Gian Pietro; Wicks, Yasmina (2018).

The Elamite World . Routledge. p. 254.

ISBN 978-1-317-32983-1 .

^ The Cambridge Ancient History . Cambridge University Press. 1971. p. 998.

ISBN 9780521077910 .

^ a b Zettler (2003), pp. 24–25.

^ Nicholas Kraus, The Weapon of Blood: Politics and Intrigue at the Decline of Akkad, Zeitschrift für Assyriologie & Vorderasiatische Archäologie, vol. 108, iss. 1, pp. 1–9, June 2018 ^ Kraus, Nicholas. "The Weapon of Blood: Politics and Intrigue at the Decline of Akkad" Zeitschrift für Assyriologie und vorderasiatische Archäologie, vol. 108, no. 1, 2018, pp. 1–9.

^ "CDLI-Found Texts" .

cdli.ucla.edu .

^ "Cylinder Seal with King or God and Vanquished Lion" .

The Walters Art Museum .

^ Norman Yoffee, "The Collapse of Ancient Mesopotamian States and Civilization", in The Collapse of Ancient States and Civilizations, ed. Norman Yoffee and George L. Cowgill, University of Arizona Press, 1991 ^ Richard A. Kerr (1998). "Sea-Floor Dust Shows Drought Felled Akkadian Empire".

Science .

279 (5349): 325– 326.

Bibcode : 1998Sci...279..325K .

doi : 10.1126/science.279.5349.325 .

S2CID 140563513 .

^ a b c Weiss, H; et al. (1993).

"The Genesis and Collapse of Third Millennium North Mesopotamian Civilization" .

Science .

261 (5124): 995– 1004.

Bibcode : 1993Sci...261..995W .

doi : 10.1126/science.261.5124.995 .

PMID 17739617 .

S2CID 31745857 .

^ Wiener, Malcolm H. (2014). "The Interaction of Climate Change and Agency in the Collapse of Civilizations ca. 2300–2000 BC".

Radiocarbon .

56 (4): S1 – S16 .

Bibcode : 2014Radcb..56S...1W .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.692.2170 .

doi : 10.2458/azu_rc.56.18325 .

S2CID 128775473 .

^ de Menocal, P.B. (30 June 2000). "North Atlantic influence on Tigris–Euphrates streamflow".

International Journal of Climatology .

20 (8): 853– 863.

Bibcode : 2000IJCli..20..853C .

doi : 10.1002/1097-0088(20000630)20:8<853::AID-JOC497>3.0.CO;2-M .

^ Cookson, Evangeline; Hill, Daniel J.; Lawrence, Dan (1 June 2019).

"Impacts of long term climate change during the collapse of the Akkadian Empire" .

Journal of Archaeological Science .

106 : 1– 9.

Bibcode : 2019JArSc.106....1C .

doi : 10.1016/j.jas.2019.03.009 .

ISSN 0305-4403 .

S2CID 133772098 . Archived from the original on 2 May 2019.

^ "Cylinder Seal of Ibni-Sharrum" .

Louvre Museum .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ Brown, Brian A.; Feldman, Marian H. (2013).

Critical Approaches to Ancient Near Eastern Art . Walter de Gruyter. p. 187.

ISBN 9781614510352 .

^ Christie, Peter (2008) The Curse of Akkad: Climate upheavals that rocked human history , Annick Press, pp. 31–48 ^ deMenocal, Peter B. (2001).

"Cultural responses to climate change during the late Holocene" (PDF) .

Science .

292 (5517): 667– 673.

Bibcode : 2001Sci...292..667D .

doi : 10.1126/science.1059827 .

PMID 11303088 .

S2CID 18642937 .

^ " Climate change and the collapse of the Akkadian empire: Evidence from the deep sea " Geology 28(4), April 2000.

^ Zettler (2003), pp. 18–21.

^ J. Oates (2004), p.

11 –13. "A French soil-micromorphologist, Marie-Agnès Courty, a leading figure in assessing the evidence for this 'event', has now identified at Brak the earliest clearly dated Near Eastern soil 'signal' in a level unquestionably preceding the construction of Naram-Sin's Palace, that is, well before the collapse of the Akkadian Empire (see Courty 2001 and associated bibliography)." ^ Watanabe, Takaaki K.; Watanabe, Tsuyoshi; Yamazaki, Atsuko; Pfeiffer, Miriam (2019).

"Oman corals suggest that a stronger winter shamal season caused the Akkadian Empire (Mesopotamia) collapse" (PDF) .

Geology .

47 (12). GeoScienceWorld: 1141– 1145.

Bibcode : 2019Geo....47.1141W .

doi : 10.1130/G46604.1 .

S2CID 204781389 .

^ "Strong winter dust storms may have caused the collapse of the Akkadian Empire" .

Hokkaido University (Press release). 24 October 2019.

^ Leick, Gwendolyn (2001) "Mesopotamia: Invention of the City" (Penguin Books) ^ [6] Tar'am-Agade, Daughter of Naram-Sin, at Urkesh, Buccellati, Giorgio and Marilyn Kelly-Buccellati, in of Pots and Plans. Papers on the Archaeology and History of Mesopotamia and Syria presented to David Oates in Honour of his 75th Birthday, London: Nabu Publications, 2002 ^ J. Oates (2004), p.

10 .

^ Thompson, William J. (2003), "Complexity, Diminishing Marginal Returns and Serial Mesopotamian Fragmentation," Journal of World Systems Research ^ Leick Gwendolyn (2003), "Mesopotamia: The invention of the city" (Penguin) ^ Kramer 1963:324, quoted in Charles Keith Maisels, The Emergence of Civilization ch. "The institutions of urbanism", 1990:179.

^ Bourke, Stephen (2008).

The Middle East: the cradle of civilization revealed . Thames & Hudson. p. 89.

ISBN 9780500251478 .

^ Ray, Himanshu Prabha (2003).

The Archaeology of Seafaring in Ancient South Asia . Cambridge University Press. p. 85.

ISBN 9780521011099 .

^ "The Indus Civilization and Dilmun, the Sumerian Paradise Land" .

www.penn.museum .

^ a b Reade, Julian E. (2008).

The Indus-Mesopotamia relationship reconsidered (Gs Elisabeth During Caspers) . Archaeopress. pp.

14– 17.

ISBN 978-1-4073-0312-3 .

^ Stein, Stephen K. (2017).

The Sea in World History: Exploration, Travel, and Trade [2 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 38.

ISBN 9781440835513 .

^ McKeon, John F. X. (1970). "An Akkadian Victory Stele".

Boston Museum Bulletin .

68 (354): 239.

ISSN 0006-7997 .

JSTOR 4171539 .

^ Frankfort, Henri (1970).

The art and architecture of the ancient Orient (4th rev. impression with additional bibliography ed.). Penguin Books (now Yale History of Art). pp.

83– 91.

ISBN 0-14-056107-2 .

^ Frankfort 1970 , p. 71.

^ Art of the First Cities: The Third Millennium B.C. from the Mediterranean to the Indus . Metropolitan Museum of Art. 2003. pp.

204– 205.

ISBN 978-1-58839-043-1 .

^ McKeon, John F. X. (1970). "An Akkadian Victory Stele".

Boston Museum Bulletin .

68 (354): 226– 243.

JSTOR 4171539 .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ "The Adda Seal" .

British Museum .

^ a b c Deutscher, Guy (2007).

Syntactic Change in Akkadian: The Evolution of Sentential Complementation .

Oxford University Press US . pp.

20– 21.

ISBN 978-0-19-953222-3 .

^ [7] , Christopher Woods, "Bilingualism, Scribal Learning, and the Death of Sumerian", in S.L. Sanders (ed) Margins of Writing, Origins of Culture, pp. 91–120, Oriental Institute Seminars 2, Chicago: The Oriental Institute, 2007 ISBN 1-885923-39-2 ^ Cooper, J. S., "Sumerian and Akkadian in Sumer and Akkad", Orientalia, n.s., 42, pp. 239–46, 1973 ^ [8] , Piotr Michalowski, "The Lives of the Sumerian Language", in S.L. Sanders (ed) Margins of Writing, Origins of Culture, pp. 163–190, Oriental Institute Seminars 2, Chicago: The Oriental Institute, 2007 ISBN 1-885923-39-2 ^ Winter, Irene J. (1987), "Women in Public: The Disk of Enheduanna, The Beginning of the Office of En-Priestess, the Weight of the Visual Evidence".

La Femme dans le Proche-Orient Antique . (Paris: Editions Recherche sur les Civilisations) ^ Enheduanna, The Exaltation of Inanna . Translated by William W. Hallo and J. J. A. Van Dijk,
Ams Pr Inc, 1979, ISBN 0-404-60263-0 ^ [9] Binkley, Roberta, "Enheduanna: An Overview of Her Writings", Feminist Theory Website, 1998 ^ Jerrold S. Cooper, "Paradigm and Propaganda: The Dynasty of Akkade in the 21st Century", in Liverani, Mario, ed. Akkad: The First World Empire: Structure, Ideology Traditions, Padova: Sargon srl, 1993 ISBN 978-8-81120-468-8 ^ Bill T. Arnold, "The Weidner Chronicle and the Idea of History in Israel and Mesopotamia"; in Faith, Tradition, and History: Old Testament Historiography in Its Near Eastern Context ; Millard , Hoffmeier & Baker, eds.; Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns, 1994; ISBN 0-931464-82-X ; p.

138 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Part of a series on the History of Iraq Prehistory Ubaid period Hassuna culture Halaf culture Halaf-Ubaid Transitional period Samarra culture ( Eridu ) Uruk period Jemdet Nasr Period Bronze Age Early Dynastic Period Sumer Hamazi Assyria Akkadian Empire Gutian Dynasty Neo-Sumerian Empire Isin-Larsa period Simurrum Babylonia First Babylonian Empire Kassites Middle Assyrian Empire Neo-Assyrian Empire Neo-Babylonian Empire Iron Age Achaemenid Assyria Seleucid Babylonia Parthian Babylonia Roman Mesopotamia Sasanian Asorestan Middle Ages Islamic conquest Rashidun Caliphate Umayyad Caliphate Abbasid Caliphate Hamdanids Buyid amirate of Iraq Marwanids Uqaylids Al-Mazeedi Ayyubids Seljuk Empire Atabegs of Azerbaijan Zengids Ilkhanate Jalairid Sultanate Timurid Empire Kara Koyunlu Aq Qoyunlu Early modern period Safavids Ottoman Iraq Kingdom of Khaza'il Mamluk dynasty Modern Iraq Mandatory Iraq Kingdom of Iraq Republic of Iraq (1958–68) Ba'athist rule (1968–2003) Occupation (2003–11) Recent history Iraq portal v t e Liverani, Mario , ed. (1993).

Akkad: The First World Empire: Structure, Ideology Traditions . Padova: Sargon srl.

ISBN 978-8-81120-468-8 Oates, Joan (2004). "Archaeology in Mesopotamia: Digging Deeper at Tell Brak". 2004 Albert Reckitt Archaeological Lecture. In Proceedings of the British Academy: 2004 Lectures ; Oxford University Press, 2005.

ISBN 978-0-19726-351-8 .

Zettler, Richard L. (2003). "Reconstructing the World of Ancient Mesopotamia: Divided Beginnings and Holistic History".

Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient .

46 (1): 3– 45.

doi : 10.1163/156852003763504320 .

JSTOR 3632803 .

Further reading [ edit ] Gough, M.A, Historical Perception in the Sargonic Literary Tradition. The Implication of Copied Texts , Rosetta 1, pp 1–9, 2006 [10] Paszke, Marcin Z, "From Sargon To Narām-Sîn: some remarks on Akkadian military activity in the II nd half of the III rd millennium bc. The example of eastern campaigns", Acta Archaeologica Lodziensia 68, pp. 75–83, 2022 Sallaberger, Walther; Westenholz, Aage (1999), Mesopotamien. Akkade-Zeit und Ur III-Zeit , Orbis Biblicus et Orientalis, vol. 160/3, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, ISBN 978-3-525-53325-3 E. A. Speiser, "Some Factors in the Collapse of Akkad", Journal of the American Oriental Society, vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 97–101, (Jul. - Sep. 1952) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Akkadian Empire .

Iraq's Ancient Past – Penn Museum Year Names of Narim-Sin – CDLI Year Named of Shar-kali-Sharri – CDLI Site on Enheduanna at Virginia Tech University (archived 12 December 2009) v t e Ancient states and regions in the history of the Levant Copper Age Kish civilization Tell Halaf Chagar Bazar Hamoukar Jericho Byblos Ebla Ugarit Urkesh Bronze Age Akkadian Empire Alashiya Amorite states Alalakh Amurru Andarig Apum First Babylon Third Ebla Ekallatum Emar Kurda Third Mari Mukish Palmyra Qatna Shaddai Ṭābetu Kingdom of Upper Mesopotamia Yamhad Zahiran Amqu Aram Barga Canaanite city-states Amalek Arqa Arwad Ascalon Aštartu Azzati Bashan / Hauran Beruta Gebal Dimasqu Gezer Gibeon Hazor Jericho Gamla Masada Jerusalem Kenites Kumidi Lakisha Megiddo Midian Phoenicia Qadesh Shechem Sidon Tyre Carchemish Hittite Empire Hurrians Urshu Nuhašše Mitanni Tell Hadidi Naziba Niya Ib'al Confederacy Paleo-Syrian states Armi Aleppo Armanum / Tall Bazi Ebla Emar Ḫana / Terqa Mari Nagar Saggarâtum Tuttul Suhum ʿApiru Aḫlamū Suteans Amqu ʿApiru Shasu Shutu Tadmor Tunip Ugarit Upu Nuhašše Niya Iron Age Achaemenid Empire Aramaean states Aram-Damascus Aram Rehob Bit-Adini Bit Agusi Bit Bahiani Geshur Hamath Sam'al Zobah Neo-Assyrian Empire Neo-Babylonian Empire Canaan Ammon Edom Israel (Samaria) Israel (united) Jericho Judah Moab Philistia Ashdod Ascalon Ekron Gath Gaza Phoenicia Amrit Arwad Gebal Tartus Tyre Sidon New Kingdom of Egypt Arabs Itureans ?

Nabataeans Qedarites Luwian-Aramaean states Carchemish Kummuh Luhuti Palistin Pattin Classical Age Ancient Rome ( Roman Republic - Roman Empire - Byzantine Empire ) Commagene Emesene Dynasty Ghassanid Kingdom Hasmonean dynasty Herodian kingdom Herodian Tetrarchy Iturea Macedonia Nabataean Kingdom Osroene Palmyrene Empire Parthian Empire Seleucid Empire Sasanian Empire Tanukhid confederacy Sources Amarna letters Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions v t e Timeline of Mesopotamia Northwestern Mesopotamia Northern Mesopotamia Southern Mesopotamia c. 3500–2350 BCE Late Chalcolithic 4-5 / Early Jezirah 1-3 Uruk period / Jemdet Nasr period / Early Dynastic period c. 2350–2200 BCE Akkadian Empire c. 2200–2100 BCE Gutians c. 2100–2000 BCE Third Dynasty of Ur c. 2000–1800 BCE Mari and other Amorite city-states Old Assyrian period Isin / Larsa and other Amorite city-states c. 1800–1600 BCE Old Hittite Kingdom Old Babylonian Empire ( Southern Akkadians ) c. 1600–1400 BCE Mitanni ( Hurrians ) Karduniaš ( Kassites ) c. 1400–1200 BCE Hittite Empire Middle Assyria c. 1200–1150 BCE Bronze Age Collapse ( " Sea Peoples " ) Arameans c. 1150–911 BCE Phoenicia Neo-Hittite city-states Aram- Damascus Arameans Middle Babylonia Chal- de- ans 911–729 BCE Neo-Assyrian Empire 729–609 BCE 626–539 BCE Neo-Babylonian Empire ( Chaldeans ) 539–331 BCE Achaemenid Empire 336–301 BCE Macedonian Empire ( Ancient Greeks and Macedonians ) 311–129 BCE Seleucid Empire 129–63 BCE Seleucid Empire Parthian Empire 63 BCE–224 CE Ancient Rome - Byzantine Empire ( Syria ) 224–mid 700s CE Sassanid Empire v t e Ancient Mesopotamia Geography Modern Upper Mesopotamia Lower Mesopotamia Mesopotamian Marshes Persian Gulf Syrian Desert Taurus Mountains Tigris–Euphrates river system Euphrates Tigris Zagros Mountains Hamrin Mountains Sinjar Mountains Ancient Fertile Crescent Adiabene Akkad Armani Assyria Babylonia Chaldea Elam Gutium Hamazi Hittites Kassites Media Mitanni Simurrum Subartu Suhum Sumer Tukri Urartu Cities (Pre)history Prehistory Acheulean Mousterian Trialetian Zarzian Natufian Nemrik Khiamian Pre-Pottery Neolithic A (PPNA) Pre-Pottery Neolithic B (PPNB) Hassuna / Samarra Halaf Ubaid Uruk Jemdet Nasr Kish civilization History Early Dynastic Akkadian Gutians Simurrum Ur III Isin-Larsa Old Babylonian Kassite Middle Babylonian Neo-Assyrian Neo-Babylonian Fall of Babylon Achaemenid Seleucid Parthian Roman Sasanian Muslim conquest Languages Akkadian Amorite Aramaic Eblaite Elamite Gutian Hittite Hurrian Kassite Luwian Median Middle Persian Old Persian Parthian Proto-Armenian Subarian Sutean Sumerian Urartian Culture/society Agriculture Architecture Art Akitu Cuneiform Babylonian astronomy Babylonian mathematics Akkadian literature Economy of Sumer Warfare in Sumer Military history of the Neo-Assyrian Empire Sumerian literature Music Indus-Mesopotamia relations Egypt-Mesopotamia relations Royal titles List of rulers Archaeology Looting Destruction by ISIL Tell Religion Sumerian religion Babylonian religion Deities Mesopotamian myths Divination Prayers Ziggurat (Temple) Academia Assyriology Assyriologists Hittitology Pennsylvania Sumerian Dictionary Chicago Assyrian Dictionary Chicago Hittite Dictionary v t e Iraq topics History Chronology Ubaid period Hassuna culture Halaf culture Halaf-Ubaid Transitional period Samarra culture Uruk period Jemdet Nasr period Sumer Subartu Akkadian Empire Gutian dynasty Neo-Sumerian Empire Isin-Larsa period First Babylonian Empire Old Assyrian Period Middle Assyrian Empire Kassite dynasty of the Babylonian Empire Simurrum culture Babylonia Assyria Neo-Assyrian Empire Neo-Babylonian Empire Babylonian captivity Fall of Babylon Achaemenid Assyria Seleucid Babylonia Parthian Babylonia Sassanid Asorestan 638–1958 Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia Umayyad Caliphate Abbasid Caliphate Buyid dynasty Qara Qoyunlu Aq Qoyunlu Safavids Ottoman Iraq (incl.

Mamluk dynasty ) Mandate for Mesopotamia Mandatory Iraq Kingdom of Iraq Kings Arab Federation Republic 1958–1968 1968–2003 2003–2011 2011– present Arab Socialist Ba'ath Party – Iraq Region ( National Command ) Saddam Hussein Iraqi–Kurdish conflict 1974–1975 Shatt al-Arab clashes 1977 Shia uprising in Iraq 1979–1980 Shia uprising in Iraq Weapons of mass destruction Iran–Iraq War Operation Opera Invasion of Kuwait Gulf War 1991 uprisings Sanctions Iraq War U.S. invasion Iraqi insurgency U.S. troop withdrawal Insurgency (2011–2013) War (2014–2017) Fall of Mosul Mosul liberation Insurgency 2019–2021 protests 2021–2022 Iraqi political crisis Geography Faw peninsula Upper Mesopotamia Lower Mesopotamia Borders Euphrates river Hamrin Mountains Iraqi Kurdistan Lakes Islands Mesopotamia Mesopotamian Marshes Persian Gulf Places Shatt al-Arab Syrian Desert Tigris river Umm Qasr Zagros Mountains Wildlife Sinjar Mountains Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Council of Representatives (legislative) Democracy Elections Foreign aid Foreign relations Government Council of Ministers Presidency Council President List Prime Minister List Human rights in pre-Saddam Iraq in Saddam Hussein's Iraq in post-invasion Iraq in ISIL-controlled territory LGBT Freedom of religion Women Law Law enforcement Military Chief of the General Staff Political parties Judiciary Wars and conflicts Economy Banks Central Bank Companies Corruption Dinar (currency) Infrastructure Foreign Investment Oil Industry Oil reserves Reconstruction Stock Exchange Telecommunications Transportation Airlines Railways Tourism Society Demographics Iraqis Languages Mesopotamian Arabic Aramaic Kurdish Iraqi Turkmen/Turkoman dialects Persian Minorities Armenians Assyrians Circassians Kurds Mandaeans Marsh Arabs Persians Solluba Iraqi Turkmen /Turkoman Jews Religion Secularism Islam Christianity Mandaeism Yazidis Irreligion General Art Cinema Cuisine Culture Literature Education Health Media Television Music Smoking Sports Squatting Public holidays Mesopotamian spring festival (Akitu) Mandaean New Year Category Portal WikiProject Commons v t e Empires Ancient ( colonies ) Akkadian Armenian Urartu Orontid Ancient Assyrian Middle Assyrian Neo-Assyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite Neo-Babylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dʿmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian Indo-Greek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Neo-Sumerian Xianbei Rouran Post-classical Angevin Aragonese Armenian Bagratid Vaspurakan Artsakh Cilician Zakarid Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jīn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala Gurjara-Pratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Lithuanian Grand Duchy Commonwealth Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Berber Almoravid Almohad Norwegian North Sea Oyo Polish Kingdom Commonwealth Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea Romano-Germanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec Turco-Persian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Türgesh Uighur Kyrgyz Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austro-Hungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Contemporary Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian Indo-Persian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi 'Alawi Polish Russian Tsarist Imperial Contemporary Sokoto Somali Isaaq Warsengeli Ajuran Geledi Swedish Tongan Vietnamese Mạc Revival Lê Tay Sơn Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Austrian attempts Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German attempts Italian Venetian Genoese Maltese attempts Japanese Mongol Norwegian Omani Ottoman Polish–Lithuanian Couronian attempts Portuguese Russian Spanish Catalan-Aragonese Basque Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Academic Anti-imperialism Cultural Ecological Green Media Nuclear Liberal Linguistic Social Soviet Theories U.S.

v t e Rulers of the ancient Near East Territories/ dates [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish / Assur Akshak / Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 4000–3200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Pre-Dynastic period (4000–2900 BCE) Susa I Uruk period (4000–3100 BCE) ( Anu Ziggurat , 4000 BCE) (Anonymous "King-priests") Susa II (Uruk influence or control) 3200–3100 BCE Proto-Dynastic period ( Naqada III ) Early or legendary kings: Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish Pen-Abu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw Iry-Hor Ka Scorpion II Narmer / Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor Ny-Hor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Nat-Hor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 3100–2900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep ♀ (regent) Hor-Aha Djer Djet Merneith ♀ (regent) Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qa'a Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period (3100–2900 BCE) Proto-Elamite period ( Susa III ) (3100–2700 BCE) 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy Nebra/Raneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa Weneg-Nebty Wadjenes Senedj Seth-Peribsen Sekhemib-Perenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I (2900–2700 BCE) First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur , Kullassina-bel Nangishlishma , En-tarah-ana Babum , Puannum , Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih En-me-nuna Melem-Kish Barsal-nuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkiangasher Enmerkar ("conqueror of Aratta ") 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II (2700–2600 BCE) Zamug , Tizqar , Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid, the Fisherman Enmebaragesi ("made the land of Elam submit") [ 6 ] Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period (2700–1500 BCE) Indo-Mesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser (First Egyptian pyramids ) Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III (2600–2340 BCE) Sagisu Abur-lim Agur-lim Ibbi-Damu Baba-Damu Kish II dynasty (5 kings) Uhub Mesilim Ur-Nungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash En-hegal Lugal- shaengur Ur A-Imdugud Ur-Pabilsag Meskalamdug (Queen Puabi ) Akalamdug Enun-dara-anna Mesh-he Melem-ana Lugal-kitun Adab Nin-kisalsi Me-durba Lugal-dalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada "King of Ur and Kish", victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia (2500–539 BCE) Second kingdom of Mari Ikun-Shamash Iku-Shamagan Ansud Sa'umu Ishtup-Ishar Ikun-Mari Iblul-Il Nizi Enna-Dagan Kish III dynasty Ku-Baba ♀ Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha- kushanna Mug-si Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty Ur-Nanshe Akurgal A'annepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas Enar-Damu Ishar-Malik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions (3 kings) [ 6 ] Shushun-Tarana Napi-Ilhush 2425 BCE Kun-Damu Eannatum (King of Lagash, Sumer, Akkad, conqueror of Elam) 2400 BCE Adub-Damu Igrish-Halam Irkab-Damu Kish IV dynasty Puzur-Suen Ur-Zababa Urur Lugal-kinishe-dudu Lugal-kisalsi E-iginimpa'e Meskigal Ur-Lumma Il Gishakidu (Queen Bara-irnun ) Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni Mesh-ki-ang-Nanna II Kikku-Siwe-Temti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugal-Anne-Mundu "King of the four quarters of the world" 2370 BCE Isar-Damu Enna-Dagan Ikun-Ishar Ishqi-Mari Invasion by Mari Anbu, Anba, Bazi, Zizi of Mari, Limer, Sharrum-iter [ 6 ] Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luh-ishan 2350 BCE Puzur-Nirah Ishu-Il Shu-Sin Uruk III dynasty Lugal-zage-si (Governor of Umma, King of all Sumer) 2340 BCE Akkadian Period (2340–2150 BCE) Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors: Eshpum Ilshu-rabi Epirmupi Ili-ishmani 2250 BCE Naram-Sin Lugal-ushumgal (vassal of the Akkadians) 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari ( Shakkanakku dynasty) Ididish Shu-Dagan Ishma-Dagan (vassals of the Akkadians) Shar-Kali-Sharri Igigi , Imi , Nanum , Ilulu (3 years) Dudu Shu-turul Uruk IV dynasty Ur-nigin Ur-gigir Lagash II dynasty Puzer-Mama Ur-Ningirsu I Pirig-me Lu-Baba Lu-gula Ka-ku Hishep-ratep Helu Khita Puzur-Inshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period (2150–2000 BCE) Nûr-Mêr Ishtup-Ilum Ishgum-Addu Apil-kin Gutian dynasty (21 kings) La-erabum Si'um Kuda (Uruk) Puzur-ili Ur-Utu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum (vassal of the Gutians) Ur-Baba Gudea Ur-Ningirsu Ur-gar Nam-mahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merikare Uruk V dynasty Utu-hengal 2100 BCE (Vassals of UR III) Iddi-ilum Ili-Ishar Tura-Dagan Puzur-Ishtar (vassals of Ur III) [ 7 ] Ur III dynasty "Kings of Ur, Sumer and Akkad" Ur-Nammu Shulgi Amar-Sin Shu-Sin 2025–1763 BCE Amorite invasions Ibbi-Sin Elamite invasions Kindattu ( Shimashki Dynasty ) Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom ( Amorites ) Ibbit-Lim Immeya Indilimma ( Amorite Shakkanakkus ) Hitial-Erra Hanun-Dagan (...) Lim Dynasty of Mari ( Amorites ) Yaggid-Lim Yahdun-Lim Yasmah-Adad Zimri-Lim (Queen Shibtu ) Old Assyria Puzur-Ashur I Shalim-ahum Ilu-shuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I Puzur-Ashur II Naram-Sin Erishum II Isin-Larsa period ( Amorites ) Dynasty of Isin : Ishbi-Erra Shu-Ilishu Iddin-Dagan Ishme-Dagan Lipit-Ishtar Ur-Ninurta Bur-Suen Lipit-Enlil Erra-imitti Enlil-bani Zambiya Iter-pisha Ur-du-kuga Suen-magir Damiq-ilishu Dynasty of Larsa : Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel Nur-Adad Sin-Iddinam Sin-Eribam Sin-Iqisham Silli-Adad Warad-Sin Rim-Sin I (...) Rim-Sin II Uruk VI dynasty : Alila-hadum Sumu-binasa Naram-Sin of Uruk Sîn-kāšid Sîn-iribam Sîn-gāmil Ilum-gamil An-am Irdanene Rîm-Anum Nabi-ilišu Sukkalmah dynasty Siwe-Palar-Khuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu ♀ 1800–1595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham ( Biblical ) Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad ( Yamhad dynasty ) (Amorites) Old Assyria ( Shamshi-Adad dynasty 1808–1736 BCE) (Amorites) Shamshi-Adad I Ishme-Dagan I Mut-Ashkur Rimush Asinum Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi (Non-dynastic usurpers 1735–1701 BCE) Puzur-Sin Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi ( Adaside dynasty 1700–722 BCE) Bel-bani Libaya Sharma-Adad I Iptar-Sin Bazaya Lullaya Shu-Ninua Sharma-Adad II Erishum III Shamshi-Adad II Ishme-Dagan II Shamshi-Adad III Ashur-nirari I Puzur-Ashur III Enlil-nasir I Nur-ili Ashur-shaduni Ashur-rabi I Ashur-nadin-ahhe I Enlil-Nasir II Ashur-nirari II Ashur-bel-nisheshu Ashur-rim-nisheshu Ashur-nadin-ahhe II First Babylonian dynasty ("Old Babylonian Period") ( Amorites ) Sumu-abum Sumu-la-El Sabium Apil-Sin Sin-Muballit Hammurabi Samsu-iluna Abi-Eshuh Ammi-Ditana Ammi-Saduqa Samsu-Ditana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty (" Sealand Dynasty ") Ilum-ma-ili Itti-ili-nibi Damqi-ilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar m DIŠ+U-EN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Ea-gamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt (" Hyksos ") Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen 'Aper-'Anati Sakir-Har Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni (1600–1260 BCE) Kirta Shuttarna I Baratarna 1531–1155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty ( Kassites ) Agum-Kakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashman-Harbe I Kurigalzu I Kadashman-Enlil I Burna-Buriash II Kara-hardash Nazi-Bugash Kurigalzu II Nazi-Maruttash Kadashman-Turgu Kadashman-Enlil II Kudur-Enlil Shagarakti-Shuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlil-nadin-shumi Kadashman-Harbe II Adad-shuma-iddina Adad-shuma-usur Meli-Shipak II Marduk-apla-iddina I Zababa-shuma-iddin Enlil-nadin-ahi Middle Elamite period (1500–1100 BCE) Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty Untash-Napirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut ♀ Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten ♀ Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire (1450–1180 BCE) Suppiluliuma I Mursili II Muwatalli II Mursili III Hattusili III Tudhaliya IV Suppiluliuma II Ugarit (vassal of Hittites) Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Tausret ♀ Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty Shutruk-Nakhunte 1155–1025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twenty-first Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ish-bosheth David Solomon Syro-Hittite states Carchemish Tabal Middle Assyria Eriba-Adad I Ashur-uballit I Enlil-nirari Arik-den-ili Adad-nirari I Shalmaneser I Tukulti-Ninurta I Ashur-nadin-apli Ashur-nirari III Enlil-kudurri-usur Ninurta-apal-Ekur Ashur-dan I Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur Mutakkil-Nusku Ashur-resh-ishi I Tiglath-Pileser I Asharid-apal-Ekur Ashur-bel-kala Eriba-Adad II Shamshi-Adad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashur-nirari IV Ashur-rabi II Ashur-resh-ishi II Tiglath-Pileser II Ashur-dan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty (" Second Dynasty of Isin ") Marduk-kabit-ahheshu Itti-Marduk-balatu Ninurta-nadin-shumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlil-nadin-apli Marduk-nadin-ahhe Marduk-shapik-zeri Adad-apla-iddina Marduk-ahhe-eriba Marduk-zer-X Nabu-shum-libur Neo-Elamite period (1100–540 BCE) 1025–934 BCE Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Babylonian dynasties ("Period of Chaos") Simbar-shipak Ea-mukin-zeri Kashshu-nadin-ahi Eulmash-shakin-shumi Ninurta-kudurri-usur I Shirikti-shuqamuna Mar-biti-apla-usur Nabû-mukin-apli 911–745 BCE Twenty-second Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twenty-third Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twenty-fourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah Neo-Assyrian Empire Adad-nirari II Tukulti-Ninurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III Shamshi-Adad V Shammuramat ♀ (regent) Adad-nirari III Shalmaneser IV Ashur-Dan III Ashur-nirari V Eight Babylonian Dynasty Ninurta-kudurri-usur II Mar-biti-ahhe-iddina Shamash-mudammiq Nabu-shuma-ukin I Nabu-apla-iddina Marduk-zakir-shumi I Marduk-balassu-iqbi Baba-aha-iddina (five kings) Ninurta-apla-X Marduk-bel-zeri Marduk-apla-usur Eriba-Marduk Nabu-shuma-ishkun Nabonassar Nabu-nadin-zeri Nabu-shuma-ukin II Nabu-mukin-zeri Humban-Tahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humban-haltash III 745–609 BCE Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa (" Black Pharaohs ") Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Neo-Assyrian Empire ( Sargonid dynasty ) Tiglath-Pileser † Shalmaneser † Marduk-apla-iddina II Sargon † Sennacherib † Marduk-zakir-shumi II Marduk-apla-iddina II Bel-ibni Ashur-nadin-shumi † Nergal-ushezib Mushezib-Marduk Esarhaddon † Ashurbanipal Ashur-etil-ilani Sinsharishkun Sin-shumu-lishir Ashur-uballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626–539 BCE Late Period Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III Neo-Babylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II Amel-Marduk Neriglissar Labashi-Marduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539–331 BCE Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt ( First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt ) Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twenty-eighth Dynasty of Egypt Twenty-ninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt 331–141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Ceraunus Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II ♀ Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis ♀ Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator ♀ Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra ♀ Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soteira ♀ Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III ♀ Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV ♀ Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III ♀ Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V ♀ Cleopatra VI Tryphaena ♀ Berenice IV Epiphanea ♀ Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator ♀ Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV ♀ Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty : Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty : Antigonus I Seleucid Empire : Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 141–30 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra ♀ Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE–116 CE Roman Empire ( Roman conquest of Egypt ) Province of Egypt Judaea Syria 116–117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117–224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224–270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I, Hamadan mint.

Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270–273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia ♀ Antiochus 273–395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395–618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618–628 CE ( Sasanian conquest of Egypt ) Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Shahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628–641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran ♀ Shapur-i Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht ♀ Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639–651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of ancient Central Asia ^ Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.

^ Hallo, William W.

; Simpson, William Kelly (1971).

The Ancient Near East: A History . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp.

48– 49.

ISBN 978-0-15-502755-8 .

^ "Rulers of Mesopotamia" .

CDLI:wiki . Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative.

^ Thomas, Ariane; Potts, Timothy , eds. (2020).

Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins . Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty Museum. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-60606-649-2 .

^ Roux, Georges (1992).

Ancient Iraq . London: Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532–534 (Chronological Tables).

ISBN 978-0-14-193825-7 .

^ a b c Per the Sumerian King List .

^ Unger, Merrill F.

(2014).

Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus: A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History . Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-62564-606-4 .

Authority control databases International VIAF National United States 2 3 Israel Other Yale LUX 33°6′N 44°6′E ﻿ / ﻿ 33.100°N 44.100°E ﻿ / 33.100; 44.100 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qzjbz
Cached time: 20250817043714
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.878 seconds
Real time usage: 2.273 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12091/1000000
Revision size: 92127/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 408685/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21598/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 429411/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.972/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22558013/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1626.878      1 -total
 36.41%  592.367      2 Template:Reflist
 17.27%  281.041      1 Template:Infobox_former_country
 12.13%  197.389     34 Template:Cite_book
 11.19%  182.080     19 Template:Cite_journal
  6.76%  109.972      2 Template:Native_name
  5.60%   91.113      1 Template:History_of_Iraq
  4.67%   75.933      1 Template:Short_description
  3.69%   60.089      1 Template:Commons_category
  3.56%   57.878      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1566:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043714 and revision id 1303302984. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Akkadian_Empire&oldid=1303302984 " Categories : Akkadian Empire States and territories established in the 3rd millennium BC States and territories disestablished in the 3rd millennium BC Ancient Mesopotamia Ancient Upper Mesopotamia Ancient Levant 24th-century BC establishments 3rd-millennium BC disestablishments Former monarchies of Asia Nimrod Former empires Hidden categories: Articles containing Akkadian-language text Articles containing Hittite-language text Articles containing Biblical Hebrew-language text Articles containing Sumerian-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2023 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images CS1: long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 05:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Akkadian Empire 87 languages Add topic

