Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Works 3 Recognition 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pierre Bouguer 36 languages Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית ქართული Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French mathematician, physicist, and astronomer (1698–1758) Portrait by Jean-Baptiste Perronneau , 1753, in the collection of the Louvre Pierre Bouguer ( French: [buˈge] ) (16 February 1698, Le Croisic – 15 August 1758, Paris) was a French mathematician , geophysicist , geodesist , and astronomer . He is also known as "the father of naval architecture ".

[ citation needed ] Career [ edit ] La Figure de la terre , 1749 Bouguer's father, Jean Bouguer , one of the best hydrographers of his time, was Regius Professor of hydrography at Le Croisic in lower Brittany , and author of a treatise on navigation . He taught his sons Pierre and Jan at their home, where he also taught private students. In 1714, at the age of 16, Pierre was appointed to succeed his deceased father as professor of hydrography. In 1727 he gained the prize given by the French Academy of Sciences for his paper On the masting of ships , beating Leonhard Euler ; and two other prizes, one for his dissertation On the best method of observing the altitude of stars at sea , the other for his paper On the best method of observing the variation of the compass at sea .

[ 1 ] These were published in the Prix de l'Académie des Sciences.

In 1729 he published Essai d'optique sur la gradation de la lumière , the object of which is to define the quantity of light lost by passing through a given extent of the atmosphere , and became the first known discoverer of what is now more commonly known as the Beer-Lambert law .

[ 2 ] He found the light of the sun to be 300,000 times more intense than that of the moon , and thus made some of the earliest measurements in photometry . In 1730 he was made professor of hydrography at Le Havre , and succeeded Pierre Louis Maupertuis as associate geometer of the Academy of Sciences. He also invented a heliometer , afterwards perfected by Joseph von Fraunhofer . He was afterwards promoted in the Academy to the place of Maupertuis, and went to reside in Paris.

Bouguer's Mémoire presented to the Academy of Sciences in 1734 and published in 1736 was the first treatise on the theory of dome.

In 1735 Bouguer sailed with Charles Marie de La Condamine on a scientific mission to Peru , to measure the length of a degree of latitude in the meridian arc near the equator . Ten years were spent in this operation, a full account of which was published by Bouguer in 1749, La figure de la terre (French for "the figure of the earth ").

[ 3 ] In 1746 he published the first treatise of naval architecture, Traité du navire , which among other achievements first explained the use of the metacenter as a measure of ships' stability. His later writings were nearly all upon the theory of navigation and naval architecture.

In January 1750 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society .

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Traité d'optique sur la gradation de la lumière [lat] (in Latin). Wien: Trattner.

Essai d'optique, sur la gradation de la lumière (in French). Paris: Claude Jombert. 1729.

Figure de la terre (in French). Paris: Charles Antoine Jombert. 1749.

Recognition [ edit ] A crater on Mars was named in his honour.

[ 5 ] A lunar crater and an asteroid were also named after him.

His name is also recalled as the meteorological term Bouguer's halo (also known as Ulloa's halo , after Antonio de Ulloa , a Spanish member of his South American expedition) which an observer may see infrequently in fog when sun breaks through (for example, on a mountain) and looks down-sun – effectively a " fog bow " (as opposed to a "rain-bow"). It is "An infrequently observed meteorological phenomenon; a faint white, circular arc or complete ring of light that has a radius of 39 degrees and is centred on the antisolar point. When observed, it is usually in the form of a separate outer ring around an anticorona." [ 6 ] The term Bouguer anomaly , referring to small regional variations in the Earth's gravity field resulting from density variations in underlying rocks, is named after him.

A large bronze statue of him stands at the port in Le Croisic; [ 7 ] see Works by Jean Fréour .

See also [ edit ] List of geophysicists Radiodrome Schiehallion experiment References [ edit ] ^ "August 15, 1758: Death of Pierre Bouguer" .

APS News . American Physical Society. August–September 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Pierre Bouguer, Essai d'Optique, sur la gradation de la lumiere (Paris, France:  Claude Jombert, 1729) pp. 16–22.

^ Bouguer, Pierre (1749).

La figure de la terre, déterminée par les observations de Messieurs Bouguer, & de la Condamine, de l' Académie Royale des Sciences, envoyes par ordre du Roy au Pérou, pour observer aux environs de l' Equateur : avec une relation abregée de ce voyage, qui contient la description du pays dans lequel le opérations ont été faites [ The shape of the earth, determined by the observations of Mr. Bouguer, and La Condamine, the Royal Academy of Sciences, sent by order of the king in Peru, to observe the neighborhood of Ecuador: a short account of this trip, which contains the description of the country where the measurements were performed ] (in French). Paris: Jombert.

^ "Library and Archive Catalogue" . Royal Society . Retrieved 18 December 2010 .

^ Ariel, Avraham; Berger, Nora Ariel (2006).

Plotting the Globe: Stories of Meridians, Parallels, and the International Date Line . Explorations in world maritime history. Vol. 1. Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0275988951 .

^ Tricker, R. A. R. (1970).

Introduction to meteorological optics . New York: American Elsevier Pub. Co. pp.

192– 193.

ISBN 978-0444197009 .

^ "Pierre Bouguer" .

association.bretonne.free.fr . association Bretonne . Retrieved 20 November 2020 .

Ferreiro, Larrie D. (2007).

Ships and science : the birth of naval architecture in the scientific revolution, 1600-1800 . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262514156 .

Ferreiro, Larrie (2011).

Measure of the Earth: The Enlightenment Expedition that Reshaped Our World . New York: Basic Books. p. 376.

ISBN 978-0-465-01723-2 . Archived from the original on 22 February 2014.

Lamontagne, Roland. "La vie et l’oeuvre de Pierre Bouguer (The life and work of Pierre Bouguer)" Montreal: Presses de l’Université de Montréal, 1964 Lamontagne, Roland. "Pierre Bouguer, 1698–1758, un Blaise Pascal du XVIIIe siècle; Suivi d'une correspondence (Pierre Bouguer, 1698–1758, a Blaise Pascal of the 18th century; followed by correspondence)". Manuscript. Montreal: Université de Montreal, 1998 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Bouguer, Pierre ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Pierre Bouguer at Wikimedia Commons www-history; biographie on Bouguer Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists ULAN People Trove Structurae Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pierre_Bouguer&oldid=1303768691 " Categories : 1698 births 1758 deaths 18th-century French mathematicians Members of the French Academy of Sciences 18th-century French astronomers French geodesists Fellows of the Royal Society French naval architects Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from July 2017 Use dmy dates from July 2017 Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pierre Bouguer 36 languages Add topic

