Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin Toggle Origin subsection 1.1 Reaction 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Opposition to Mormonism in Smith's lifetime 2.2 Early publications 3 Forms Toggle Forms subsection 3.1 Religious anti-Mormonism 3.1.1 Protests 3.2 Secular anti-Mormonism 3.2.1 Legal 4 Violence 5 Responses Toggle Responses subsection 5.1 Official 5.2 Apologetic 5.3 Evangelical 5.4 Political 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mormonism 6 languages العربية Deutsch Español Português 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility towards the Latter Day Saint movement Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e An anti-Mormonism political cartoon from the late 19th century.

Anti-Mormonism refers to individuals, literature and media that are opposed to the beliefs , adherents , or institutions of Mormonism and the Latter Day Saint movement as a whole. It may include hostility, prejudice , discrimination , persecution , and violent physical attacks targeting Mormons and the Latter Day Saint movement.

Opposition to Mormonism began before the first Latter Day Saint church was established in 1830 and continues to the present day. The most vocal and strident opposition occurred during the 19th century, particularly the forced expulsion from Missouri following the 1838 Mormon War , during the Utah War of the 1850s, and in the second half of the century when the practice of polygamy in Utah Territory was widely condemned by the majority of Americans.

[ 1 ] : 192 [ 2 ] : 86 [ 3 ] : 382 Opponents of polygamy believed that polygamy forced wives into submission to their husbands [ 4 ] : 454 and some described polygamy as a form of slavery.

[ 2 ] : 117 A caricature of Brigham Young's wives, published in Puck following his death in 1877.

Modern-day opposition generally takes the form of websites, podcasts, videos or other media criticizing Mormonism , or protests at large gatherings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church), such as its semiannual general conference , outside of Latter-day Saint pageants , or at events surrounding the construction of new temples .

Scholars hold that the church's historical claims are false, while some non-Mormon Christians teach that the faith is non-Christian. Critics claim that it is a religion based on fraud or deceit on the part of its past and present leaders.

Most Americans accept Mormonism as a valid faith, and in 2012 the US presidential candidate Mitt Romney 's membership in the LDS Church was described as "non-issue" in that year's election.

[ 5 ] The FBI began tracking anti-Mormonism hate crimes in the United States in 2015 and have noted an increase in incidents over time (through 2019).

[ 6 ] Origin [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e The term, "anti-Mormon" first appears in the historical record in 1833 by the Louisville ( Kentucky ) Daily Herald in an article, "The Mormons and the Anti-Mormons" (the article was also the first known to label believers in the Book of Mormon as "Mormons").

[ 7 ] In 1841, it was revealed that an Anti-Mormon Almanac would be published.

Mormonism had been strongly criticized by dozens of publications since its inception. In 1834, Eber D. Howe published his book Mormonism Unvailed . The Latter Day Saints initially labeled such publications "anti-Christian", [ 8 ] but the publication of the Almanac and the subsequent formation of an " Anti-Mormon Party " in Illinois heralded a shift in terminology. "Anti-Mormon" became a common self-designation for those opposed to the religion.

[ 9 ] Today, the term is primarily used as a descriptor for persons and publications that are active in their opposition to the LDS Church, although its precise scope has been the subject of some debate. It is used by some to describe all thought perceived as critical of the LDS Church.

[ citation needed ] Siding with the latter, less-inclusive understanding of the term, Latter-day Saint scholar William O. Nelson suggests in the Encyclopedia of Mormonism that the term includes "any hostile or polemic opposition to Mormonism or to the Latter-day Saints, such as maligning Joseph Smith , his successors, or the doctrines or practices of the Church. Though sometimes well intended, anti-Mormonism publications have often taken the form of invective, falsehood, demeaning caricature, prejudice, or legal harassment, leading to both verbal and physical assault." [ 10 ] Reaction [ edit ] Many of those who have been labeled "anti-Mormon" object to the designation, arguing that the term implies that disagreement or criticism of Mormonism stems from some inherent "anti-Mormon" prejudice, rather than being part of a legitimate factual or religious debate.

[ citation needed ] Eric Johnson, for example, makes a distinction between "personal animosity and intellectual dialogue". Johnson insists that he is motivated by "love and compassion for Mormons", and that while he "[might] plead guilty to being against Mormon ism ", he finds the suggestion that he is anti- Mormon "both offensive and inaccurate".

[ citation needed ] Even some members of the church who write negatively about it have had their writings labeled anti-Mormon. Ex-Mormons who write about the church are likewise frequently labeled anti-Mormon, even when their writings are not inflammatory in nature.

[ citation needed ] The debate on who is "anti-Mormon" frequently arises in Mormon discussions of authors and sources.

[ citation needed ] Stephen Cannon has argued that use of the label is a "campaign by Latter-day Saints to disavow the facts presented by simply labeling the source as 'anti-Mormon'".

[ citation needed ] Critics of the term also claim that Mormon authors promote the ideal of a promised heavenly reward for enduring persecution for one's beliefs.

[ citation needed ] Those individuals and groups who challenge Mormonism, particularly those who approach the challenge from an evangelical Christian perspective, would generally sustain that they do, in fact, have the best interest of the Mormon at heart.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Main articles: History of the Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism and violence Opposition to Mormonism in Smith's lifetime [ edit ] 1851 lithograph of Smith's body about to be mutilated (Library of Congress) Mormonism, or the Latter Day Saint movement , arose in western New York , the area where its founder, Joseph Smith , was raised, during a period of religious revival in the early 19th century. Smith claimed to have several visions involving God, Jesus and angelic Native American prophets. These claims were often not received well by those in the community, [ 11 ] as evident in the following excerpt from Smith's account of LDS Church history: ... one of the Methodist preachers ... treated my communication ... with great contempt, saying it was all of the devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations in these days; that all such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would never be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common among all the sects—all united to persecute me.

[ 12 ] Title page of one of the earliest anti-Mormonism publications, E. D. Howe's Mormonism Unvailed: Or, A Faithful Account of that Singular Imposition and Delusion, from its Rise to the Present Time (1834), which claimed that the Book of Mormon was written by Solomon Spalding .

In New York and Pennsylvania , anti-Mormonism dealt mainly with issues including whether or not Smith actually had the gold plates ; whether those plates belonged to the people rather than Smith; whether or not Smith ever really had had visions (at least ones of theological import); Smith's treasure-digging episodes; and alleged occult practices by Smith.

[ 13 ] In Ohio , anti-Mormons focused on the ill-fated banking efforts of the Kirtland Safety Society and other failed economic experiments including the United Order .

In Missouri , once the gathering place of the Latter Day Saints, Mormons tended to vote as a bloc, wielding "considerable political and economic influence," often unseating local political leadership and earning long-lasting enmity in the sometimes hard-drinking, hard-living frontier communities.

[ 14 ] These differences culminated in hostilities and the eventual issuing of an executive order (since called the Extermination Order ) by Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs declaring "the Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the State." Three days later, a renegade militia unit attacked a Mormon settlement at Haun's Mill , resulting in the death of 18 Mormons and no militiamen.  The Extermination Order was not formally rescinded until 1976.

In Nauvoo, Illinois , persecutions were often based on the tendency of Mormons to "dominate community, economic, and political life wherever they resided." [ 15 ] The city of Nauvoo had become the largest in Illinois, the city council was predominantly Mormon, and the Nauvoo Legion (the Mormon militia ) had grown to a quarter of the size of the U.S. Army .

[ citation needed ] Other issues of contention included polygamy , freedom of speech , anti-slavery views during Smith's presidential campaign, and the deification of man .

[ citation needed ] After the destruction of the press of the Nauvoo Expositor and institution of martial law , Joseph Smith was arrested on charges of treason against the state of Illinois and incarcerated in Carthage Jail where he was killed by a mob on June 27, 1844. The persecution in Illinois became so severe that most of the residents of Nauvoo fled across the Mississippi River in February 1846.

In 1847, Mormons established a community hundreds of miles away in the Salt Lake Valley in Utah . Beginning in 1849, every federally appointed official left Utah under duress.

[ 16 ] In 1857 President Buchanan concluded that the Mormons in the territory were rebelling against the United States . In response, President Buchanan sent one-third of the United States army to Utah in 1857 in what is known as the Utah War .

Early publications [ edit ] A Mormon and his wives dancing to the Devil's tune (1850) Much of this anti-Mormonism sentiment was expressed in publications during the early part of LDS Church history. In his 2005 biography of Joseph Smith, Richard Lyman Bushman cites four 1838 pamphlets as anti-Mormon: Mormonism Exposed by Sunderland, Mormonism Exposed by Bacheler, Antidote to Mormonism by M'Chesney, and Exposure of Mormonism by Livesey.

[ 17 ] : 398–402 The first was the work of Origen Bacheler, who had no direct contact with the body of Mormons, and contained the contents of a debate between the author and Parley Pratt , with Pratt's side omitted. Bushman describes the author's rhetoric as indistinguishable from that uttered by  "scores of other polemicists of his time," providing a glimpse into the kind of material considered anti-Mormon. The pamphlet described Joseph Smith as a "blockhead", a "juggling, money-digging, fortune-telling impostor" and, along with the Book of Mormon witnesses , as "perhaps the most infamous liars and impostors that ever breathed. ... By their deception and lies, they swindle them out of their property, disturb social order and the public peace, excite a spirit of ferocity and murder, and lead multitudes astray on the subject in which, of all others, they have the deepest interest." He voiced outrage at "the miscreants who are battening on the ignorance and credulity of those upon whom they can successfully play off this imposture." He described the Book of Mormon as, "the most gross, the most ridiculous, the most imbecile, the most contemptible concern, that was ever attempted to be palmed off upon society as a revelation." He believed the religion "can be viewed in no other light than that of monstrous public nuisances, that ought forthwith to be abated" and that the Mormons were "the most vile, the most impudent, the most impious, knot of charlatans and cheat with which any community was ever disgraced and cursed." [ 18 ] Antidote to Mormonism describes Mormons as "miserable enemies of both God and man—engines of death and hell." He described combat with them as being "desperate, the battle is one of extermination." [ 19 ] Bushman describes the characteristics of these anti-Mormonism materials as sensationalizing actuality: [ 17 ] : 401 The critics' writings largely controlled the reading public's image of [Joseph Smith] for the next century, with unfortunate results for biographers. The sharp caricature of "Joe Smith" as fraud and con man blotted out the actual person. He was a combination of knave and blockhead. No one had to explain what motives drove him. He was a fixed type, the confidence man, well known in the literature of antebellum America. Americans knew all about these insidious scoundrels who undermined social order and ruined the lives of their unsuspecting victims. Joseph Smith became the worst of the type—a religious fraud who preyed upon the sacred yearnings of the human soul.

British author Arthur Conan Doyle 's A Study in Scarlet (1887), the novel in which the famous fictional detective Sherlock Holmes made his first appearance, includes a very negative depiction of the early Mormon community in Utah after its migration westwards and the foundation of Salt Lake City . Mormons are presented as violent, rigidly intolerant and corrupt, systematically terrorizing both members of the church and non-Mormon neighbors as well as forcing polygamous marriage on Mormon girls against their will.

Later in his career, Conan Doyle apologized to the Mormons for his depiction of their religion. During a 1923 tour of the United States, Doyle was invited to speak at the LDS Church's Salt Lake Tabernacle ; while some individual Mormons remained deeply upset over the negative depiction, in general, the Mormons present received him warmly.

[ 20 ] Forms [ edit ] Vehement opposition to the LDS Church comes from individuals or groups associated with the Christian countercult movement , which is mostly an evangelical Christian phenomenon. In the 21st century, opposition to Mormonism has become frequent among Secular groups.

Religious anti-Mormonism [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Among those with religious motives, Daniel C. Peterson has identified two major streams of modern anti-Mormonism thought. The first is "traditional anti-Mormonism", typified by Rev. Wesley Walters , and Walter Martin . Anti-Mormons in this category generally try to explain Mormonism in naturalistic terms. They appeal to "Joseph Smith's environment and his (wicked or pathological) character, perhaps assisted by a co-conspirator or two", as a sufficient explanation for Mormon origins.

[ 21 ] : 154, 158 "New Age anti-Mormonism", according to Peterson, "is quite different. It admits the presence of supernatural events in the founding events of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and is quite willing to acknowledge continuous supernatural influence in the life of the Church today." However, "unlike faithful Latter-day Saints, New Age anti-Mormons see the supernatural agents involved in the founding and progress of the Church as demonic, occultic, diabolical, luciferian." [ 21 ] : 154 This "New Age anti-Mormon" grouping includes Ed Decker , Loftes Tryk, James R. Spencer and many others. According to Introvigne, New Age anti-Mormonism emerged in the 1980s largely as a result of the rise of Third-wave Pentecostalism and its emphasis on spiritual warfare .

[ 21 ] : 159—161 While some may believe that Satan was indirectly involved in the founding of the LDS Church, they place little emphasis on his role. For them, naturalistic and historical explanations are always preferable to supernatural ones.

[ 21 ] : 158 Walter Martin , founder of the Christian Research Institute , was another traditional anti-Mormon. Martin was more controversial and contemptuous than others noted here. He portrayed Mormons as deceivers who "pose as Christians," calling them "anti-Christian" and "a cult infiltration." Martin also claimed that Mormons secretly harbor a "deep contempt for Christians," and accused them of being egomaniacs and "cultists".

[ 22 ] New Age anti-Mormons have generated considerably more controversy than traditional anti-Mormons. The most prominent of their number, Ed Decker , produced The God Makers and The God Makers II , and wrote books by the same name. The film is generally considered acerbic and misleading, and has provoked bomb threats against LDS meetinghouses and death threats against members.

[ citation needed ] In other publications, Decker has asserted that the literal source of Mormonism is Satan , that its religious symbolism is satanic in nature, and that it is a political conspiracy by nature.

[ 21 ] : 158, 164 Protests [ edit ] Protesters outside the site of the LDS general conference in 2006 Protesters have been visible as "street preachers" at LDS General Conferences , outside of LDS pageants, and temples. At the Sacramento temple, for example, protesters distributed pamphlets to visitors who came to take a guided tour. They also held up signs directing people to websites critical of the LDS Church.

[ 23 ] Notably, protesters also made an appearance at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City.

[ citation needed ] One group that actively organizes peaceful protests, a non-profit organization called Mormonism Research Ministry, insists that its activities are not "anti-Mormon".

[ citation needed ] Some other individuals have been seen throwing copies of the Book of Mormon on the ground, stepping on them, and portray using temple garments, which LDS hold sacred, as toilet tissue, and other similarly offensive actions.

[ citation needed ] However, nearly every evangelical ministry, including those that actively challenge truth claims of Mormonism, vehemently condemns this sort of offensive and belligerent behavior, and further object to being placed in the same category as those few who engage in such behavior.

[ citation needed ] As a result of organized protests at Mormon events, a number of Latter-day Saints, and even non-Mormons, have begun to counter-demonstrate at events (by singing hymns, for example).

[ citation needed ] Secular anti-Mormonism [ edit ] Opposition to Mormonism has been more prominent in the 21st century from atheist perspectives.

Richard Dawkins , Bill Maher and John Dehlin are among those who more prominent individuals who have used media appearances or podcasts to oppose the Institutional LDS Church and its doctrines and policies.

[ citation needed ] Legal [ edit ] In March 2014, a court case was brought against LDS Church president Thomas S. Monson in the United Kingdom. Monson was accused by disaffected member Tom Phillips of breaching the Fraud Act 2006 . The summons alleged that two men were induced to pay tithes to the LDS Church by church teachings which are objectively untrue. The allegedly untrue teachings included that Joseph Smith translated the Book of Mormon from ancient gold plates and it is historically accurate , and that Native Americans are descended from Israelites who left Jerusalem in 600 BC. The court case was tossed out before trial. A court judge called it an "abuse" of court process.

[ 24 ] Violence [ edit ] See also: Mormonism and violence , List of attacks against Latter-day Saint churches , and Protests against Proposition 8 supporters Tangible acts of violence against Latter-day Saints are considerably less common in the United States today than they were in the 19th century. The first significant violent persecution occurred in the early 1830s in Missouri . Mormons tended to vote as a bloc there, wielding "considerable political and economic influence," often unseating local political leadership and earning long-lasting enmity in the frontier communities.

[ 14 ] These differences culminated in the Missouri Mormon War and the eventual issuing of an executive order (since called the extermination order within the LDS community) by Missouri governor Lilburn Boggs , which declared that "the Mormons must be treated as enemies, and must be exterminated or driven from the State." Three days later, a renegade militia unit attacked a Mormon settlement at Haun's Mill , resulting in the death of 18 Mormons and no militiamen. The extermination order was not formally rescinded until 1976.

After the destruction of the press of the Nauvoo Expositor in Nauvoo, Illinois , Joseph Smith was arrested and incarcerated in Carthage Jail where he was killed by a mob on June 27, 1844. The persecution in Illinois became so severe that most of the residents of Nauvoo fled across the Mississippi River in February 1846.

Even after Mormons established a community hundreds of miles away in the Salt Lake Valley in 1847, anti-Mormonism activists in Utah Territory convinced U.S. President James Buchanan that the Mormons in the territory were rebelling against the United States; [ 25 ] critics pointed to plural marriage as a sign of the rebellion. In response, President Buchanan sent one-third of the American standing army in 1857 to Utah in what is known as the Utah War .

More recent persecution against Mormons in the U.S. has occasionally taken the shape of acts of vandalism against church property.

[ citation needed ] At an LDS Church building in Orangevale , Sacramento County , vandals spray painted "No on 8" and "No on Prop 8" on the front sign and sidewalk.

[ 26 ] An affiliate group of the radical Trans/Queer organization Bash Back!

, claims credit for pouring glue into the locks of an LDS Church building and spray painting on its walls. An internet posting signed by Bash Back!'s Olympia chapter said: "The Mormon church ... needs to be confronted, attacked, subverted and destroyed." [ 27 ] According to the Chicago Tribune , the acts of vandalism against the LDS Church appear to be in retaliation for support of Proposition 8.

[ 27 ] Police reported that nine church buildings were also damaged in Utah that month.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] The Anti-Defamation League released a statement condemning the "defacement and destruction of property." [ 30 ] In November 2008, the United States Postal Service delivered envelopes containing white powder to two LDS Church temples —the Los Angeles California Temple and the Salt Lake Temple —and to the Knights of Columbus ' national headquarters in New Haven, Connecticut , prompting a hazardous materials response and a federal domestic terrorism investigation.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] The LDS Church blamed opponents of the marriage ban for sending the hoax mailings , while a group that also supported the measure condemned "acts of domestic terrorism against our supporters." [ 34 ] LGBT rights groups, such as Equality Utah and Equality California , have spoken out against the use of violence in protests, and note that the source of the "white powder" mailings has not been determined.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In Latin America, however, opposition to Mormonism has taken a deadlier form. In May 1989, members of a terrorist organization called the Zarate Willka Armed Forces of Liberation murdered two Mormon missionaries in La Paz, Bolivia. Another Bolivian terrorist group, the Tupac Katari Guerrilla Army , claimed responsibility for two attacks against Mormon chapels. The Lautaro Youth Movement in Chile conducted 27 small-scale bombings against LDS meetinghouses in 1992.

[ 36 ] Responses [ edit ] Official [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Anti-Mormonism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Although a position on anti-Mormonism is not part of the official doctrine of the LDS Church, it has been mentioned specifically in a number of general conference talks made by church general authorities .

Marvin J. Ashton , speaking as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles , began a fall 1982 conference by relating an experience he had with a protester outside Temple Square . He went on to declare "[t]o the world, and especially to members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" that "there is no time for contention," and encouraged "all our members to refuse to become anti-anti-Mormon. In the wise words of old, can we 'live and let live'?" [ 37 ] Carlos E. Asay of the Presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy spoke in the fall 1981 conference concerning opposition to the LDS Church. He describes " Lucifer " as the source of at least some anti-Mormonism and apostate groups, relates an experience of a Mormon convert being excommunicated and encourages the avoidance of "those who would tear down your faith.” [ 38 ] A passage from an early Mormon epistle addresses a claimed tendency of ex-Mormons to criticize the church of which they are no longer a part: [A]postates after turning from the faith of Christ ... have sooner or later fallen into the snares of the wicked one, and have been left destitute of the Spirit of God, to manifest their wickedness in the eyes of multitudes. From apostates the faithful have received the severest persecutions ... "When once that light which was in them is taken from them, they become as much darkened as they were previously enlightened, and then, no marvel, if all their power should be enlisted against the truth," and they, Judas like, seek the destruction of those who were their greatest benefactors.

[ 39 ] In 1985, Vaughn J Featherstone, a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy of the LDS Church, addressed students at the church-owned Brigham Young University , calling anti-Mormonism material "theological pornography that is damaging to the spirit." [ 40 ] In 1992, the church issued a press release describing their scriptural mandate to "[gather] up a knowledge of all the facts, and sufferings and abuses put upon them. ... And perhaps a committee can be appointed to find out these things, and to take statements and affidavits; and also to gather up the libelous publications that are afloat ...." The Strengthening Church Members Committee was appointed by the First Presidency to comply with this scripture and to serve as a resource to local church leaders to assist their members who have questions. The committee consisted at that time of Russell M. Nelson and James E. Faust .

[ 41 ] Apologetic [ edit ] Main article: Mormon studies § Apologetics and polemics Mormon apologetics and members vary both in their perception of criticism and opposition, as well as what they see as falling under the umbrella of anti-Mormonism. According to Hugh Nibley , a noted Mormon apologist, some of those who leave the LDS Church "become sometimes feverishly active, determined to prove to the world and themselves that it is a fraud after all," while others "hold no rancor and even retain a sentimental affection for the Church—they just don't believe the gospel." However, neither group, Nibley affirms, can ever "leave it alone. ... It haunts them all the days of their life. No one who has ever had a testimony ever forgets or denies that he once did have it—that it was something that really happened to him." [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Although some Mormons avoid anti-Mormonism material, others analyze and criticize it, such as William J. Hamblin , who addresses anti-Mormonism attacks on the geography and archeology of the Book of Mormon in "Basic Methodological Problems with the Anti-Mormon Approach to the Geography and Archaeology of the Book of Mormon." [ 44 ] Some prominent LDS Church apologists believe that the opposition from anti-Mormonism can be beneficial to Mormonism. As Hugh Nibley expressed it, "We need more anti-Mormon books. They keep us on our toes." [ 45 ] Orson Pratt also seemed to invite criticism when he said: Convince us of our errors of doctrine, if we have any, by reason, by logical arguments, or by the word of God, and we will be ever grateful for the information, and you will ever have the pleasing reflection that you have been instruments in the hands of God of redeeming your fellow beings from the darkness which you may see enveloping their minds.

[ 46 ] Evangelical [ edit ] Regarding the subject of Christian anti-Mormonism, Richard Mouw (President of the Fuller Theological Seminary ) stated in 2004 at the Salt Lake Tabernacle in Salt Lake City , I am now convinced that we ... have often seriously misrepresented the beliefs and practices of the Mormon community. Indeed, let me state it bluntly to the LDS folks here this evening: we have sinned against you. The God of the Scriptures makes it clear that it is a terrible thing to bear false witness against our neighbors, and we have been guilty of that sort of transgression in things we have said about you. We have told you what you believe without making a sincere effort first of all to ask you what you believe...Indeed, we have even on occasion demonized you, weaving conspiracy theories about what the LDS community is 'really' trying to accomplish in the world.

[ 47 ] Mouw is not the only Christian calling for moderation. Similar pleas have been issued by David Rowe, [ 48 ] Carl Mosser, Francis J. Beckwith, Paul Owen, [ 49 ] Craig Blomberg, [ 50 ] and others. Some church and parachurch groups have also made efforts to repair relations with the Mormons. In the 1980s, Jerry Falwell 's Moral Majority "took some small steps toward Evangelical-Mormon cooperation for a shared social, political, and ethical agenda".

[ 51 ] In or around 2000, a Pentecostal congregation in Provo, Utah held a public ceremony of repentance for its negative attitudes and actions toward the Latter-day Saint community.

[ 52 ] Some traditional Christian churches and ministries, however, have expressed varying degrees of concern about the movement to abandon what they consider to be valid and cogent challenges to Mormon doctrine and teaching for the sake of "peaceful co-existence", and yet at the same time do not wish to be categorized with the fringe Christian elements that seek to be openly disruptive and antagonistic toward the LDS community.

[ citation needed ] Political [ edit ] In 2011, Rick Santorum was asked if Jon Huntsman and Mitt Romney would have problems in the 2012 presidential election cycle as Mormons. Santorum answered, "I hope not. ... I hope that people will look at the qualities of candidates and look at what they believe and what they're for and look [at] their records and then make a decision." [ 53 ] Then-Vice President Joe Biden said, in a long response to a University of Pittsburgh student's question about how his own religious faith affected his philosophy of government: I find it preposterous that in 2011 we're debating whether or not a man is qualified or worthy of your vote based on whether or not his religion ... is a disqualifying provision. ... It is not. It is embarrassing and we should be ashamed, anyone who thinks that way.

[ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Latter Day Saint movement portal American Party (Utah) Anti-Christian sentiment Anti-Catholicism Anti-Protestantism Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses A Victim of the Mormons Criticism of LDS Church Ex-Mormon Freedom of religion in the United States Latter Day Saint martyrs Latter Day Saints in popular culture Mormonism and Christianity Phrenology and the Latter Day Saint Movement Portrayal of Mormons in comics Veterans on Patrol References [ edit ] ^ Linford, Orma (1965).

The Mormons and the Law: The Polygamy Cases . The University of Wisconsin.

^ a b Talbot, Christine (2013).

A foreign kingdom: Mormons and polygamy in American political culture, 1852–1890 .

University of Illinois Press .

ISBN 978-0-252-09535-1 .

OCLC 862745819 .

^ Ulrich, Laurel Thatcher (2017).

A House Full of Females: Plural Marriage and Women's Rights in Early Mormonism, 1835–1870 (1st ed.).

Knopf .

ISBN 978-0-307-59490-7 .

OCLC 955274387 .

^ Phipps, Kelly Elizabeth (April 2009).

"Marriage and Redemption: Mormon Polygamy in the Congressional Imagination, 1862–1887" (PDF) .

Virginia Law Review .

95 (2): 435– 487.

JSTOR 25478708 .

^ Turner, John G. (October 3, 2012).

"Mitt Romney's Mormon religion a non-issue during the 2012 presidential election" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved May 23, 2025 .

^ "The FBI has been tracking crimes against Latter-day Saints for 3 years. Here's why" .

Deseret News . January 12, 2019.

^ Oxford English Dictionary , s.v. "Mormon".

^ cf.

Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate , vol. 3, no. 1, October 1836, p. 319.

^ A similar party would arise in Utah in 1883, professing to be "'anti-Mormon' ... to the heart's core." Cf. Jennifer Hansen, Letters of Catharine Cottam Romney, p. 76. See also Liberal Party (Utah) .

^ Nelson, William O. (1992).

"Anti-Mormon Publications" .

Encyclopedia of Mormonism (5 ed.).

Macmillan .

ISBN 0-02-904040-X . Retrieved June 1, 2006 .

^ "Latter Day Saints Movement" (PDF) .

hwpi.harvard.edu .

^ History:21–22 ^ Quinn, D. Michael (1998).

Early Mormonism and the Magic World View . Salt Lake City, Utah: Signature Books .

ISBN 1-56085-089-2 .

^ a b Monroe, R.D.

"Congress and the Mexican War, 1844–1849" .

lincoln.lib.niu.edu . Archived from the original on June 13, 2006 . Retrieved June 3, 2006 .

^ VandeCreek, Drew E.

"Religion and Culture" .

Northern Illinois University .

^ "Mormons Enter the Salt Lake Valley: 1847" .

I Love History . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

^ a b Bushman, Richard Lyman (2005).

Joseph Smith: Rough Stone Rolling .

Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 1-4000-4270-4 .

^ Origen Bacheler (1838).

Mormonism Exposed: Internally and Externally . New York: n.p.

^ M'Chesney, James (1838).

An Antidote to Mormonism . Burnett & Pollard. p. 2 . Retrieved October 18, 2024 .

^ Schindler, Hal (April 10, 1994).

"The Case Of The Repentant Writer: Sherlock Holmes' Creator Raises The Wrath Of Mormons" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Archived from the original on September 23, 2006.

Page D1. Reprinted at historytogo.utah.gov by the Utah State Historical Society.

^ a b c d e Introvigne, Massimo (1994).

"The Devil Makers: Contemporary Evangelical Fundamentalist Anti-Mormonism" (PDF) .

Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought .

27 (1): 153– 169.

doi : 10.2307/45228331 .

JSTOR 45228331 .

S2CID 254397627 . Retrieved September 25, 2022 .

^ Millet, Robert (2005).

A Different Jesus? The Christ of the Latter-day Saints . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Eerdmans, 178–179.

^ Garza, Jennifer (June 29, 2006).

"Mission Accomplished: Today, Mormon temple opens its doors to the public" .

dwb.sacbee.com .

The Sacramento Bee . pp. K1. Archived from the original on October 4, 2007 . Retrieved September 25, 2006 .

^ Mormon leader "Thomas Monson fraud case thrown out" , BBC News , 2014-03-20.

^ "Why the Mormons Settled in Utah" .

HISTORY . August 30, 2023 . Retrieved September 6, 2024 .

^ "Prop 8 Protesting Turns Ugly" . November 10, 2008. Archived from the original on June 8, 2011 . Retrieved April 4, 2009 .

^ a b "Radical Gay Activist Group Plans More Disruptions" .

Chicago Tribune . November 20, 2008.

^ Gehrke, Steve (November 24, 2008).

"More than mischief: Are recent acts of church vandalism tied to bigotry?" . THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE . Retrieved August 4, 2012 .

^ Gehrke, Steve (November 21, 2008).

"Wall tagged outside Farmington LDS building" . THE SALT LAKE TRIBUNE . Retrieved August 4, 2012 .

^ "ADL Condemns Criminal Activity Targeting Religious Institutions That Supported Proposition 8" .

Anti-Defamation League . November 10, 2008. Archived from the original on December 20, 2008.

^ Garza, Jennifer (November 14, 2008).

"Feds investigate vandalism at Mormon sites" .

The Sacramento Bee . Archived from the original on February 22, 2009.

^ Winslow, Ben (December 10, 2008).

"FBI to run more tests on mystery substance mailed to LDS Church" .

Deseret News . Archived from the original on January 2, 2013.

^ Winslow, Ben (November 17, 2009).

"FBI sending suspicious powder to headquarters" .

Deseret News . Archived from the original on November 23, 2008.

^ a b "Mormon church blames powder hoax on gays: Leaders say opponents of marriage ban are behind the mailings" . Associated Press. December 24, 2008.

^ Ziegler, Elizabeth (November 14, 2008).

"GLBT Advocates Condemn Attacks on LDS Church" . KCPW. Archived from the original on December 18, 2008.

^ Office of the Secretary of State (1993).

"Patterns of Global Terrorism: 1992 – Latin American Overview" .

fas.org .

Archived from the original on September 3, 2006 . Retrieved September 25, 2006 .

^ Marvin J. Ashton (November 1982).

"Pure Religion" .

Ensign .

LDS Church . p. 63.

^ Carlos E. Asay (November 1981).

"Opposition to the Work of God" .

Ensign .

LDS Church . p. 67.

^ Smith, Joseph F.

Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 1834-1837 .

LDS Church . p. 66.

Although sometimes mistaken for a direct quote from Joseph Smith, this passage occurs in the book as part of "Excerpts from an Epistle of the Elders of the Church in Kirtland to Their Brethren Abroad", edited by Oliver Cowdery and F. G. Williams as published in The Evening and the Morning Star .

^ Featherstone, Vaughn J. (1985).

"The Last Drop in the Chalice" .

Speeches.BYU.edu . Archived from the original (PHP) on May 26, 2006 . Retrieved June 1, 2006 .

^ "First Presidency statement cites scriptural mandate for Church committee" .

LDS Church . August 22, 1992 . Retrieved December 23, 2024 .

^ Nibley, Hugh (1989). "6". In Don E. Norton (ed.).

Approaching Zion (Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol. 9) . Salt Lake City, Utah: Deseret Book . p. 155.

ISBN 0-87579-252-9 .

^ See also Nibley, Hugh (August 1991). "Part 3: How To Write An anti-Mormon Book (A Handbook for Beginners)". In David J. Whittaker (ed.).

Tinkling Cymbals and Sounding Brass: The Art of Telling Tales About Joseph Smith and Brigham Young (The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, Vol 11) .

Deseret Book . pp.

474– 580.

ISBN 0-87579-516-1 .

^ William J. Hamblin (Spring 1993).

"Basic Methodological Problems with the Anti-Mormon Approach to the Geography and Archaeology of the Book of Mormon" .

Journal of Book of Mormon Studies : 161– 197.

^ Nibley, Hugh (1978).

Nibley on the Timely and the Timeless . Provo, Utah: Religious Studies Center at Brigham Young University . xii.

^ Orson Pratt (January 1853). "The Seer".

UCLA Law Review .

1 (1): 15– 16.

^ Mouw, Richard (January 15, 2005).

"We Have Sinned Against You" .

jmm.aaa.net.au .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2006 . Retrieved September 25, 2006 .

, Moore, Carrie A. (November 15, 2004).

"Evangelical preaches at Salt Lake Tabernacle" .

Deseret Morning News . Retrieved August 13, 2006 .

Mouw's remarks generated mixed reactions from members of the evangelical community, ranging from heartfelt agreement to biting criticism.

Moore, Carrie A. (January 15, 2005).

"Speaker's apology to LDS stirs up fuss" .

Deseret Morning News . Retrieved September 25, 2006 .

^ Rowe, David L. (2005).

I Love Mormons: A New Way to Share Christ with Latter-day Saints . Grand Rapids, MI: Baker.

^ Mosser, Carl, Francis J. Beckwith, Paul Owen (2002).

The New Mormon Challenge . Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan.

^ Blomberg, Craig and Stephen E. Robinson (1997).

How Wide the Divide? A Mormon and an Evangelical in Conversation . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 31–32.

^ Blomberg, Craig and Stephen E. Robinson (1997).

How Wide the Divide? A Mormon and an Evangelical in Conversation . Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity, 25.

^ Merrill, Dean (February 7, 2000).

"A Peacemaker in Provo" .

Christianity Today . Retrieved May 23, 2025 .

^ "Rick Santorum Hopes Christian Voters Will Look Beyond Mormon Faith of Romney, Huntsman" .

www.christianpost.com . June 13, 2011.

^ "Biden defends Romney's Mormon faith" .

Reuters . November 4, 2011.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-Mormonism .

Wikinews has related news: Community forum held after attacks on Mormon teens in Arizona Tabernacle on Trial: Mormons Dismayed by Harsh Spotlight – The Wall Street Journal By Suzanne Sataline, February 8, 2008; Page A1 Anti-Mormonism and the Question of Religious Authenticity in Antebellum America (PDF), Journal of Religion and Society Some Themes of Counter-Subversion: An Analysis of Anti-Masonic, Anti-Catholic, and Anti-Mormon Literature Saletan, William (October 10, 2011).

"Latter-Day Sins: Why don't we challenge anti-Mormonism? Because it's the prejudice of our age" .

Slate.com .

v t e "Mormon-nomers" Mormon Cultural Mormon Molly Mormon and Peter Priesthood Less-active Mormon Jack Mormon Ex-Mormon Anti-Mormon Latter Day Saint movement portal v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Latter Day Saint movement Fundamental ideas Mormonism Mormonism and Nicene Christianity Mormon fundamentalism Teachings of Joseph Smith History Church of Christ Extermination Order Succession crisis History of the LDS Church Mormon handcart pioneers Mormon Battalion Mormon Reformation Utah War Community of Christ history Amboy Conference Restoration branches Church of Jesus Christ (Bickertonite) history Rigdonite William Bickerton Sacred texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Book of Abraham Criticism Book of Mormon outline Criticism Book of Moses Criticism of Mormon sacred texts Doctrine and Covenants (Book of Commandments) Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible Pearl of Great Price Lectures on Faith Book of the Law of the Lord ( Strangites only ) The Word of the Lord ( Fettingites and offshoots ) Founders and leaders Joseph Smith outline Oliver Cowdery Sidney Rigdon Brigham Young Wilford Woodruff Joseph Smith III James Strang William Bickerton Granville Hedrick Alpheus Cutler LDS denominations The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints outline Community of Christ Restoration branches Bickertonite Strangite Hedrickite Christian fellowships of "the Remnants" movement Mormon fundamentalism FLDS Church Apostolic United Brethren Latter Day Church of Christ Centennial Park group List of Reorganized Restorationist churches Doctrines and practices Adam–God doctrine Agency Articles of Faith Baptism Confirmation Cosmology Degrees of glory Early views on death Exaltation Gifts of the Spirit Views on God Heavenly Parents Heavenly Mother Islam and Mormonism Judaism and Mormonism Law of consecration Melchizedek priesthood Patriarchal blessing Plan of salvation Premortal life Priesthood Restoration Revelation Second anointing Spirit world Spectrums of orthodoxy and practice Son of perdition Temples Endowment Penalty Tithing Women and Mormonism Word of wisdom Controversies Polygamy current state origin Race Black people Black people and early Mormonism Civil rights Joseph Smith's views Native Americans Pacific Islanders Phrenology Slavery LGBTQ people Violence Historicity of the Book of Mormon origin Geographical setting List of prophecies of Joseph Smith Universalism Culture Ex-Mormon Jack Mormon Lost boys Mormon art Mormon blogosphere Mormon cinema Mormon folklore Cunning folk traditions and the Latter Day Saint movement Mormon foodways Mormon literature Mormon poetry Mormon fiction Association for Mormon Letters Mormon music Mormon folk music Placement marriage The Mormon Image Mormon studies Latter Day Saints in popular culture Portrayal of Mormons in comics Mormon pornography Places Cumorah Kirtland, Ohio Mormon corridor Nauvoo, Illinois Salt Lake City Sacred Grove Smith Family Farm Related Anti-Mormonism Angel Moroni Bibliography Bibliography of books critical of Mormonism Criticism of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints First Vision Golden plates Joseph Smith Papyri Eyewitness accounts associated with the Joseph Smith Papyri Kirtland Egyptian papers Kolob Mormonism and history Reformed Egyptian Temple architecture (LDS Church) Theodemocracy Voree plates Latter Day Saints Portal v t e The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints History 1838 Mormon War 1890 Manifesto Anthon Transcript Brigham Young Church of Christ First Vision Good Neighbor policy History of the Relief Society Historic sites Joseph Smith Death Succession crisis LGBTQ Mormon timeline Handcart companies Mormon Battalion Name of the church Pioneers Mormonism & violence Utah War 2023 SEC case Sacred texts Holy Bible Book of Mormon Doctrine & Covenants Pearl of Great Price Book of Moses Book of Abraham Joseph Smith–Matthew Joseph Smith–History Articles of Faith Beliefs & practices Apostolic succession Apostasy & restoration Calling Cosmology Adam & Eve Evolution Plan of salvation Degrees of glory Exaltation Premortal life Family Home Evening Fast Sunday " For the Strength of Youth " Gender " Family Proclamation " Transgender people God in Mormonism Heavenly Mother Ministering Marriage Celestial Interracial Polygamy Ordinances Baptism for the dead Marriage sealing Second anointing Temple endowment Temple garment Priesthood Race Black people Black Mormons Black temple & priesthood restrictions Curses of Cain and Ham Native Americans Pacific Islanders Slavery Revelation Reformed Egyptian Sexuality Birth control Homosexuality Sexual orientation change efforts Masturbation Soaking Spectrums of belief & practice Suicide Tithing Word of wisdom Culture & worship Cultural depictions Especially for Youth Family Services Feminism Films List Foodways General Conference Helping Hands Humanitarian services Hymns Book Latter-day Saints Channel Liahona magazine Missionary service Mormons Music Pageants Pioneer Day Tabernacles Tabernacle Choir Temples List Worship services Sacrament Leadership President Russell M. Nelson List First Presidency Quorum of the Twelve Apostles Quorums of the Seventy Presiding Bishop Relief Society Sunday School Young Women Young Men Primary Demographics Membership history Statistics by country Mormon corridor Less-active Mormon Ex-Mormon LGBTQ Mormons & organizations Organization Congregational Area District Stake Ward Statistics Church Educational System BYU BYU-Idaho BYU-Hawaii BYU–Pathway Worldwide Ensign College Deseret Management Deseret Book Deseret Industries Deseret Media Temple Square Hospitality Deseret News Bonneville International Beneficial Financial FamilySearch RootsTech Philanthropies Finances Ensign Peak Advisors Perpetual Emigration Fund Perpetual Education Fund Utah Property Management AgReserves Deseret Ranches Criticism Anti-Mormonism Book of Abraham Book of Mormon Geographical setting Historical authenticity Linguistics Origin Fawn M. Brodie No Man Knows My History Christian Research Institute Ed Decker The God Makers John Dehlin Mormon Stories podcast Jeremy Runnells CES Letter Kinderhook plates Salamander letter September Six Jerald & Sandra Tanner Truth & Transparency Related Bloggernacle ComeUntoChrist.org Book of Mormon translations Joseph Smith Translation Joseph Smith Papers Dialogue FAIR organization FARMS organization I'm a Mormon campaign LGBTQ Mormon suicides Mormon fundamentalism Mormon History Association Mormon studies Mormonism & Nicene Christianity Relationship to U.S. politics LGBTQ rights Senkyoshigo Sunstone Joseph Smith Papyri Eyewitnesses Kirtland Egyptian papers Giving Machine Category Latter Day Saint Movement Outline v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Mormonism&oldid=1305626216 " Categories : History of the Latter Day Saint movement Criticism of Mormonism Mormonism-related controversies Mormon studies Persecution of Christians Prejudice and discrimination by type Religious discrimination in the United States Anti-Christian sentiment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Use mdy dates from August 2025 Use American English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles that may contain original research from February 2018 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from September 2020 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles lacking reliable references from July 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 04:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mormonism 6 languages Add topic

