Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable alumni 3 Notable articles 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Harvard Civil Rights – Civil Liberties Law Review Discipline Law review Language English Publication details History 1966-present Publisher Harvard Law School ( United States ) Frequency Biannually Impact factor 1.185 (2016) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) Bluebook Harv. C.R.-C.L. L. Rev.

ISO 4 Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0017-8039 (print) 2153-2389 (web) LCCN sn82005086 OCLC no.

06031621 Links Journal homepage The Harvard Civil Rights – Civil Liberties Law Review is a student-run law review published by Harvard Law School .

[ 1 ] Founded in 1966, the journal is published two times per year and contains articles, essays, and book reviews concerning civil rights and liberties .

[ 2 ] In 2009, its online companion Amicus was launched, which features standard length journal articles coupled with online responses.

[ 3 ] In 2018, the journal launched its podcast, Taking Liberties .

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The journal was established in Spring 1966 by students Spencer H. Boyer (later Professor and Associate Dean at Howard Law School), Joseph Meissner, and Frank Parker in the wake of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

[ 5 ] The funds for the establishing the journal, a figure of $600 as requested by Boyer, were granted after a short meeting with Harvard Law School Dean Ervin Griswold. In their first issue the editors of the new publication wrote that the review "is an emblem and achievement of the collaboration" between the Harvard Civil Liberties Research Service, the Law Students Civil Rights Research Council, and the Harvard Civil Rights Committee, three newly formed organizations that had recently noticed the dearth of legal material on civil rights: Still, there is today hardly a journal which regularly and completely dedicates its pages to the civil rights revolution and the modern manifestations of the relation between citizen and state. Nor is there any review steadily providing Southern lawyers with library ammunition. Nor does any publication capitalize on the burgeoning interest in rights and liberties among this new generation of law students. Nor does any review endeavor to link together the students and faculties of the various law schools in such a cooperative enterprise.

These are among our aims.

But most important. Ours is to be a review of revolutionary law. Such an ideal is as new as United Nation Declarations on Human Rights and as old as the "Grand Tradition" of Common Law fashioning causes of action to rights and wrongs.

[ 6 ] In its 35th anniversary issue, legal academic Morton Horowitz wrote that the journal "seeks to catalyze progressive thought and dialogue through publishing innovative legal scholarship from various perspectives and in diverse fields of study." [ 7 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Charles F. Abernathy Deborah Batts Jacqueline A. Berrien Keith Boykin Alvin Bragg Ted Wells James H. Burnley Morgan Chu Stuart E. Eizenstat John R. Evans Robert Fellmeth Jennifer Granholm Mark Green Joseph A. Greenaway Jr.

[ 8 ] Raja Krishnamoorthi William J. Jefferson Susan Oki Mollway Barack Obama Jorge Rangel Daniel P. Sheehan Cass Sunstein Notable articles [ edit ] Brest, Paul A. (1966). "The Federal Government's Power to Protect Negroes and Civil Rights Workers Against Privately Inflicted Harm".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

1 .

Nader, Ralph (1970). "Freedom from Information: The Act and the Agencies".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

5 : 53.

Murray, Pauli (1971). "The Negro Woman's Stake in the Equal Rights Amendment".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

6 .

Tribe, Laurence (1975). "Structural Due Process".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

10 .

Baker Motley, Constance (1979). "From Brown to Bakke : The Long Road to Equality".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

14 .

Delgado, Richard (1982). "Words That Wound: A Tort Action for Racial Insults, Epithets, and Name-Calling".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

17 .

MacKinnon, Catherine (1985). "Pornography, Civil Rights and Speech".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

20 : 1.

Stevenson, Bryan (2006). "Confronting Mass Imprisonment and Restoring Fairness to Collateral Review of Criminal Cases".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

41 .

Ho, Dale (2015). "Two Fs for Formalism: Interpreting Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act in Light of Changing Demographics and Electoral Patterns".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

50 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Journals and Publications" . Retrieved 2010-02-23 .

^ " Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review Home page" . Retrieved 2010-02-23 .

^ "Online Supplement to Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review " . Retrieved 2010-02-23 .

^ "Podcast | Harvard Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review" .

' ^ " A journal dedicated to promoting 'revolutionary law " . Retrieved 2021-02-24 .

^ "Preface".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

1 : iii. 1966.

^ Horowitz, Morton (2002). "A Brief History of the Harvard Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Law Review".

Harv. Civ. Rights-Civ. Liberties Law Rev .

37 : 259.

^ "President Obama Nominates Judge Joseph A. Greenaway, Jr. for the Third Circuit, and Judge Beverly B. Martin for United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit | The White House" .

whitehouse.gov . 19 June 2009 . Retrieved 2010-02-23 – via National Archives .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Civil_Rights–Civil_Liberties_Law_Review&oldid=1274893109 " Categories : Academic journals established in 1966 Biannual journals American law journals English-language journals Harvard University academic journals Law journals edited by students Constitutional law journals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biannual journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2016 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 21:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Civil Rights–Civil Liberties Law Review Add languages Add topic

