Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Construction and opening 2 Collections 3 Exhibitions 4 Public access 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′11″N 0°07′19″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20295°N 0.12206°E ﻿ / 52.20295; 0.12206 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science museum in England The Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Established 1912 Location Downing Street , Cambridge , England, United Kingdom CB2 3EQ Coordinates 52°12′11″N 0°07′19″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.20295°N 0.12206°E ﻿ / 52.20295; 0.12206 Type Science museum Collection size 1.5 million specimens Visitors 168,021 (2019) [ 1 ] Director Dr. Liz Hide Website sedgwickmuseum .cam .ac .uk University of Cambridge Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Whipple Museum of the History of Science Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences The Polar Museum Museum of Zoology The Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences , is the geology museum of the University of Cambridge . It is part of the Department of Earth Sciences and is located on the university's Downing Site in Downing Street , central Cambridge , England. The Sedgwick Museum is the oldest [ 2 ] of the eight museums which make up the University of Cambridge Museums consortium.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Construction and opening [ edit ] Inside the museum (October 2008) Dr John Woodward collected and catalogued over 35 years nearly 10,000 specimens in five walnut cabinets, two of which he bequeathed to the university in his will.

[ 4 ] The university later purchased another two, and the fifth was added in the 1840s. The cabinets are still in use today.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He also left funds to establish the position of the Woodwardian Professor of Geology .

[ 4 ] Adam Sedgwick began the process of expanding the collection, and purchased several ichthyosaur skeletons from Mary Anning .

[ 5 ] He persuaded the university to set aside space in the Cockerill Building, but by the time he died, the collection was too large for that space, so it was decided there should be a museum set up in his memory.

[ 5 ] Construction of the Sedgwick Museum was supervised by Thomas McKenny Hughes , an astute negotiator who persuaded the university to build the museum, and raised over £95,000 by a public appeal.

[ 5 ] The museum was opened on 1 March 1904 in a ceremony attended by King Edward VII .

[ 5 ] Collections [ edit ] The Oligocene period The Sedgwick has a collection of around 2 million rocks , minerals and fossils , spanning a period of 4.5 billion years.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] They are an important international resource for research, learning and enjoyment.  They are not yet all available to search online but information about the collections is available on a number of sites via the museum's website.

The Mineral Collections contain 40,000 - 55,000 mineral specimens from across the world, and more than 400 meteorite specimens. In most cases, a hand specimen of the rock is accompanied by a thin section.   The strengths of the collection reflect current and historical research interests, and include Cornish and Cumbrian minerals and specimens from the Binntal of Switzerland. Examples from this collection are on display in the Mineral Gallery [ 8 ] The 'Beagle' Collection comprises approximately 2000 rocks and a few fossils collected by Charles Darwin during his voyage around the world on HMS Beagle between 1831 and 1836.

The Harker Collection of igneous and metamorphic rocks is named after leading petrologist Alfred Harker who spent many years organising and cataloguing the collection.

The Maurice Black Sedimentary Petrology Collection consists of around 32,000 rock specimens and petrological thin sections.

The Sedgwick Museum Archive Collection includes papers charting the history and development of the museum, as well as the Sedgwick Club , the oldest student-run geological society in the world.

[ 9 ] The Archive also includes Adam Sedgwick's field notebooks, sketchbooks and specimen catalogues.

[ 10 ] The A. G. Brighton Building is a purpose-built geological conservation laboratory and collections store in West Cambridge .

[ 11 ] It was named for Albert George (known as Bertie or Peter) Brighton (1900-1988) who was the curator of the Sedgwick Museum from 1931, until his retirement in 1968.

[ 12 ] The Palaeontological Collection contains over 1 million fossils from across the world.

Exhibitions [ edit ] Unveiling of the Young Darwin bust at the museum in March 2009 In 2009 the museum curated a large exhibition on Darwin the Geologist to coincide with the Darwin bicentenary celebrations . The exhibition focused on Darwin's early geological research and displayed many of the specimens collected during the Beagle voyage . The launch of the exhibition also saw the unveiling of a large portrait bust of the young Darwin.

[ 13 ] The sculpture was created by the sculptor Anthony Smith and unveiled by Darwin historian Janet Browne .

Public access [ edit ] Relief of two prehistoric creatures (the Iguanodon on the left of image and the Megatherium on the right) Admission is free to the Sedgwick Museum for all visitors. The museum is open 10am - 5pm Monday to Friday, and 10am - 4pm on Saturdays. It is currently open on some Bank Holidays but closed on Sundays.

[ 14 ] The Sedgwick is an important venue for widening interest in Earth Sciences and regularly participates in Cambridge-wide events such as the Cambridge Science Festival and Twilight at the Museums. It puts on activities for families and individuals as well as temporary exhibitions, workshops and other events.

[ 15 ] The museum logo is based on the Iguanodon skeleton displayed by the entrance. A display board explains that the skeleton is incorrectly mounted in an upright posture rather than a horizontal one but as the upright posture is widely recognised on the logo it was decided to leave the specimen and logo as they are.

See also [ edit ] Category:Geology organizations References [ edit ] ^ "ALVA - Association of Leading Visitor Attractions" .

www.alva.org.uk . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ official website ^ "Our Museums | University of Cambridge" .

www.cam.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 19 August 2013.

^ a b c "Woodward's Legacy" . Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences. Archived from the original on 26 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ a b c d e "History" . Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences. Archived from the original on 13 November 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences - Collections" .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences" . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences - Mineral Collection" .

^ "The Sedgwick Club" .

sedgwickclub.soc.srcf.net . Retrieved 6 April 2016 .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences - Archives" .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences - Conservation" .

^ "Albert Brighton: Undergraduate lecture notebooks - Archives Hub" . Retrieved 6 February 2017 .

^ "Darwin the Geologist" .

Sedgwick Museum . Retrieved 31 October 2016 .

^ "Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences - Visiting" .

^ "The Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences" . Cambridge.com . Retrieved 1 December 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences .

Official website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sedgwick_Museum_of_Earth_Sciences&oldid=1298243518 " Categories : Museums established in 1904 Geology museums in England Natural history museums in England Museums in Cambridge Museums of the University of Cambridge Institutions in the Department of Earth Sciences, University of Cambridge Biographical museums in Cambridgeshire 1904 establishments in England Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use dmy dates from August 2015 Use British English from August 2015 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 09:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences 1 language Add topic

