Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Context 2 Content 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Divino afflante Spiritu 11 languages Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Nederlands Polski Português Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1943 papal encyclical letter issued by Pope Pius XII Divino afflante Spiritu Latin for '[By] the divine inspiration of the Spirit' Encyclical of Pope Pius XII Signature date 30 September 1943 Subject On Sacred Scripture Number 5 of 41 of the pontificate Text In English AAS 35 (10): 297-325 ← Mystici Corporis Christi Orientalis Ecclesiae → Divino afflante Spiritu ( English : "[By] the divine inspiration of the Spirit" ) is a papal encyclical letter issued by Pope Pius XII on 30 September 1943 calling for new translations of the Bible into vernacular languages, using the original languages as a source instead of the Latin Vulgate .

Catholic biblical scholar Raymond E. Brown , SS , described Divino afflante Spiritu as a " Magna Carta for biblical progress".

[ 1 ] Context [ edit ] The Vulgate, made mostly by Jerome , had formed the textual basis for all Catholic vernacular translations of the Bible until Pius XII's encyclical.

Divino afflante Spiritu inaugurated the modern period of Roman Catholic biblical studies by encouraging the study of textual criticism (or 'lower criticism'), pertaining to text of the Scriptures themselves and transmission thereof (for example, to determine correct readings) and permitted the use of the historical-critical method (or 'higher criticism'), to be informed by theology , Sacred Tradition , and ecclesiastical history on the historical circumstances of the text, hypothesizing about matters such as authorship, dating, and similar concerns.

[ 2 ] Content [ edit ] The encyclical appeared on the feast of Jerome to commemorate the 50th anniversary of Pope Leo XIII 's 1893 encyclical Providentissimus Deus . With Providentissimus Deus , Pope Leo gave the first formal authorization for the use of critical methods in biblical scholarship.

[ 3 ] Previously, Catholic translations of the Bible into modern languages were usually based on the Latin Vulgate, the text used in the Liturgy. They generally referred back to the source texts (in Biblical Hebrew , Biblical Aramaic and Biblical Greek ) only to clarify the exact meaning of the Latin text.

[ 4 ] In his encyclical, Pius stressed the importance of diligent study of the original languages and other cognate languages to arrive at a deeper and fuller knowledge of the meaning of the sacred texts: We ought to explain the original text which was written by the inspired author himself and has more authority and greater weight than any, even the very best, translation whether ancient or modern. This can be done all the more easily and fruitfully if to the knowledge of languages be joined a real skill in literary criticism of the same text.

[ 5 ] It is likely that in the detailed presentation of the work of textual criticism, Pius was sharing what he had learned from the expertise of his confessor, the Jesuit priest Augustin Bea , rector of the Pontifical Biblical Institute and a professor of textual criticism.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Bible portal Catholicism portal Afflatus Dei verbum École Biblique Pontifical Biblical Institute References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Raymond E.

(1990). "Church Pronouncements". In Brown, Raymond E.

; Fitzmyer, Joseph A.

; Murphy, Roland E.

(eds.).

The New Jerome Biblical Commentary . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall. p. 1167.

Cited in Donahue 1993 , p. 76.

^ Soulen & Soulen 2001 , p. 49.

^ Prior, Joseph G., The Historical Critical Method in Catholic Exegesis , Gregorian Biblical BookShop, 1999, p. 90.

ISBN 9788876528255 ^ Cunningham, Philip A.; Radtke, Barbara A. (2015).

"Catholic Approach to the Bible" .

The Birth of Jesus: Two Gospel Narratives . Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts: Boston College. Archived from the original on 22 October 2017 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ The New American Bible 2011 , p. xxi, xxiii.

^ Arias, Javier Velasco. "Celebrating 'Divino Afflante Spiritu'", The Pastoral Review 14 (2018) pp.22-27 Bibliography [ edit ] Donahue, John R. (1993).

"The Challenge of the Biblical Renewal to Moral Theology" . In O'Brien, William James (ed.).

Riding Time Like a River: The Catholic Moral Tradition Since Vatican II . Washington: Georgetown University Press. pp.

59–80 .

hdl : 10822/551477 .

ISBN 978-0-87840-542-8 .

Soulen, Richard N.; Soulen, R. Kendall (2001).

Handbook of Biblical Criticism (3rd ed.). Louisville, Kentucky: Westminster John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-22314-4 .

The New American Bible (rev. ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2011.

ISBN 978-0-19-529803-1 .

External links [ edit ] Pius XII (1943).

Divino afflante Spiritu (encyclical letter). Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

v t e Catholic Church and the Bible Background Biblical canon ( Canon of Trent and Deuterocanonical books ) Septuagint Vetus Latina Vulgate ( Sixtine Vulgate and Sixto-Clementine Vulgate ) Post-Vatican II theology Events Council of Rome (382) Synod of Hippo (393) Councils of Carthage (397 and 419) Council of Florence (1431) Council of Trent (1545) Documents Prologus Galeatus Gelasian Decree Providentissimus Deus Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Divino afflante Spiritu Dei verbum ( Second Vatican Council ) Holy See Pontifical Biblical Institute ( Biblica · Elenchus of Biblica · Pontifical Biblical Institute Library ) Pontifical Biblical Commission Organisations École Biblique ( Revue Biblique ) Studium Biblicum Franciscanum ( Liber Annuus ) Catholic Biblical Association ( Catholic Biblical Quarterly ) Bible portal · Catholicism portal v t e Pope Pius XII Born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli; 2 March 1876 – 9 October 1958 Archpriest of St. Peter's Basilica (1930–1939) Cardinal Secretary of State (1930–1939) Camerlengo (1935–1939) Pope (1939–1958) Biography Early life Nunciature US visit Election Later years Illness and death Testament Canonization Encyclicals in chronological order Summi Pontificatus Sertum laetitiae Saeculo exeunte Mystici Corporis Christi Divino afflante Spiritu Orientalis Ecclesiae Communium interpretes dolorum Orientales omnes Ecclesias Quemadmodum Deiparae Virginis Mariae Fulgens radiatur Mediator Dei Optatissima pax Auspicia quaedam In multiplicibus curis Redemptoris nostri cruciatus Anni sacri Summi maeroris Humani generis Mirabile illud Evangelii praecones Sempiternus Rex Ingruentium malorum Orientales Ecclesias Doctor Mellifluus Fulgens corona Sacra virginitas Ecclesiae fastos Ad Sinarum gentem Ad Caeli Reginam Musicae Sacrae Haurietis aquas Luctuosissimi eventus Laetamur admodum Datis nuperrime Fidei donum Invicti athletae Le pèlerinage de Lourdes Miranda prorsus Ad Apostolorum principis Meminisse iuvat World War II The Holocaust statements conversion of Jews Persecution of Church German Resistance Nazi euthanasia Catholic Resistance Roman razzia Occupied dioceses Ustaše involvement Jewish orphans controversy Pontifical Relief Commission 1942 Christmas address Alleged kidnapping plot Yad Vashem Bombing of Rome Foreign relations Nazi Germany ( Reichskonkordat ) Post–World War II " Ratlines " Persecutions China Poland Russia Theology Social teachings Mariology Judaism Liturgy Eastern canon law Canonizations Beatifications Fátima and Balazar Writings Apostolic constitutions and bulls Encyclicals Apostolic writings Magisterium Appointments Tisserant Maglione Montini Tardini Orsenigo Muench Cardinals Advisers Bea Galeazzi-Lisi Kaas Lehnert Leiber Nogara Spellman Spiazzi Works on Pius XII The Deputy Three Popes and the Jews Actes et documents Hitler's Pope International Catholic–Jewish Historical Commission Under His Very Windows The Myth of Hitler's Pope Pius XII, The Holocaust, and the Cold War The Pope's Jews Related Pius Wars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divino_afflante_Spiritu&oldid=1271160763 " Categories : 1943 documents 1943 in Christianity Biblical criticism Encyclicals of Pope Pius XII September 1943 Vulgate Catholic bibles Bible versions and translations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2017 Use American English from October 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 20:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divino afflante Spiritu 11 languages Add topic

