Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Intersection lineations 2 Stretching lineations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Lineation (geology) 11 languages Afrikaans Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Polski Português Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lineation" geology – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,127 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Lineación]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Lineación}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Lineations in structural geology are linear structural features within rocks.

[ 1 ] There are several types of lineations, intersection lineations, crenulation lineations, mineral lineations and stretching lineations being the most common. Lineation field measurements are recorded as map lines with a plunge angle and azimuth.

Intersection lineations [ edit ] Stretched pebble conglomerate L-tectonite illustrating a stretch lineation within a shear zone , Glengarry Basin, Australia. Pronounced asymmetric shearing has stretched the conglomerate pebbles into prolate (cigar-shaped) rods.

Intersection lineations are linear structures formed by the intersection of any two surfaces in a three-dimensional space. The trace of bedding on an intersecting foliation plane commonly appears as colour stripes generally parallel to local fold's hinges. Intersection lineations can also be due to the intersection of two foliations.

Intersection lineations are measured in relation to the two structures which intersect to form them. For instance, according to the measurement conventions of structural geology , original bedding, S 0 intersected by a fold's axial plane foliation, forms an intersection lineation L 0-1 , with an azimuth and plunge defined by the fold. This is the typical cleavage -bedding intersection angle and is diagnostic of the plunge of the fold on all parts of the fold.

Stretching lineations [ edit ] L-teconite mylonite formed from coarse-grained sandstone protolith, Glengarry Basin, Australia. This photograph illustrates a pronounced and prominent stretching lineation plunging steeply to the north, as a rake upon the main shear foliation parallel with the protractor. Stretching lineations may form in any faulting regime when conditions are such that rocks deform ductiley, including extensional, compressional, transpressional, and transtensional.

Stretching lineations are formed by shearing of rocks during asymmetric deformation of a rock mass. Stretching lineations record primarily the vector of greatest stretch, which is perpendicular to the principle plane of shortening.

A stretching lineation may be visualised as a ball of treacle (molasses) which, when pulled, forms a cigar-shaped rod parallel to the direction in which it is pulled. This is parallel to the direction in which a shearing force, as found in a shear zone, stretches the rock. Shortening occurs at the same time as elongation but in a perpendicular sense to the stretched rod.

With reference to the image at right (top), the conglomerate pebbles most likely were deposited as sub-spherical pebbles and boulders. During deformation the rock was flattened and then stretched by movement along a ductile shear zone within which this outcrop resides. The spherical conglomerate pebbles stretched along the direction of movement of this shear zone, attaining their current somewhat flattened cigar-shaped form. The pebbles thus record important information on the orientation of the shear zone (subvertical) and the direction of movement of the shear zone, and the overall change in pebble shape from originally sub-spherical to presently elongate cigar-shaped, allows one to quantify the strain experienced by the rock mass in the geologic past.

Stretching lineations may also manifest as linear features upon pre-existing surfaces such as foliations within shear zones (see image at right, below). In such a case the lineation may not be as obvious in plan and may require measurement as a rake upon a planar surface. In this case, the two lineations are formed in the same deformation event but are manifest differently owing to the different rheologies of the deformed rocks.

Finally, the key difference between a stretching lineation and an intersection lineation is that stretching lineations carry no information on the orientation of other planar fabrics within a rock mass. In the case of the illustrated lineations within the sandstone, they do not record an earlier deformation event's foliation and cannot be used to infer orientation information for folds or original bedding.

Linear structures are extremely important in structural mapping, they can be used to separate deformation phases and to determine the kinematics of deformation. Quartz rods are one of the most eye-catching linear structures in deformed rocks. Despite relatively rare, rods are described in several places worldwide. Wherever rods occur, they are promptly noticed. Rods form a conspicuous coarse lineation, frequently highly contrasting with the surrounding rock in regions that was under high strain. The term rod or rodding, in geology, broadly refers to a mass of rock, which has assumed a cylindrical shape while accommodating strain; however, different definitions are found in the literature. The mechanisms of rod formation can be constrained from field observations.

[ 2 ] They are frequently parallel to fold axes and lie at right angles to the direction of maximum compression. For more information on RODS please refer to: [ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Shear (geology) Foliation (geology) Rock microstructure Fold (geology) Tectonite References [ edit ] ^ Parker, Sybil (1994).

Dictionary of Geology and Mineralogy . McGraw Hill.

^ a b Martins-Ferreira, Marco Antonio Caçador; Rodrigues, Sérgio Wilians de Oliveira (2021), Mukherjee, Soumyajit (ed.), "Field Guide to RODS in the Pireneus Syntaxis, Central Brazil" , Structural Geology and Tectonics Field Guidebook — Volume 1 , Springer Geology, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

221– 264, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-60143-0_8 , ISBN 978-3-030-60143-0 , retrieved 2023-10-12 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lineation_(geology)&oldid=1292279538 " Category : Structural geology Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lineation (geology) 11 languages Add topic

