Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Use in North America vs. Europe 2 Contexts 3 Benefits Toggle Benefits subsection 3.1 Economic 3.2 Social 3.3 Environmental 4 Drawbacks Toggle Drawbacks subsection 4.1 Equity 4.2 Financing 5 Types of contemporary mixed-use zoning 6 Examples of cities' mixed-use planning policies Toggle Examples of cities' mixed-use planning policies subsection 6.1 Australia 6.2 Canada 6.3 United States 6.3.1 Portland 6.3.2 Hudson Yards, NYC 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Mixed-use development 14 languages العربية Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of urban development strategy The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Apartment complex with retail and medical offices on ground floor, Kirkland, Washington Ballston Quarter in Arlington, Virginia , part of the Baltimore-Washington metropolitan area , is transit-oriented, mixed-use and densified, giving a "downtown" feel in an edge city .

Traditional mixed-use development pattern in a city center: Bitola , North Macedonia Mixed-use development is a type of urban development , urban design , urban planning and/or a zoning classification that blends multiple uses , such as residential, commercial, cultural, institutional, or entertainment, into one space, where those functions are to some degree physically and functionally integrated, and that provides pedestrian connections.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Mixed-use development may be applied to a single building, a block or neighborhood, or in zoning policy across an entire city or other administrative unit. These projects may be completed by a private developer, (quasi-)governmental agency, or a combination thereof. A mixed-use development may be a new construction, reuse of an existing building or brownfield site , or a combination.

[ 4 ] Use in North America vs. Europe [ edit ] Traditionally, human settlements have developed in mixed-use patterns. However, with industrialization , governmental zoning regulations were introduced to separate different functions, such as manufacturing, from residential areas. Public health concerns and the protection of property values stood as the motivation behind this separation.

[ 5 ] In the United States, the practice of zoning for single-family residential use was instigated to safeguard communities from negative externalities , including air, noise, and light pollution, associated with heavier industrial practices.

[ 5 ] These zones were also constructed because of racial and class tensions.

[ 6 ] The heyday of separate-use zoning in the United States came after World War II when planner and New York City Parks Commissioner , Robert Moses , championed superhighways to break up functions and neighborhoods of the city. The antithesis to these practices came from activist and writer, Jane Jacobs , who was a major proponent of mixed-use zoning, believing it played a key role in creating an organic, diverse, and vibrant streetscape.

[ 7 ] These two figures went head-to-head during much of the 1960s.

[ 8 ] Since the 1990s, mixed-use zoning has once again become desirable as it works to combat urban sprawl and increase economic vitality.

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] In most of Europe, government policy has encouraged the continuation of the city center's role as a main location for business, retail, restaurant, and entertainment activity, unlike in the United States where zoning actively discouraged such mixed use for many decades. In England, for example, hotels are included under the same umbrella as "residential," rather than commercial as they are classified under in the US.

[ 6 ] France similarly gravitates towards mixed-use as much of Paris is simply zoned to be "General Urban," allowing for a variety of uses. Even zones that house the mansions and villas of the aristocrats focus on historical and architectural preservation rather than single family zoning.

[ 6 ] Single family zoning is also absent in Germany and Russia where zoning codes make no distinction between different types of housing.

[ 6 ] America's attachment to private property and the traditional 1950s suburban home, as well as deep racial and class divides, have marked the divergence in mixed-use zoning between the continents.

[ 10 ] As a result, much of Europe's central cities are mixed use "by default" and the term "mixed-use" is much more relevant regarding new areas of the city where an effort is made to mix residential and commercial activities – such as in Amsterdam's Eastern Docklands .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Contexts [ edit ] Expanded use of mixed-use zoning and mixed-use developments may be found in a variety of contexts, such as the following (multiple such contexts might apply to one particular project or situation): [ 13 ] Barracks Row in Washington, D.C.

; ground-level retail with upper-story residential.

as part of smart growth planning strategies in traditional urban neighborhoods , as part of urban renewal and/or infill, i.e., upgrading the buildings and public spaces and amenities of the neighborhood to provide more and/or better housing and a better quality of life—examples include Barracks Row in Washington, D.C.

, and East Liberty, Pittsburgh in traditional suburbs , adding one or more mixed-use developments to provide a new or more prominent "downtown" for the community–examples include new projects in downtown Bethesda, Maryland , an inner suburb of Washington, D.C., and the Excelsior & Grand complex in St. Louis Park, Minnesota , an inner suburb of Minneapolis greenfield developments , i.e., new construction on previously undeveloped land, particularly at the edge of metropolitan areas and in their exurbs , often as part of creating a relatively denser center for the community—an edge city , or part of one, zoned for mixed use, in the 2010s often labeled "urban villages" (examples include Avalon in Alpharetta, Georgia , and Halcyon in Forsyth County, Georgia , at the edge of the Atlanta metropolitan area ) the repurposing of shopping malls and intensification of development around them, particularly as many shopping malls' retail sales, and ability to rent space to retailers, decrease as part of the 2010s retail apocalypse Any of the above contexts may also include parallel contexts such as: Transit-oriented development —for example in Los Angeles and San Diego , where the cities made across-the-board zoning law changes permitting denser development within a certain distance of certain types of transit stations, with the primary aim of increasing the amount and affordability of housing [ 14 ] Older cities such as Chicago and San Francisco have historic preservation policies that sometimes offer more flexibility for older buildings to be used for purposes other than what they were originally zoned for, with the aim of preserving historic architecture [ 15 ] Benefits [ edit ] Economic [ edit ] Mixed-use developments are home to significant employment and housing opportunities.

[ 16 ] Many of these projects are already located in established downtown districts, meaning that development of public transit systems is incentivized in these regions.

[ 17 ] By taking undervalued and underutilized land, often former heavy industrial, developers can repurpose it to increase land and property values.

[ 16 ] These projects also increase housing variety, density, and oftentimes affordability through their focus on multifamily, rather than single-family housing compounds.

[ 18 ] A more equal balance between the supply and demand of jobs and housing is also found in these districts.

[ 7 ] Social [ edit ] Apartments with ground floor retail and ice skating rink at Pentagon Row in Arlington, VA.

This development pattern is centered around the idea of "live, work, play," transforming buildings and neighborhoods into multi-use entities. Efficiency, productivity, and quality of life are also increased with regards to workplaces holding a plethora of amenities.

[ 17 ] Examples include gyms, restaurants, bars, and shopping. Mixed-use neighborhoods promote community and socialization through their bringing together of employees, visitors, and residents.

[ 17 ] A distinctive character and sense-of-place is created by transforming single use districts that may run for eight hours a day (ex. commercial office buildings running 9am - 5pm) into communities that can run eighteen hours a day through the addition of cafes, restaurants, bars, and nightclubs.

[ 18 ] Safety of neighborhoods in turn may be increased as people stay out on the streets for longer hours.

[ 19 ] Environmental [ edit ] Mixed-use neighborhoods and buildings have a strong ability to adapt to changing social and economic environments. When the COVID-19 pandemic hit, New York retailers located on long, commercially oriented blocks suffered severely as they were no longer attracting an audience of passersby. By combining multiple functions into one building or development, mixed-use districts can build resiliency through their ability to attract and maintain visitors.

[ 20 ] More sustainable transportation practices are also fostered. A study of Guangzhou, China , done by the Journal of Geographical Information Science, found that taxis located in regions where buildings housed a greater variety of functions had greatly reduced traveling distances.

[ 7 ] Shorter traveling distances, in turn, support the use of micro-mobility . Pedestrian and bike-friendly infrastructure are fostered due to increased density and reduced distances between housing, workplaces, retail businesses, and other amenities and destinations.

[ 5 ] Additionally, mixed-use projects promote health and wellness, as these developments often provide better access (whether it be by foot, bicycle, or transit) to farmer's markets and grocery stores.

[ 18 ] However, hybrid metropolises, areas that have large and tall buildings which accommodate a combination of public and private interests, do not show a decrease in carbon emissions in comparison to metropolitan areas that have a low, dense configuration. This is possibly because hybrid metropolises are prone to attract car traffic from visitors.

[ 21 ] Drawbacks [ edit ] Equity [ edit ] " Vessel ", a tourist attraction in the mixed-use neighborhood of Hudson Yards , New York Due to the speculative nature of large scale real estate developments, mega-mixed-use projects often fall short on meeting equity and affordability goals. High-end residential, upscale retail, and Class A office spaces appealing to high-profile tenants are often prioritized due to their speculative potential.

[ 16 ] There is also a trend towards making residential spaces in mixed-use developments to be condominiums, rather than rental spaces. A study done by the Journal of the American Planning Association found that a focus on homeownership predominantly excludes individuals working in public services, trades, cultural, sales and service, and manufacturing occupations from living in amenity-rich city centers.

[ 22 ] Despite incentives like density bonuses, municipalities and developers rarely put a significant focus on affordable housing provisions in these plans.

[ 22 ] Financing [ edit ] Mixed-use buildings can be risky given that there are multiple tenants residing in one development.

[ 17 ] Mega-mixed-use projects, like Hudson Yards , are also extremely expensive. This development has cost the City of New York over 2.2 billion dollars.

[ 23 ] Critics argue that taxpayer dollars could better serve the general public if spent elsewhere.

[ 23 ] Additionally, mixed-use developments, as a catalyst for economic growth, may not serve their intended purpose if they simply shift economic activity, rather than create it. A study done by Jones Lang LaSalle Incorporated (JLL) found that "90 percent of Hudson Yards' new office tenants relocated from Midtown." [ 23 ] Types of contemporary mixed-use zoning [ edit ] Some of the more frequent mixed-use scenarios in the United States are: [ 2 ] Neighborhood commercial zoning – convenience goods and services, such as convenience stores , permitted in otherwise strictly residential areas Main Street residential/commercial – two to three-story buildings with residential units above and commercial units on the ground floor facing the street Urban residential/commercial – multi-story residential buildings with commercial and civic uses on ground floor Office convenience – office buildings with small retail and service uses oriented to the office workers Office/residential – multi-family residential units within office building(s) Shopping mall conversion – residential and/or office units added (adjacent) to an existing standalone shopping mall Retail district retrofit – retrofitting of a suburban retail area to a more village-like appearance and mix of uses Live/work – residents can operate small businesses on the ground floor of the building where they live Studio/light industrial – residents may operate studios or small workshops in the building where they live Hotel/residence – mix hotel space and high-end multi-family residential Parking structure with ground-floor retail Single-family detached home district with standalone shopping center Examples of cities' mixed-use planning policies [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Mixed-use developments in Fortitude Valley , Queensland The first large-scale attempt to create mixed-use development in Australia was the Sydney Region Outline Plan , a plan that identified Sydney 's need to decentralise and organise its growth around the metropolitan area. Its main objective was to control the city's rapid post-war population growth by introducing growth corridors and economic centres that would help prevent uncontrolled sprawl and the overuse of the car as a means of transport [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Several city centres such as Parramatta or Campbelltown benefited from these policies, creating economic hubs with his own inner-city amenities along Sydney's main thoroughfares.

[ 24 ] Subsequent plans complemented the initial one with new policies focused on economic and urban renewal issues. In particular, the 1988 Plan was designed in collaboration with a transport strategy and was the first to recommend higher development densities.

[ 26 ] Since then, Australian planning authorities have given greater priority to mixed-use development of inner-city industrial land as a way of revitalising areas neglected by the decline in manufacturing, consolidating and densifying the previously underpopulated urban centres.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] This new urban planning approach has had a significant impact on the use of land parcels in major Australian cities: according to 2021 data from Australian Bureau of Statistics , mixed zoning already suppose more than 9% of new housing approvals.

[ 29 ] Canada [ edit ] One of the first cities to adopt a policy on mixed-use development is Toronto . The local government first played a role in 1986 with a zoning bylaw that allowed for commercial and residential units to be mixed. At the time, Toronto was in the beginning stages of planning a focus on developing mixed-use development due to the growing popularity of more social housing. The law has since been updated as recently as 2013, shifting much of its focus outside the downtown area which has been a part of the main city since 1998. With the regulations in place, the city has overseen the development of high-rise condominiums throughout the city with amenities and transit stops nearby. Toronto's policies of mixed-use development have inspired other North American cities in Canada and the United States to bring about similar changes.

[ 22 ] One example of a Toronto mixed-use development is Mirvish Village [ 30 ] by architect Gregory Henriquez . Located at Bloor and Bathurst Street , a significant intersection in Toronto, portions of the Mirvish Village project site are zoned as "commercial residential" and others as "mixed commercial residential".

[ 31 ] Within the City of Toronto's zoning by-laws, commercial residential includes "a range of commercial, residential and institutional uses, as well as parks." [ 32 ] Mirvish Village's programmatic uses include rental apartments, a public market, and small-unit retail, [ 33 ] while also preserving 23 of 27 heritage houses on site.

[ 34 ] The project is notable for its public consultation process, which was lauded by Toronto city officials.

[ 34 ] Architect Henriquez and the developer had previously collaborated on mixed-use projects in Vancouver , British Columbia , including the successful Woodward's Redevelopment .

[ 35 ] United States [ edit ] Mixed-use spaces developed in Portland, Oregon In the United States, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) collaborates with local governments by providing researchers developing new data that estimates how a city can be impacted by mixed-use development.  With the EPA putting models in the spreadsheet, it makes it much easier for municipalities, and developers to estimate the traffic, with Mixed-use spaces. The linking models also used as a resource tool measures the geography, demographics, and land use characteristics in a city. The Environmental Protection Agency has conducted an analysis on six major metropolitan areas using land usage, household surveys, and GIS databases. States such as California, Washington, New Mexico, and Virginia have adopted this standard as statewide policy when assessing how urban developments can impact traffic. Preconditions for the success of mixed-use developments are employment, population, and consumer spending . The three preconditions ensure that a development can attract quality tenants and financial success. Other factors determining the success of the mixed-use development is the proximity of production time, and the costs from the surrounding market.

[ 36 ] Portland [ edit ] Mixed-use zoning has been implemented in Portland, Oregon , since the early 1990s, when the local government wanted to reduce the then-dominant car-oriented development style. The Metropolitan Area Express , Portland's light rail system, encourages the mixing of residential, commercial, and work spaces into one zone.

[ 37 ] With this one-zoning-type planning system, the use of land at increased densities provides a return in public investments throughout the city. Main street corridors provide flexible building heights and high density uses to enable "gathering places".

[ 38 ] Hudson Yards, NYC [ edit ] Hudson Yards project is the US's largest project to ever be financed by TIF ( tax increment financing ) subsidies. It did not require voter approval, nor did it have to go through the city's traditional budgeting process. Rather, the project is financed by future property taxes and the EB-5 Visa Program.

[ 23 ] This program provides VISAs to overseas investors in exchange for placing a minimum of $500,000 into US real estate.

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Activity centre Automobile dependency Edge city Main Street New Urbanism Pedestrian village Principles of Intelligent Urbanism Public space Single-use zoning Smart growth Sustainable development Third Place Transit-oriented development Urban design Urban sprawl Urban vitality Zoning Notes [ edit ] ^ Business Geography and New Real Estate Market Analysis , Grant Ian Thrall, p.216 ^ a b "Quality Growth Toolkit: Mixed-use Development" (PDF) . Atlanta Regional Commission. p. 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-11-28.

^ Raman, Rewati; Roy, Uttam Kumar (2019-11-01). "Taxonomy of urban mixed land use planning".

Land Use Policy .

88 : 104102.

Bibcode : 2019LUPol..8804102R .

doi : 10.1016/j.landusepol.2019.104102 .

ISSN 0264-8377 .

S2CID 201338748 .

^ O’Connell, Evan. Submission to the Cork City Development Plan 2021-2028: Re: Mixed Planning System.

https://consult.corkcity.ie/ga/system/files/materials/1399/2492/Submission%20to%20the%20Cork%20City%20Development%20Plan%202021-2028_%20Re_%20Mixed%20Planning%20System.pdf ^ a b c d Delisle, James; Grissom, Terry (2013).

"An Empirical Study of the Efficacy of Mixed-Use Development: The Seattle Experience" .

Journal of Real Estate Literature .

21 : 25– 57.

doi : 10.1080/10835547.2013.12090352 .

^ a b c d Hirt, Sonia (November 2012).

"Mixed Use by Default: How the Europeans (Don't) Zone" .

Journal of Planning Literature .

27 (4): 375– 393.

doi : 10.1177/0885412212451029 .

ISSN 0885-4122 .

S2CID 154219333 .

^ a b c Xiaoping Liu, Ning Niu, Xingjian Liu, He Jin, Jinpei Ou, Limin Jiao & Yaolin Liu (2018) Characterizing mixed-use buildings based on multi-source big data, International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 32:4, 738-756, doi : 10.1080/13658816.2017.1410549 ^ "Jane Jacobs" .

www.pps.org . Retrieved 2021-10-12 .

^ "Chicago Zoning Ordinance" (PDF) .

Metropolitan Planning Council . 2007.

^ Hirt, Sonia (2012-11-01).

"Mixed Use by Default: How the Europeans (Don't) Zone" .

Journal of Planning Literature .

27 (4): 375– 393.

doi : 10.1177/0885412212451029 .

ISSN 0885-4122 .

S2CID 154219333 .

^ Hirt, Sonia (2012). "Mixed Use by Default".

Journal of Planning Literature .

27 (4): 375– 393.

doi : 10.1177/0885412212451029 .

S2CID 154219333 .

^ Hoppenbrouwer, Eric; Louw, Erik (2005). "Mixed-use development: Theory and practice in Amsterdam's Eastern Docklands".

European Planning Studies .

13 (7): 967– 983.

doi : 10.1080/09654310500242048 .

S2CID 154169103 .

^ "This is Smart Growth" (PDF) . United States Environmental Protection Agency. April 2014 . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Schuetz, Jenny; Giuliano, Genevieve; Shin, Eun Jin (February 21, 2018).

"California wants cities to build more housing near transit hubs. Can LA improve its track record on TOD?" . Brookings Institution . Retrieved September 20, 2019 .

^ Laitos, Jan G.; Abel, Teresa H. (2011). "The Role of Brownfields as Sites for Mixed use Development Projects in America and Britain".

Denver Journal of International Law and Policy .

40 ( 1– 3): 492.

^ a b c Harris, Mike (2017).

"Competitive Precinct Projects: The Five Consistent Criticisms of "Global" Mixed-Use Megaprojects" .

Project Management Journal .

48 (6): 76– 92.

doi : 10.1177/875697281704800607 .

S2CID 117672467 .

^ a b c d "Advantages and Disadvantages of Mixed-Use Development" .

Gaebler.com Resources for Entrepreneurs . Retrieved 2023-11-09 .

^ a b c "American Planning Association, "Planning and Community Health Research Center: Mixed Use Development" . Archived from the original on 2013-02-07 . Retrieved 2012-11-01 .

^ Trench, Sylvia; Oc, Taner; Tiesdell, Steven (1992).

"Safer Cities for Women: Perceived Risks and Planning Measures" .

The Town Planning Review .

63 (3): 279– 296.

doi : 10.3828/tpr.63.3.r16862416261h337 .

ISSN 0041-0020 .

JSTOR 40113842 .

^ Chaffin, Joshua (2021-10-09).

"Manhattan's office towers are a tale of the haves and the have-nots" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-11 . Retrieved 2021-11-23 .

^ Zagow, Maged (1 December 2020). "Does mixed-use development in the metropolis lead to less carbon emissions?".

Urban Climate .

34 : 100682.

Bibcode : 2020UrbCl..3400682Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.uclim.2020.100682 .

S2CID 224862707 .

^ a b c "Planning for Mixed Use: Affordable for Whom?" (PDF) .

^ a b c d Fisher, B and Leite, F. (2018) “The Cost of New York City’s Hudson Yards Redevelopment Project.” Schwartz Center for Economic Policy Analysis and Department of Economics, The New School for Social Research, Working Paper Series 2018-2.

http://www.economicpolicyresearch.org/images/docs/research/political_economy/Cost_of_Hudson_Yards_WP_11.5.18.pdf ^ a b State Planning Authority (1968).

Sydney region outline plan 1970–2000 A.D.: a strategy for development . Sydney: Government of New South Wales .

^ Gentin, Michael.

"ALL MIXED UP:  A Critical Analysis of Mixed Use" (PDF) .

unsw.edu.au . p. 29 . Retrieved 20 June 2024 .

^ "A Metropolis of Three Cities" (PDF) .

planning.nsw.gov.au . Greater Sydney Commission. p. 28.

^ Grodach, Carl; Gibson, Chris; O'Connor, Justin (2019-08-25).

"Three ways to fix the problems caused by rezoning inner-city industrial land for mixed-use apartments" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 2024-06-19 .

^ Baker, Emma; Lange, Jarrod; Coffee, Neil (28 September 2016).

"Density, sprawl, growth: how Australian cities have changed in the last 30 years" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ "Land and Housing Supply Indicators, 2022" .

www.abs.gov.au . 15 June 2022 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Hume, Christopher (2015-03-20).

"Honouring his parents at Honest Ed's site" .

The Star . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ "Honest Ed's and Mirvish Village" (PDF) .

City of Toronto . 2017-03-17. p. 26 . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ "By-law No 569-2013" (PDF) .

City of Toronto Zoning By-law . 2019-07-15. p. 6 . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ Bozikovic, Alex (2015-03-05).

"Redevelopment of Honest Ed's in Toronto holds several surprises" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ a b Bozikovic, Alex (2018-05-17).

"Honest Ed's redevelopment shows what it takes to make a Village" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ Bula, Frances (2010-01-04).

"From slum to new urban mix" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 2019-11-25 .

^ "Mixed-Use Trip Generation Model" . 2013-04-28.

^ Arrington, G.B.

"Light Rail Transit and Transit-Oriented Development " (PDF).

Transportation Research Circular E-C058: 9th National Light Rail Transit Conference. Retrieved 2021-09-19.

^ "Mixed Use Zones Project Assessment Report" . City of Portland Bureau of Planning and Sustainability. October 2014.

^ "The Worst Thing About Hudson Yards Isn't the Architecture" .

Bloomberg.com . 2019-04-12 . Retrieved 2023-11-09 .

Further reading [ edit ] Reclaiming the City , 1997, Andy Coupland "Mixed use development, practice and potential", Department for Communities and Local Government, UK Government What is functional mix?

, Planning Theory and Practice 18(2):249-267 · February 2017 External links [ edit ] Media related to Mixed-use developments at Wikimedia Commons v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mixed-use_development&oldid=1300038737 " Categories : Mixed-use developments Commercial real estate Residential real estate Sustainable urban planning Sustainable transport Urban design Zoning Shopping malls by type New Urbanism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 23:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mixed-use development 14 languages Add topic

