Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms of moral skepticism 2 Moral error theory 3 Epistemological moral skepticism 4 Noncognitivism 5 Criticisms 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Moral skepticism 13 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethical theory Moral skepticism (or moral scepticism in British English ) is a class of meta-ethical theories all members of which entail that no one has any moral knowledge. Many moral skeptics also make the stronger, modal claim that moral knowledge is impossible. Moral skepticism is particularly opposed to moral realism : the view that there are knowable and objective moral truths.

Some defenders of moral skepticism include Pyrrho , Aenesidemus , Sextus Empiricus , David Hume , J. L. Mackie (1977), Friedrich Nietzsche , Richard Joyce (2001), Joshua Greene, Richard Garner, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong (2006b), and James Flynn . Strictly speaking, Gilbert Harman (1975) argues in favor of a kind of moral relativism , not moral skepticism. However, he has influenced some contemporary moral skeptics.

Forms of moral skepticism [ edit ] Moral skepticism is divided into three subclasses: moral error theory (or moral nihilism ), epistemological moral skepticism, and noncognitivism .

[ 1 ] All three of these theories reach the same conclusions, which are: (a) we are never justified in believing that moral claims (claims of the form "state of affairs x is (morally) good," "action y is morally obligatory," etc.) are true, and, furthermore, (b) we never know that any moral claim is true.

However, each method arrives at (a) and (b) by a different route.

Moral error theory holds that we do not know that any moral claim is true because (i) all moral claims are false, (ii) we have reason to believe that all moral claims are false, and (iii) since we are not justified in believing any claim we have reason to deny, we are not justified in believing any moral claims.

Epistemological moral skepticism is a subclass of theory, the members of which include Pyrrhonian moral skepticism and dogmatic moral skepticism. All members of epistemological moral skepticism share two things: first, they acknowledge that we are unjustified in believing any moral claim, and second, they are agnostic on whether (i) is true (i.e. on whether all moral claims are false).

Pyrrhonian moral skepticism holds that the reason we are unjustified in believing any moral claim is that it is irrational for us to believe either that any moral claim is true or that any moral claim is false. Thus, in addition to being agnostic on whether (i) is true, Pyrrhonian moral skepticism denies (ii).

Dogmatic moral skepticism, on the other hand, affirms (ii) and cites (ii)'s truth as the reason we are unjustified in believing any moral claim.

Finally, noncognitivism holds that we can never know that any moral claim is true because moral claims are incapable of being true or false (they are not truth-apt). Instead, moral claims are imperatives (e.g. "Don't steal babies!"), expressions of emotion (e.g. "stealing babies: Boo!"), or expressions of "pro-attitudes" ("I do not believe that babies should be stolen.") Moral error theory [ edit ] Moral error theory is a position characterized by its commitment to two propositions: (i) all moral claims are false and (ii) we have reason to believe that all moral claims are false. The most famous moral error theorist is J. L. Mackie, who defended the metaethical view in Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong (1977). Mackie has been interpreted as giving two arguments for moral error theory.

The first argument people attribute to Mackie, often called the argument from queerness , [ 2 ] holds that moral claims imply motivation internalism (the doctrine that "It is necessary and a priori that any agent who judges that one of his available actions is morally obligatory will have some (defeasible) motivation to perform that action" [ 3 ] ). Because motivation internalism is false, however, so too are all moral claims.

The other argument often attributed to Mackie, often called the argument from disagreement, [ 3 ] maintains that any moral claim (e.g. "Killing babies is wrong") entails a correspondent "reasons claim" ("one has reason not to kill babies"). Put another way, if "killing babies is wrong" is true then everybody has a reason to not kill babies. This includes the psychopath who takes great pleasure from killing babies, and is utterly miserable when he does not have their blood on his hands. But, surely, (if we assume that he will suffer no reprisals) this psychopath has every reason to kill babies, and no reason not to do so. All moral claims are thus false.

Epistemological moral skepticism [ edit ] All versions of epistemological moral skepticism hold that we are unjustified in believing any moral proposition. However, in contradistinction to moral error theory, epistemological moral skeptical arguments for this conclusion do not include the premise that "all moral claims are false." For example, Michael Ruse [ 4 ] gives what Richard Joyce [ 3 ] calls an "evolutionary argument" for the conclusion that we are unjustified in believing any moral proposition. He argues that we have evolved to believe moral propositions because our believing the same enhances our genetic fitness (makes it more likely that we will reproduce successfully). However, our believing these propositions would enhance our fitness even if they were all false (they would make us more cooperative, etc.). Thus, our moral beliefs are unresponsive to evidence; they are analogous to the beliefs of a paranoiac . As a paranoiac is plainly unjustified in believing his conspiracy theories , so too are we unjustified in believing moral propositions. We therefore have reason to jettison our moral beliefs.

Nietzsche's moral skepticism centers on the profound and ongoing lack of consensus among philosophers regarding foundational moral propositions. He highlights the persistent debates on whether the basis of right action is rooted in reasons or consequences, and the diverse, conflicting theories within Western moral philosophy.

[ 5 ] Noncognitivism [ edit ] Main article: Non-cognitivism Criticisms [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2020 ) Criticisms of moral skepticism come primarily from moral realists . The moral realist argues that there is in fact good reason to believe that there are objective moral truths and that we are justified in holding many moral beliefs. One moral realist response to moral error theory holds that it "proves too much"—if moral claims are false because they entail that we have reasons to do certain things regardless of our preferences, then so too are "hypothetical imperatives" (e.g. "if you want to get your hair-cut you ought to go to the barber"). This is because all hypothetical imperatives imply that "we have reason to do that which will enable us to accomplish our ends" and so, like moral claims, they imply that we have reason to do something regardless of our preferences.

[ 6 ] If moral claims are false because they have this implication, then so too are hypothetical imperatives. But hypothetical imperatives are true. Thus the argument from the non-instantiation of (what Mackie terms) "objective prescriptivity" for moral error theory fails.

Russ Shafer-Landau and Daniel Callcut have each outlined anti-skeptical strategies. Callcut argues that moral skepticism should be scrutinized in introductory ethics classes in order to get across the point that "if all views about morality, including the skeptical ones, face difficulties, then adopting a skeptical position is not an escape from difficulty." [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Amoralism Perspectivism Psychological determinism Is–ought problem References [ edit ] ^ Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (November 21, 2019). "Moral Skepticism". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ D. Brink, "Moral Realism and the Skeptical Arguments from Disagreement and Queerness," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62 (1984) ^ a b c Joyce, Richard (2001).

The Myth of Morality , Cambridge University Press .

^ M. Ruse, Taking Darwin Seriously (Oxford: Basil Blackwell , 1986) ^ "Moral Skepticism and Moral Disagreement: Developing an Argument from Nietzsche « On the Human" .

nationalhumanitiescenter.org . Retrieved October 23, 2023 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 16, 2011 . Retrieved July 8, 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Daniel Callcut, "The Value of Teaching Moral Skepticism," in Teaching Philosophy Volume 29, Number 3 (Sep 2006), p. 231, online at http://philpapers.org/archive/CALTVO-2 Further reading [ edit ] Butchvarov, Panayot (1989).

Skepticism in Ethics , Indiana University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Gibbard, Allan (1990).

Wise Choices, Apt Feelings . Cambridge: Harvard University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] Harman, Gilbert (1975). "Moral Relativism Defended," Philosophical Review , pp. 3–22.

[ ISBN missing ] Harman, Gilbert (1977).

The Nature of Morality . New York: Oxford University Press .

[ ISBN missing ] Joyce, Richard (2001).

The Myth of Morality , Cambridge University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Joyce, Richard (2006).

The Evolution of Morality , MIT Press . ( link ) Lillehammer, Halvard (2007).

Companions in Guilt: arguments for ethical objectivity , Palgrave MacMillan.

[ ISBN missing ] Mackie, J. L. (1977).

Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong , Penguin.

[ ISBN missing ] Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2006a). "Moral Skepticism", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Edward N. Zalta (ed.). ( link ) Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2006b).

Moral Skepticisms , Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Olson, Jonas (2014) Moral Error Theory: History, Critique, Defence , Oxford University Press.

[ ISBN missing ] Kalf, Wouter (2018) Moral Error Theory , Palgrave MacMillan.

[ ISBN missing ] External links [ edit ] Moral skepticism at PhilPapers Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter.

"Moral Skepticism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Campbell, Richmond.

"Moral Epistemology" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Richardson, Henry S.

"Moral Reasoning" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Moral skepticism at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_skepticism&oldid=1293141195 " Categories : Metaethics Philosophical skepticism Ethical theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from April 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2021 Articles to be expanded from January 2020 All articles to be expanded Pages with missing ISBNs This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 23:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral skepticism 13 languages Add topic

