Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Debate over millennium celebrations 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Millennium 117 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs La .lojban.

Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Руски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Time period of 1000 years For other uses, see Millennium celebrations and Millennium (disambiguation) .

A millennium ( pl.

millennia or millenniums ) is a period of one thousand years , one hundred decades , or ten centuries , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] sometimes called a kiloannum ( ka ), or kiloyear ( ky ). Normally, the word is used specifically for periods of a thousand years that begin at the starting point (initial reference point) of the calendar in consideration and at later years that are whole number multiples of a thousand years after the start point. The term can also refer to an interval of time beginning on any date. Millennia sometimes have religious or theological implications (see millenarianism ).

The word millennium derives from the Latin mille , thousand , and annus , year.

[ 3 ] Debate over millennium celebrations [ edit ] All aboard for the millennium! by Opper and Keppler , 1896 There was a public debate leading up to the celebrations of the year 2000 as to whether the beginning of that year should be understood as the beginning of the "new" millennium. Historically, there has been debate around the turn of previous decades , centuries , and millennia, but not so much for decades. The issue arises from the difference between the convention of using ordinal numbers to count years and millennia, as in "the third millennium", or using a vernacular description, as in "the two thousands". The difference of opinion comes down to whether to celebrate, respectively, the end or the beginning of the "-000" year. The first convention is common in English-speaking countries, but the latter is favoured in, for example, Sweden ( tvåtusentalet , which translates literally as the two thousands period ).

Those holding that the arrival of the new millennium should be celebrated in the transition from 2000 to 2001 (i.e., December 31, 2000, to January 1, 2001) argued that the Anno Domini system of counting years began with the year 1 (there was no year 0 ) and therefore the first millennium was from the year 1 to the end of the year 1000, the second millennium from 1001 to the end of 2000, and the third millennium beginning with 2001 and ending at the end of 3000. Similarly, the first millennium BC was from the year 1000 BC to the end of the year 1 BC.

Popular culture supported celebrating the arrival of the new millennium in the transition from 1999 to 2000 (i.e., December 31, 1999, to January 1, 2000), in that the change of the hundreds digit in the year number, with the zeroes rolling over, is consistent with the vernacular demarcation of decades by their 'tens' digit (e.g. naming the period 1980 to 1989 as "the 1980s " or "the eighties"). This has been described as "the odometer effect".

[ 4 ] Also, the "year 2000" had been a popular phrase referring to an often utopian future, or a year when stories in such a future were set. There was also media and public interest in the Y2K computer bug .

A third position was expressed by Bill Paupe, honorary consul for Kiribati : "To me, I just don't see what all the hoopla is about ... it's not going to change anything. The next day the sun is going to come up again and then it will all be forgotten." [ 5 ] Even for those who did celebrate, in astronomical terms, there was nothing special about this particular event.

[ 6 ] Stephen Jay Gould , in his essay "Dousing Diminutive Dennis' Debate (or DDDD = 2000)", discussed the "high" versus "pop" culture interpretation of the transition. Gould noted that the high culture, strict construction had been the dominant viewpoint at the 20th century's beginning, but that the pop culture viewpoint dominated at its end.

[ 7 ] The start of the 21st century and 3rd millennium was celebrated worldwide at the start of the year 2000. One year later, at the start of the year 2001, the celebrations had largely returned to the usual ringing in of just another new year, [ 8 ] although some welcomed "the real millennium", including America's official timekeeper, the U.S. Naval Observatory , [ 9 ] as well as Cuba [ 10 ] and Japan .

[ 11 ] The popular [ 12 ] approach was to treat the end of 1999 as the end of "a millennium" and to hold millennium celebrations at midnight between December 31, 1999, and January 1, 2000, with the cultural and psychological significance of the events listed above combining to cause celebrations to be observed one year earlier than the formal date.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] List of calendars List of decades, centuries, and millennia Century Millennialism Millennium Dome Millennials References [ edit ] ^ " Millennium ", Oxford Dictionaries (Oxford University Press, 2016).

^ "Millennium" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ von Harnack, Carl Gustav Adolf (1911).

"Millennium" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 18 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 461.

^ "For the Chronologically Correct, Now It's Time for the Millennium" .

Los Angeles Times . December 26, 2000 . Retrieved April 12, 2021 .

^ Harris, Aimee (August 1999).

"Millennium: Date Line Politics" .

Honolulu magazine . Trussel.com. Archived from the original on June 28, 2006 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Bikos, Konstantin.

"When Did the 21st Century Start?" .

timeanddate.com . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Gould, Stephen (1995).

Dinosaur in a Haystack . Harmony Books.

ISBN 0-517-70393-9 .

^ "Millennium Gets Little Notice" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ "For the Chronologically Correct, Now It's Time for the Millennium" .

Los Angeles Times . December 26, 2000 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ "Castro hosts party for the 'true Millennium' " .

The Telegraph . December 31, 2000.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2022 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ "Japanese purists prepare to welcome new millennium" .

DeseretNews . December 15, 2000 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ a b "Y2K It Wasn't, but It Was a Party" .

Los Angeles Times .

AP . January 1, 2001.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of millennia at Wiktionary The dictionary definition of millennium at Wiktionary Media related to Millennium at Wikimedia Commons Quotations related to Millennium at Wikiquote v t e Millennia CE / AD 1st 2nd 3rd 4th and later BCE / BC 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th and earlier v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Millennium&oldid=1303005416 " Categories : Units of time Millennia Chronology 1000 (number) Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2020 Use mdy dates from June 2013 Articles containing Latin-language text Inconsistent wikidata for Commons category This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 16:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Millennium 117 languages Add topic

