Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient times 1.2 British early modern and Victorian times 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Pleasure garden 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Íslenska עברית Nederlands Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Garden that is open to the public for recreation and entertainment For other uses, see The Pleasure Garden (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with pleasure ground .

An 18th-century print showing the exterior of the Rotunda at Ranelagh Gardens and part of the grounds A pleasure garden is a park or garden that is open to the public for recreation and entertainment . Pleasure gardens differ from other public gardens by serving as venues for entertainment, variously featuring such attractions as concert halls , bandstands , amusement rides , zoos , and menageries .

Paderborn Castle, Germany, in 1736, with its jardins de plaisance , as well as the kitchen gardens ("E") at right.

Historically a "pleasure garden" or pleasure ground meant private flower gardens , shrub gardens or formal wooded areas such as bosquets , that were planted for enjoyment, with ornamental plants and neat paths for walking.

[ 1 ] These were distinguished from the areas in a large garden planted as lawns or a landscaped park, or the "useful" areas of the kitchen garden and woodland. Pleasure gardens provided a cool and refreshing refuge from the summer heat.

[ 2 ] The Mediterranean gardens were also maintained in the winter season, with winter rain allowing for the upkeep of rose and almond trees in northern Italy.

[ 2 ] This made the gardens a welcome retreat throughout the year.

[ 2 ] The two meanings of the term, as the ornamental parts of a garden, and as a commercial place of entertainment, coexisted in English from at least the 17th century.

History [ edit ] Ancient times [ edit ] The depiction of entertainment in nature has been documented as far back as 1500 BC, with depictions of garden scenes with guests entertained by musicians and dancing girls.

[ 3 ] In ancient Rome , the landscaped Gardens of Sallust ( Horti Sallustiani ) were developed as a private garden by the historian Sallust . The gardens were acquired by the Roman Emperor Tiberius for public use. Containing many pavilions, a temple to Venus , and monumental sculptures , the gardens were open to the public for centuries.

A paradeisos was a playground for the Persian nobility, combining parklands, orchards and hunting grounds. In 321 BC the Partition of Triparadisus was signed at Triparidisus in Syria, a vast pleasure grounds complex in Syria.

[ 4 ] Formal, extravagant pleasure gardens came to Roman Britain in the 1st century AD, such as can now be seen at Fishbourne Roman Palace . Such gardens were typically decorated with statues, columns, fountains and frescoed walls, as well as decorative stonework. They would likely have been used for hosting and entertaining Roman-born officials and merchants, as well as the native, Romanized British upper classes.

[ 5 ] British early modern and Victorian times [ edit ] The Grand Walk, Vauxhall Gardens by Canaletto , 1751.

Public pleasure gardens were opened in London from the later 17th century; many had previously been parts of large private gardens, so the garden layout already existed. Usually entrance required payment. English nobles were increasingly able to build undefended, hospitable homes equipped with pleasure gardens displaying exotic fauna introduced from the Americas and Indies.

[ 5 ] Marylebone Gardens was visited by Samuel Pepys on 7 May 1668: "And we abroad to Marrowbone, and there walked in the garden, the first time I ever was there, and a pretty place it is".

Cuper's Gardens , on the southern bank of the River Thames , opened in the 1680s. These both expanded their areas greatly in the 18th century, the heyday of the pleasure garden.

New openings in the 18th and 19th centuries in London included Cremorne Gardens , Ranelagh Gardens , Royal Surrey Gardens , Vauxhall Gardens and Royal Flora Gardens . Other cities, in England and abroad, acquired their own, such as Holte Bridgman's Apollo Gardens in Birmingham (1740s) and Leeds Royal Park in 1858. Most modern gardens would have been called "pleasure gardens", especially in the 17th and 18th centuries.

Many contained large concert halls, or hosted promenade concerts ; some lesser discussed pleasure gardens were home to haberdasheries and harems. A smaller version of a pleasure garden is a tea garden , where visitors may drink tea and stroll.

The rise of the suburban, private garden in the 20th century coincided with and influenced the decline of the public pleasure garden.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] List of garden types References [ edit ] ^ Helmreich, Anne L.

"Pleasure ground/Pleasure garden - History of Early American Landscape Design" .

heald.nga.gov . National Gallery of Art . Retrieved 2025-05-03 .

^ a b c Semple, Ellen Churchill (July 1929).

"Ancient Mediterranean Pleasure Gardens" .

Geographical Review .

19 (3): 420– 443.

Bibcode : 1929GeoRv..19..420S .

doi : 10.2307/209149 .

ISSN 0016-7428 .

JSTOR 209149 .

^ Nichols, Rose Standish (2003).

English Pleasure Gardens . David R. Godine Publisher.

ISBN 978-1-56792-232-5 .

^ Waterfield, Robin (2013).

Dividing the spoils : the war for Alexander the Great's empire (1st Oxford University Press pbk ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-993152-1 .

OCLC 824081717 .

^ a b c Scott-James, Anne (1992).

The pleasure garden : an illustrated history of British gardening . Osbert, Sir Lancaster. Oxford: ISIS Large Print.

ISBN 1-85089-322-5 .

OCLC 26152910 .

Further reading [ edit ] Melanie Doderer-Winkler, "Magnificent Entertainments: Temporary Architecture for Georgian Festivals" (London and New Haven, Yale University Press for The Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art, December 2013).

ISBN 0300186428 and ISBN 978-0300186420 .

Wroth, A. E. & W. W.

The London Pleasure Gardens of the Eighteenth Century (MacMIllan, 1896).

External links [ edit ] Media related to pleasure gardens at Wikimedia Commons v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pleasure_garden&oldid=1301174808 " Categories : Pleasure gardens Parks Types of garden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pleasure garden 12 languages Add topic

