Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cloud identification and classification: Order of listed types 2 Cloud cross-classification throughout the homosphere 3 Mesospheric cloud identification and classification Toggle Mesospheric cloud identification and classification subsection 3.1 Extreme-level stratiform, stratocumuliform, and cirriform 4 Stratospheric cloud identification and classification Toggle Stratospheric cloud identification and classification subsection 4.1 Very high-level stratiform 4.2 Very high-level cirriform and stratocumuliform 5 Troposphere cloud identification and classification Toggle Troposphere cloud identification and classification subsection 5.1 High-level cirriform, stratocumuliform, and stratiform 5.1.1 Genus cirrus 5.1.1.1 Species 5.1.1.2 Varieties 5.1.1.3 Supplementary features 5.1.2 Genus cirrocumulus 5.1.2.1 High stratocumuliform species 5.1.2.2 Varieties 5.1.2.3 Supplementary features 5.1.3 Genus cirrostratus 5.1.3.1 Species 5.1.3.2 Varieties 5.1.3.3 Supplementary features 5.2 Mid-level stratocumuliform and stratiform 5.2.1 Genus altocumulus 5.2.1.1 Mid-level stratocumuliform species 5.2.1.2 Varieties 5.2.1.3 Supplementary features 5.2.2 Genus altostratus 5.2.2.1 Species 5.2.2.2 Varieties 5.2.2.3 Supplementary features 5.3 Towering vertical cumulonimbiform and cumuliform (low to mid-level cloud base) 5.3.1 Genus cumulonimbus: Towering vertical 5.3.1.1 Species 5.3.1.2 Varieties 5.3.1.3 Supplementary features 5.3.2 Genus cumulus: Towering vertical 5.3.2.1 Species 5.3.2.2 Varieties 5.3.2.3 Supplementary features 5.4 Multi-level stratiform and moderate vertical cumuliform (low to mid-level cloud base) 5.4.1 Genus nimbostratus: Multi-level 5.4.1.1 Species 5.4.1.2 Varieties 5.4.1.3 Supplementary features 5.4.2 Genus cumulus: Moderate vertical 5.4.2.1 Species 5.4.2.2 Varieties 5.4.2.3 Supplementary features 5.5 Low-level stratocumuliform, cumuliform, and stratiform 5.5.1 Genus stratocumulus 5.5.1.1 Species 5.5.1.2 Varieties 5.5.1.3 Supplementary features 5.5.2 Genus cumulus (little vertical extent) 5.5.2.1 Species 5.5.2.2 Varieties 5.5.2.3 Supplementary features and accessory clouds 5.5.3 Genus stratus 5.5.3.1 Species 5.5.3.2 Varieties 5.5.3.3 Supplementary features 6 Tropospheric cloud types with Latin etymologies where applicable Toggle Tropospheric cloud types with Latin etymologies where applicable subsection 6.1 WMO genera 6.2 WMO species 6.3 WMO varieties 6.4 WMO supplementary features 6.5 Genitus mother clouds 6.6 Other genitus clouds 6.7 Mutatus mother clouds 6.8 Informal terms recently accepted for WMO classification with Latin nomenclature 6.9 WMO and informal terms related to free-convective cloud types and storms 7 Other planets Toggle Other planets subsection 7.1 Venus 7.2 Mars 7.3 Jupiter and Saturn 7.4 Uranus and Neptune 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 External links Toggle the table of contents List of cloud types 11 languages العربية Ελληνικά Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Suomi Türkçe Українська Zazaki Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Cloud types ) Tropospheric cloud classification by altitude of occurrence. Multi-level and vertical genus-types not limited to a single altitude level include nimbostratus, cumulonimbus, and some of the larger cumulus species.

The list of cloud types groups all genera as high (cirro-, cirrus), middle (alto-), multi-level (nimbo-, cumulo-, cumulus), and low (strato-, stratus). These groupings are determined by the altitude level or levels in the troposphere at which each of the various cloud types is normally found. Small cumulus are commonly grouped with the low clouds because they do not show significant vertical extent. Of the multi-level genus-types, those with the greatest convective activity are often grouped separately as towering vertical . The genus types all have Latin names.

The genera are also grouped into five physical forms. These are, in approximate ascending order of instability or convective activity: stratiform sheets; cirriform wisps and patches; stratocumuliform patches, rolls, and ripples; cumuliform heaps, and cumulonimbiform towers that often have complex structures. Most genera are divided into species with Latin names, some of which are common to more than one genus. Most genera and species can be subdivided into varieties , also with Latin names, some of which are common to more than one genus or species. The essentials of the modern nomenclature system for tropospheric clouds were proposed by Luke Howard , a British manufacturing chemist and an amateur meteorologist with broad interests in science , in an 1802  presentation to the Askesian Society . Very low stratiform clouds that touch the Earth's surface are given the common names fog and mist , which are not included with the Latin nomenclature of clouds that form aloft in the troposphere.

Above the troposphere, stratospheric and mesospheric clouds have their own classifications with common names for the major types and alpha-numeric nomenclature for the subtypes. They are characterized by altitude as very high level (polar stratospheric) and extreme level (polar mesospheric). Three of the five physical forms in the troposphere are also seen at these higher levels, stratiform, cirriform, and stratocumuliform, although the tops of very large cumulonimbiform clouds can penetrate the lower stratosphere.

Cloud identification and classification: Order of listed types [ edit ] In section two of this page (Classification of major types), height ranges are sorted in approximate descending order of altitude expressed in general terms. On the cross-classification table, forms and genus types (including some genus sub-types) are shown from left to right in approximate ascending order of instability.

In sections three to five, terrestrial clouds are listed in descending order of the altitude range of each atmospheric layer in which clouds can form: mesospheric layer; stratospheric layer; tropospheric layer.

Within the troposphere, the cloud levels are listed in descending order of altitude range.

Non-vertical genus types (including some genus sub-types) are sorted into approximate descending order of altitude of the cloud bases.

Vertical or multi-level genera and genus sub-types can be based in the low or middle levels and are therefore placed between the non-vertical low and mid-level genus types and sub-types.  These thick clouds are listed in approximate descending order of altitude of the cloud tops.

The species associated with each genus type are listed in approximate ascending order of instability where applicable.

The constituent varieties and associated supplementary features and mother clouds for each genus or species are arranged in approximate order of frequency of occurrence.

A count of basic tropospheric variants that result from the division and subdivision of genus types into species and varieties is shown as a number in parentheses from V-1 (variant 1) through V-93 after each variety, after nimbostratus that has no sub-types, and after certain species that are not always dividable into varieties.

In section six, the cloud types in the general lists and the mother clouds in the applicable classification table are sorted in alphabetical order except where noted.  The species table shows these types sorted from left to right in approximate ascending order of the convective instability of each species.  The table for supplementary features has them arranged in approximate descending order of frequency of occurrence.

In section seven, extraterrestrial clouds can be found in the atmospheres of other planets in the Solar System and beyond.  The planets with clouds are listed (not numbered) in order of their distance from the Sun , and the clouds on each planet are in approximate descending order of altitude.

Cloud cross-classification throughout the homosphere [ edit ] Cloud chart showing major tropospheric cloud types identified by standard two-letter abbreviations and grouped by altitude and form. See table below for full names and classification.

The table that follows is very broad in scope much like the cloud genera template near the bottom of the article and upon which this table is partly based. There are some variations in styles of nomenclature between the classification scheme used for the troposphere (strict Latin except for surface based aerosols) and the higher levels of the homosphere (common terms, some informally derived from Latin). However, the schemes presented here share a cross-classification of physical forms and altitude levels to derive the 10 tropospheric genera, [ 1 ] the fog and mist that forms at surface level, and several additional major types above the troposphere. The cumulus genus includes four species that indicate vertical size which can affect the altitude levels.

For another tabular overview that also covers the entire homosphere, see Template:Cloud types .

Form [ 2 ] Level [ 3 ] Stratiform non-convective Cirriform mostly non-convective Stratocumuliform limited-convective Cumuliform free-convective Cumulonimbiform strong-convective Extreme-level Noctilucent (NLC) veils Noctilucent billows or whirls Noctilucent bands Very high-level [ 4 ] Nitric acid & water polar stratospheric (PSC) Cirriform nacreous PSC Lenticular nacreous PSC High-level Cirrostratus (Cs) Cirrus (Ci) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Mid-level Altostratus (As) Altocumulus (Ac) Towering vertical [ 5 ] Cumulus congestus (Cu con) Cumulonimbus (Cb) Multi-level or moderate vertical Nimbostratus (Ns) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) Low-level Stratus (St) Stratocumulus (Sc) Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) or fractus (Cu fr) Surface-level Fog or mist Mesospheric cloud identification and classification [ edit ] Clouds that form in the mesosphere come in a variety of forms such as veils, bands, and billows, but are not given Latin names based on these characteristics.  These clouds are the highest in the atmosphere and are given the Latin-derived name noctilucent which refers to their illumination during deep twilight rather than their physical forms. They are sub-classified alpha-numerically and with common terms according to specific details of their physical structures.

Extreme-level stratiform, stratocumuliform, and cirriform [ edit ] Mesospheric noctilucent clouds over Estonia Noctilucent clouds are thin clouds that come in a variety of forms based from about 80 to 85 kilometres (262,000–279,000 ft) and occasionally seen in deep twilight after sunset and before sunrise.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Type 1 Veils, very tenuous stratiform; resembles cirrostratus or poorly defined cirrus.

Type 2 Long stratocumuliform bands, often in parallel groups or interwoven at small angles. More widely spaced than cirrocumulus bands.

2A Bands with diffuse, blurred edges.

2B Bands with sharply defined edges.

Type 3 Billows. Clearly spaced, fibrous cirriform, roughly parallel short streaks.

3A Short, straight, narrow streaks.

3B Wave-like structures with undulations.

Type 4 Whirls. Partial (or, more rarely, complete) cirriform rings with dark centers.

4A Whirls possessing a small angular radius of curvature, sometimes resembling light ripples on a water surface.

4B Simple curve of medium angular radius with one or more streaks.

4C Whirls with large-scale ring structures.

Stratospheric cloud identification and classification [ edit ] Stratospheric nacreous clouds over Antarctica Polar stratospheric clouds form at very high altitudes in polar regions of the stratosphere. Those that show mother-of-pearl colors are given the name nacreous .

[ 8 ] Very high-level stratiform [ edit ] Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric Sometimes known as type 1, a thin sheet-like cloud resembling cirrostratus or haze. Contains supercooled nitric acid and water droplets; sometimes also contains supercooled sulfuric acid in ternary solution.

Very high-level cirriform and stratocumuliform [ edit ] Nacreous polar stratospheric cloud (mother of pearl) Sometimes known as type 2, a thin usually cirriform or lenticular (stratocumuliform) looking cloud based from about 18 to 30 kilometres (59,000–98,000 ft) and seen most often between sunset and sunrise .

[ 8 ] Consists of ice crystals only.

Troposphere cloud identification and classification [ edit ] Tropospheric clouds are divided into physical forms defined by structure, and levels defined by altitude range.  These divisions are cross-classified to produce ten basic genus-types. They have Latin names as authorized by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) that indicate physical structure, altitude or étage, and process of formation.

High-level cirriform, stratocumuliform, and stratiform [ edit ] High clouds form in the highest and coldest region of the troposphere from about 5 to 12 km (16,500 to 40,000 ft) in temperate latitudes.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] At this altitude water almost always freezes so high clouds are generally composed of ice crystals or supercooled water droplets.

Genus cirrus [ edit ] Abbreviation: Ci Cirriform clouds tend to be wispy and are mostly transparent or translucent. Isolated cirrus do not bring rain ; however, large amounts of cirrus can indicate an approaching storm system eventually followed by fair weather .

There are several variations of clouds of the cirrus genus based on species and varieties: Species [ edit ] Cirrus spissatus (V-3) Cirrus fibratus radiatus (V-8) Cirrus uncinus (V-2) Cirrus fibratus (V-1) High clouds having the traditional "mare's tail" appearance. These clouds are long, fibrous, and curved, with no tufts or curls at the ends.

Cirrus uncinus (V-2) Filaments with up-turned hooks or curls.

Cirrus spissatus (V-3) Dense and opaque or mostly opaque patches.

Cirrus castellanus (V-4) A series of dense lumps, or "towers", connected by a thinner base.

Cirrus floccus (V-5) Elements which take on a rounded appearance on the top, with the lower part appearing ragged.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based None; always translucent except species spissatus which is inherently opaque.

[ 12 ] Fibratus pattern-based Cirrus fibratus intortus (V-6) Irregularly curved or tangled filaments.

Cirrus fibratus vertebratus (V-7) Elements arranged in the manner of a vertebrate or fish skeleton .

Pattern-based variety radiatus Large horizontal bands that appear to converge at the horizon ; normally associated with fibratus and uncinus species.

Cirrus fibratus radiatus (V-8) Cirrus uncinus radiatus (V-9) Pattern-based variety duplicatus Sheets at different layers of the upper troposphere, which may be connected at one or more points; normally associated with fibratus and uncinus species.

Cirrus fibratus duplicatus (V-10) Cirrus uncinus duplicatus (V-11) Spissatus, castellanus , or floccus [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Varieties are not commonly associated.

Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based Not associated with cirrus.

Cloud-based Mamma Bubble-like downward protuberances; mostly seen with species castellanus.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Cirrus cirrocumulogenitus Cirrus altocumulogenitus Cirrus cumulonimbogenitus Cirrus homogenitus Cirrus formed by spreading of aircraft contrails.

Mutatus mother cloud Cirrus cirrostratomutatus Cirrus homomutatus Cirrus formed by the complete transformation of cirrus homogenitus.

Genus cirrocumulus [ edit ] A large field of cirrocumulus stratiformis (V-12) Abbreviation: Cc .

[ 9 ] High-level stratocumuliform clouds of the genus cirrocumulus form when moist air at high tropospheric altitude reaches saturation, creating ice crystals or supercooled water droplets. Limited convective instability at the cloud level gives the cloud a rolled or rippled appearance. Despite the lack of a strato- prefix, layered cirrocumulus is physically a high stratocumuliform genus.

[ 14 ] High stratocumuliform species [ edit ] Cirrocumulus stratiformis [ 15 ] (V-12) Sheets or relatively flat patches of cirrocumulus.

Cirrocumulus lenticularis [ 15 ] (V-13) Lenticular, or lens -shaped high cloud.

Cirrocumulus castellanus [ 15 ] (V-14) Cirrocumulus layer with "towers", or turrets joined at the bases.

Cirrocumulus floccus [ 15 ] (V-15) Very small white heaps with ragged bases and rounded tops.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties None (always translucent).

Pattern-based varieties Undulatus Cirrocumulus with an undulating base; normally associated with stratiformis and lenticularis species.

Stratocumuliform undulatus (V-16) Cirrocumulus stratiformis undulatus (V-17) Cirrocumulus lenticularis undulatus [ 12 ] (V-18) Lacunosus Cirrocumulus with large clear holes; normally associated with stratiformis and castellanus species (also with cumuliform floccus species).

Stratocumuliform lacunosus Cirrocumulus stratiformis lacunosus (V-19) Cirrocumulus castellanus lacunosus (V-20) Cirrocumulus floccus lacunosus [ 12 ] (V-21) Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary feature Virga Light precipitation that evaporates well above ground level; mostly seen with species stratiformis, castellanus, and floccus.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary feature Mamma Bubble-like downward protuberances; mostly seen with species castellanus.

Genitus mother clouds No genitus types.

Mutatus mother clouds Cirrocumulus cirromutatus Cirrocumulus cirrostratomutatus Cirrocumulus altocumulomutatus Cirrocumulus homomutatus Results from the transformation of cirrus homogenitus.

Genus cirrostratus [ edit ] Cirrostratus nebulosus merging into darker altostratus translucidus (V-47) Abbreviation: Cs [ 9 ] Cirrostratus fibratus undulatus (V-25) Clouds of the genus cirrostratus consist of mostly continuous, wide sheets of cloud that covers a large area of the sky. It is formed when convectively stable moist air cools to saturation at high altitude, forming ice crystals.

[ 16 ] Frontal cirrostratus is a precursor to rain or snow if it thickens into mid-level altostratus and eventually nimbostratus, as the weather front moves closer to the observer.

Species [ edit ] Cirrostratus fibratus [ 15 ] (V-22) Cirrostratus sheet with a fibrous appearance, but not as detached as cirrus.

Cirrostratus nebulosus [ 15 ] (V-23) Featureless, uniform sheet.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties None (always translucent) [ 12 ] Fibratus pattern-based varieties Cirrostratus fibratus duplicatus [ 12 ] (V-24) Separate or semi-merged sheets with one layer slightly above the other.

Cirrostratus fibratus undulatus [ 12 ] (V-25) Undulating waves .

Varieties are not commonly associated with Cs species nebulosus.

[ 12 ] Supplementary features [ edit ] Supplementary features/accessory clouds: Not associated with cirrostratus.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Cirrostratus cirrocumulogenitus Cirrostratus cumulonimbogenitus Mutatus mother clouds Cirrostratus cirromutatus Cirrostratus cirrocumulomutatus Cirrostratus altostratomutatus Cirrostratus homomutatus Results from the transformation of cirrus homogenitus.

Mid-level stratocumuliform and stratiform [ edit ] Middle cloud forms from 2 to 7 km (6,500–23,000 ft) in temperate latitudes, and may be composed of water droplets or ice crystals depending on the temperature profile at that altitude range.

[ 10 ] Genus altocumulus [ edit ] Altocumulus castellanus (V-28) Altocumulus floccus (V-29) Altocumulus lenticularis duplicatus (V-39) Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus undulatus (V-40) Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus undulatus (V-41) clouds merging into altostratus opacus (V-50), with higher layer of cirrus fibratus (V-1) Fallstreak hole -altocumulus stratiformis translucidus lacunosus (V-44) Abbreviation: Ac [ 9 ] Mid-level stratocumuliform clouds of the genus altocumulus are not always associated with a weather front but can still bring precipitation, usually in the form of virga which does not reach the ground. Layered forms of altocumulus are generally an indicator of limited convective instability, and are therefore mainly stratocumuliform in structure.

Mid-level stratocumuliform species [ edit ] Altocumulus stratiformis Always dividable into opacity-based varieties. Sheets or relatively flat patches of altocumulus.

Altocumulus lenticularis (V-26) Lens-shaped middle cloud. Includes informal variant altocumulus Kelvin–Helmholtz cloud , lenticular spiral indicative of severe turbulence .

Altocumulus volutus (V-27) Elongated, tube shaped, horizontal stratocumuliform cloud.

Altocumulus castellanus (V-28) Turreted layer cloud.

Altocumulus floccus (V-29) Tufted stratocumuliform clouds with ragged bases.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus (V-30) Translucent altocumulus through which the sun or moon can be seen.

Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus (V-31) Opaque middle clouds with translucent breaks.

Altocumulus stratiformis opacus (V-32) Opaque altocumulus that obscures the sun or moon .

[ 12 ] Pattern-based varieties Radiatus Rows of altocumulus that appear to converge at the horizon;  normally associated with stratiformis species.

Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus radiatus (V-33) Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus radiatus (V-34) Altocumulus stratiformis opacus radiatus (V-35) Duplicatus Altocumulus in closely spaced layers, one above the other; normally associated with stratiformis and lenticularis species.

Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus duplicatus (V-36) Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus duplicatus (V-37) Altocumulus stratiformis opacus duplicatus (V-38) Altocumulus lenticularis duplicatus (V-39) Undulatus Altocumulus with wavy undulating base; normally associated with stratiformis and lenticularis species.

[ 12 ] Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus undulatus (V-40) Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus undulatus (V-41) Altocumulus stratiformis opacus undulatus (V-42) Altocumulus lenticularis undulatus (V-43) Lacunosus Altocumulus with circular holes caused by localized downdrafts ; normally associated with stratiformis and castellanus species (also with cumuliform floccus species).

[ 12 ] Altocumulus stratiformis translucidus lacunosus (V-44) Altocumulus stratiformis perlucidus lacunosus (V-45) Altocumulus stratiformis opacus lacunosus (V-46) Altocumulus castellanus lacunosus (V-47) Altocumulus floccus lacunosus [ 11 ] (V-48) Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary feature Virga Altocumulus producing precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground; usually associated with species stratiformis, castellanus, and floccus.

Cloud-based supplementary feature Mamma Altocumulus (usually species castellanus) with downward facing bubble-like protuberances caused by localized downdrafts within the cloud.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Altocumulus cumulogenitus Altocumulus cumulonimbogenitus Mutatus mother clouds Altocumulus cirrocumulomutatus Altocumulus altostratomutatus Altocumulus nimbostratomutatus Altocumulus stratocumulomutatus Genus altostratus [ edit ] Altostratus translucidus (V-49) near top of photo thickening into altostratus opacus (V-50) near bottom Abbreviation: As [ 9 ] Stratiform clouds of the genus altostratus form when a large convectively stable air mass is lifted to condensation in the middle level of the troposphere, usually along a frontal system. Altostratus can bring light rain or snow. If the precipitation becomes continuous, it may thicken into nimbostratus which can bring precipitation of moderate to heavy intensity.

Species [ edit ] No differentiated species (always nebulous).

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties Altostratus translucidus (V-49) Altostratus through which the sun can be seen.

Altostratus opacus (V-50) Altostratus that completely blocks out the sun.

[ 12 ] Pattern-based variety radiatus Bands that appear to converge at the horizon.

Altostratus translucidus radiatus (V-51) Altostratus opacus radiatus (V-52) Pattern-based variety duplicatus Altostratus in closely spaced layers, one above the other.

Altostratus translucidus duplicatus (V-53) Altostratus opacus duplicatus (V-54) Pattern-based variety undulatus Altostratus with wavy undulating base.

Altostratus translucidus undulatus (V-55) Altostratus opacus undulatus [ 11 ] (V-56) Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Virga Accompanied by precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground. Seen mostly with opacus varieties.

Praecipitatio Produces precipitation that reaches the ground; associated with opacus varieties.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary feature Mamma Altostratus with downward facing bubble-like protuberances caused by localized downdrafts within the cloud.

Accessory cloud Seen mostly with opacus varieties Pannus Accompanied by ragged lower layer of fractus species clouds forming in precipitation.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Altostratus altocumulogenitus Altostratus cumulonimbogenitus Mutatus mother clouds Altostratus cirrostratomutatus Altostratus nimbostratomutatus Towering vertical cumulonimbiform and cumuliform (low to mid-level cloud base) [ edit ] Clouds with upward-growing vertical development usually form below 2 kilometres (6,600 ft), [ 10 ] but can be based as high as 2.5 kilometres (8,200 ft) in temperate climates, and often much higher in arid regions.

Genus cumulonimbus: Towering vertical [ edit ] Cumulonimbus calvus (V-57) Single-cell Cumulonimbus capillatus (V-58) incus Abbreviation: Cb [ 9 ] Clouds of the genus cumulonimbus have very-dark-gray-to-nearly-black flat bases and very high tops that can penetrate the tropopause . They develop from cumulus when the air mass is convectively highly unstable. They generally produce thunderstorms , rain or showers , and sometimes hail , strong outflow winds , and/or tornadoes at ground level.

Species [ edit ] Cumulonimbus calvus (V-57) Cumulonimbus with high domed top.

Cumulonimbus capillatus (V-58) Towering vertical cloud with high cirriform top.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] No varieties (always opaque and does not form in patterns visible from surface level).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Associated with calvus and capillatus species.

Virga Precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Praecipitatio Precipitation that reaches the ground.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary features Incus (species capillatus only) Cumulonimbus with flat anvil-like cirriform top caused by wind shear where the rising air currents hit the inversion layer at the tropopause.

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] Mamma Also sometimes called Mammatus , consisting of bubble-like protrusions on the underside caused by localized downdrafts.

Arcus (including roll and shelf clouds) Low, horizontal cloud formation associated with the leading edge of thunderstorm outflow.

Tuba Column hanging from the cloud base which can develop into a funnel cloud or tornado.

[ 13 ] Accessory clouds Seen with species and capillatus except where noted.

Pannus Accompanied by a lower layer of fractus species cloud forming in precipitation.

Pileus (species calvus only) Small cap-like cloud over parent cumulonimbus.

Velum A thin horizontal sheet that forms around the middle of a cumulonimbus.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Cumulonimbus altocumulogenitus Cumulonimbus altostratogenitus Cumulonimbus nimbostratogenitus Cumulonimbus stratocumulogenitus Cumulonimbus flammagenitus Formed by large-scale fires or volcanic eruptions.

Mutatus mother cloud Cumulonimbus cumulomutatus Genus cumulus: Towering vertical [ edit ] Cumulus congestus (V-59) Abbreviations: Cu con ( cumulus congestus ) or Tcu ( towering cumulus ) [ 18 ] Species [ edit ] Cumulus congestus [ 11 ] (V-59) These large cumulus clouds have flat dark grey bases and very tall tower-like formations with tops mostly in the high level of the troposphere. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) designates this species as towering cumulus (Tcu).

Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties None (always opaque).

Pattern-based variety None (not generally discerned with highly unstable cumulus congestus).

Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Virga Accompanied by precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Praecipitatio Produces precipitation that reaches the ground.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary features Mamma Downward facing bubble-like protuberances caused by localized downdrafts within the cloud.

Arcus (including roll and shelf clouds ) Low horizontal cloud formation associated with the leading edge of a thunderstorm outflow.

Tuba Column hanging from the cloud base which can develop into a small funnel cloud.

[ 13 ] Accessory clouds Pannus Accompanied by a lower layer of fractus species cloud forming in precipitation.

Pileus Small cap-like cloud over parent cumulus cloud.

Velum A thin horizontal sheet that forms around the middle of a cumulus cloud.

[ 13 ] Mother clouds Cumulus congestus flammagenitus Other genitus and mutatus types are the same as for small and moderate cumulus.

Multi-level stratiform and moderate vertical cumuliform (low to mid-level cloud base) [ edit ] Genus nimbostratus: Multi-level [ edit ] Nimbostratus (V-60) with virga Abbreviation: Ns [ 9 ] (V-60) Clouds of the genus nimbostratus tend to bring constant precipitation and low visibility. This cloud type normally forms above 2 kilometres (6,600 ft) [ 10 ] from altostratus cloud but tends to thicken into the lower levels during the occurrence of precipitation. The top of a nimbostratus deck is usually in the middle level of the troposphere.

Species [ edit ] No differentiated species (always nebulous).

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] No varieties (always opaque and never forms in patterns).

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Virga Accompanied by precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Praecipitatio Produces precipitation that reaches the ground.

[ 13 ] Accessory cloud Pannus Nimbostratus with lower layer of fractus species cloud forming in precipitation.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Nimbostratus cumulogenitus Nimbostratus cumulonimbogenitus Mutatus mother clouds Nimbostratus altostratomutatus Nimbostratus altocumulomutatus Nimbostratus stratocumulomutatus Genus cumulus: Moderate vertical [ edit ] Cumulus mediocris (V-61) from above Cumulus mediocris (V-61) pileus Cumulus congestus (V-59) arcus Abbreviation: Cu [ 9 ] Moderate vertical cumulus is the product of free convective air mass instability. Continued upward growth suggests showers later in the day.

Species [ edit ] Cumulus mediocris (V-61) Moderate vertical clouds with flat medium grey bases and higher tops than cumulus humilis.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties: None (always opaque) Pattern-based variety Cumulus mediocris radiatus (V-62) [ 19 ] (V-60); Moderate cumulus clouds arranged in parallel lines that appear to converge at the horizon.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features: Virga Accompanied by precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Praecipitatio Produces precipitation that reaches the ground.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary feature Mamma Downward facing bubble-like protuberances caused by localized downdrafts within the cloud.

[ 13 ] Accessory clouds Pileus; Small cap-like cloud over parent cumulus cloud.

[ 13 ] Velum A thin horizontal sheet that forms around the middle of a cumulus cloud.

Mother clouds Genitus and mutatus types are the same as for cumulus of little vertical extent.

Low-level stratocumuliform, cumuliform, and stratiform [ edit ] Low cloud forms from near surface to ca. 2 kilometres (6,600 ft) and are generally composed of water droplets.

[ 10 ] Genus stratocumulus [ edit ] Stratocumulus castellanus (V-66) Abbreviation: Sc [ 9 ] Clouds of the genus stratocumulus are lumpy, often forming in slightly unstable air, and they can produce very light rain or drizzle.

Species [ edit ] Stratocumulus stratiformis Always dividable into opacity-based varieties. Sheets or relatively flat patches of stratocumulus Stratocumulus lenticularis (V-63) Lens-shaped low cloud.

Stratocumulus volutus (V-64) Elongated, low-level, tube shaped, horizontal stratocumuliform cloud.

Stratocumulus floccus (V-65) Scattered or isolated stratocumulus tufts with domed tops and ragged bases.

Stratocumulus castellanus (V-66) Layer of turreted stratocumulus cloud with tower-like formations protruding upwards.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Stratocumuliform opacity-based varieties Stratocumulus stratiformis translucidus (V-67) Thin translucent stratocumulus through which the sun or moon can be seen.

Stratocumulus stratiformis perlucidus (V-68) Opaque low clouds with translucent breaks.

Stratocumulus stratiformis opacus (V-69) Opaque stratocumulus clouds.

[ 12 ] Pattern-based variety radiatus Stratocumulus arranged in parallel bands that appear to converge on the horizon; normally associated with stratiformis species.

Stratocumulus stratiformis translucidus radiatus (V-70) Stratocumulus stratiformis perlucidus radiatus (V-71) Stratocumulus stratiformis opacus radiatus (V-72) Pattern-based variety duplicatus Closely spaced layers of stratocumulus, one above the other; normally associated with stratiformis and lenticularis species.

Stratocumulus stratiformis translucidus duplicatus (V-73) Stratocumulus stratiformis perlucidus duplicatus (V-74) Stratocumulus stratiformis opacus duplicatus (V-75) Stratocumulus lenticularis duplicatus (V-76) Pattern-based variety undulatus Stratocumulus with wavy undulating base; normally associated with stratiformis and lenticularis species.

[ 12 ] Stratocumulus stratiformis translucidus undulatus (V-77) Stratocumulus stratiformis perlucidus undulatus (V-78) Stratocumulus stratiformis opacus undulatus (V-79) Stratocumulus lenticularis undulatus (V-80) Pattern-based variety lacunosus Sc with circular holes caused by localized downdrafts; normally associated with stratiformis and castellanus species.

Stratocumulus stratiformis translucidus lacunosus (V-81) Stratocumulus stratiformis perlucidus lacunosus (V-82) Stratocumulus stratiformis opacus lacunosus (V-83) Stratocumulus castellanus lacunosus [ 11 ] (V-84) Stratocumulus floccus lacunosus (V-85) Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Usually associated with species stratiformis and castellanus.

Virga Low cloud producing precipitation that evaporates before reaching the ground.

Praecipitatio Stratocumulus clouds producing precipitation that reaches the ground.

[ 13 ] Cloud-based supplementary feature Mamma Stratocumulus with bubble-like protrusions on the underside; usually associated with species castellanus.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Stratocumulus cumulogenitus Stratocumulus cumulogenitus with higher layer of altocumulus stratiformis Stratocumulus nimbostratogenitus Stratocumulus cumulonimbogenitus Stratocumulus altostratogenitus Mutatus mother clouds Stratocumulus nimbostratomutatus Stratocumulus altocumulomutatus Stratocumulus stratomutatus Genus cumulus (little vertical extent) [ edit ] Cumulus humilis (V-87) Abbreviation: Cu These are fair weather cumuliform clouds of limited convection that do not grow vertically. The vertical height from base to top is generally less than the width of the cloud base. They appear similar to stratocumulus but the elements are generally more detached and less wide at the base.

Species [ edit ] Cumulus fractus (V-86) Ragged shreds of cumulus clouds.

Cumulus humilis (V-87) "Fair weather clouds" with flat light grey bases and small white domed tops.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based varieties None (always opaque except species fractus which is always translucent).

[ 12 ] Humilis pattern-based variety Cumulus humilis radiatus (V-88) Small cumulus clouds arranged in parallel lines that appear to converge at the horizon.

[ citation needed ] Supplementary features and accessory clouds [ edit ] Not commonly seen with cumulus fractus or humilis.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds Cumulus stratocumulogenitus Cumulus homogenitus Clouds formed by air-mass convection associated with contained industrial activity.

Mutatus mother clouds Cumulus stratocumulomutatus Cumulus stratomutatus Cumulus cataractagenitus Generated by the spray from waterfalls.

Genus stratus [ edit ] At level with stratus nebulosus translucidus (V-90) and opacus (V-91) clouds Stratus fractus (V-89) cloud Abbreviation: St [ 9 ] Clouds of the genus stratus form in low horizontal layers having a ragged or uniform base. Ragged stratus often forms in precipitation while more uniform stratus forms in maritime or other moist stable air mass conditions. The latter often produces drizzle.  Stratus that touches the Earth's surface is given the common name, fog , rather than a Latin name that applies only to clouds that form and remain aloft in the troposphere.

Species [ edit ] Stratus nebulosus Uniform fog-like low cloud.

Stratus fractus (V-89) Ragged shreds of stratus clouds usually under base of precipitation clouds.

[ 11 ] Varieties [ edit ] Nebulosus opacity-based varieties Stratus nebulosus translucidus (V-90) Thin translucent stratus.

Stratus nebulosus opacus (V-91) Opaque stratus that obscures the sun or moon.

[ 12 ] Pattern-based variety undulatus Wavy undulating base.

Stratus nebulosus translucidus undulatus (V-92) Stratus nebulosus opacus undulatus (V-93) Varieties are not commonly associated with St species fractus.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary feature Praecipitatio Stratus (usually species nebulosus) producing precipitation.

[ 13 ] Accessory clouds Not usually seen with stratus.

[ 13 ] Genitus mother clouds and other mother sources Stratus nimbostratogenitus Stratus cumulogenitus Stratus cumulonimbogenitus Stratus cataractagenitus Generated by the spray from waterfalls.

Stratus silvagenitus A stratus cloud that forms as water vapor is added to the air above a forest.

Stratus homogenitus Mutatus mother cloud Stratus stratocumulomutatus Tropospheric cloud types with Latin etymologies where applicable [ edit ] Cloud types are sorted in alphabetical order except where noted .

WMO genera [ edit ] Altocumulus ( altus and cumulus ) Latin for "high heap":  Applied to mid-level stratocumuliform.

Altostratus ( altus and stratus ) "High sheet": Applied to mid-level stratiform.

Cirrocumulus ( cirrus and cumulus ) "Hair-like heap": Applied to high-level stratocumuliform.

Cirrostratus ( cirrus and stratus ) "Hair-like sheet": Applied to high-level stratiform.

Cirrus "Hair-like": Applied to high-level cirriform.

Cumulonimbus ( cumulus and nimbus ) "Precipitation-bearing heap": Applied to vertical/multi-level cumulonimbiform.

Cumulus "Heap": Applied to low-level and vertical/multi-level cumuliform.

Nimbostratus ( nimbus and stratus ) "Precipitation-bearing sheet": Applied to multi-level stratiform with vertical extent that produces precipitation of significant intensity.

Stratocumulus ( stratus and cumulus ) "Sheet-like heap": Applied to low-level stratocumuliform.

Stratus "Sheet": Applied to low-level mostly shallow stratiform.

WMO species [ edit ] Castellanus (Cas) Latin for "castle-like": Applies to stratocumuliform (Sc cas, Ac cas, Cc cas) and dense cirriform (Ci cas) with a series of turret shapes – indicates air mass instability.

Congestus (Con) Latin for "congested": Applies to cumuliform (Cu con/Tcu) with great vertical development and heaped into cauliflower shapes – indicates considerable air mass instability and strong upcurrents.

Fibratus (Fib) "Fibrous": Cirriform (Ci fib) or high stratiform (Cs fib) in the form of filaments, can be straight or slightly curved; indicates strong, continuous upper winds.

Floccus (Flo) "Tufted": Applies to stratocumuliform (Sc flo, Ac flo, Cc flo) and high cirriform (Ci flo); indicates some mid or high-level instability.

Fractus (Fra) "Broken": Low stratiform (St fra) or cumuliform (Cu fra) with an irregular shredded appearance – forms in precipitation and/or gusty winds.

Humilis (Hum) "Small": Applies to cumuliform (Cu hum) with little vertical extent; indicates relatively slight air mass instability.

Lenticularis (Len) "Lens–like": Stratocumuliform (Sc len, Ac len, Cc len) having a lens-like appearance – formed by standing waves of wind passing over mountains or hills.

A translucent wave cloud - altocumulus lenticularis Mediocris (Med) "Medium-size": Cumuliform (Cu med) with moderate vertical extent; indicates moderate instability and upcurrents.

Nebulosus (Neb) "Nebulous": Indistinct low and high stratiform (St neb, Cs  neb) without features; indicates light wind if any and stable air mass.

Spissatus (Spi) "Dense": Thick cirriform (Ci spi) with a grey appearance; indicates some upward movement of air in the upper troposphere.

Stratiformis (Str) "Sheet-like": Horizontal cloud sheet of flattened stratocumuliform (Sc str, Ac str, Cc str); indicates very slight air mass instability.

Uncinus (Unc) "Hook-like": Cirriform (Ci unc) with a hook shape at the top; indicates a nearby backside of a weather system.

Volutus (Vol) "Rolled":  Elongated, low or mid-level, tube shaped, stratocumuliform (Sc vol, Ac vol).

The division of genus types into species is as shown in the following table. The genus types (including some cumulus sub-types) are arranged from top to bottom in the left column in approximate descending order of average overall altitude range.  The species are sorted from left to right in approximate ascending order of instability or vertical extent of the forms to which each belongs: Stratiform species, Cirriform species, Stratocumuliform species, Cumuliform species, Cumulonimbiform species.

These ordinal instability numbers appear in each box where a particular genus has a particular species.

Level Species (L-R) Abbrev.

Neb Fib Unc Spi Str Len Vol Flo Cas Fra Hum Med Con Cal Cap Genus name Species name L-R (no species) Nebulosus Fibratus Uncinus Spissatus Stratiformis Lenticularis Volutus Floccus Castellanus Fractus Humilis Mediocris Congestus Calvus Capillatus High Cirrus Ci (2) (2) (2) (2) (2) Cirrocumulus Cc (3) (3) (3) (3) Cirrostratus Cs (1) (1) Middle Altocumulus Ac (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) Altostratus As (1) Towering vertical Cumulonimbus (5) Cb (5) (5) Cumulus congestus Cu con or Tcu (4) Moderate vertical Nimbostratus Ns (1) Cumulus mediocris Cu med (4) Low Stratocumulus Sc (3) (3) (3) (3) (3) Cumulus humilis Cu hum (4) (4) Stratus St (1) (1) WMO varieties [ edit ] Opacity-based Opacus Latin for "Opaque". A thick sheet of stratiform or stratocumuliform cloud.

Perlucidus "Semi-transparent". Sheet of stratocumuliform cloud with small spaces between elements.

Translucidus "Translucent". Thin translucent patch or sheet of stratiform or stratocumuliform.

Pattern-based Duplicatus Latin for "Double". Closely spaced often partly merged layers of cloud in one of several possible forms.

Intortus "Twisted". Curved and tangled cirriform.

Lacunosus "Full of holes". Thin stratocumuliform cloud distinguished by holes and ragged edges.

Radiatus "Radial". Clouds in one of several possible forms arranged in parallel lines that appear to converge at a central point near the horizon.

Undulatus "Wavy". Stratiform or stratocumuliform cloud displaying an undulating pattern.

Vertebratus "In the form of a back-bone". Cirriform arranged to look like the back-bone of a vertebrate .

The following table shows the cloud varieties arranged across the top of the chart from left to right in approximate descending order of frequency of appearance.  The genus types and some sub-types associated with each variety are sorted in the left column from top to bottom in approximate descending order of average overall altitude range.  Where applicable, the genera and varieties are cross-classified to show the species normally associated with each combination of genus and variety. The exceptions comprise the following: Altostratus that have varieties but no species so the applicable boxes are marked without specific species names; cumulus congestus, a species that has its own altitude characteristic but no varieties; cumulonimbus that have species but no varieties, and nimbostratus that has no species or varieties.  The boxes for genus and species combinations that have no varieties are left blank.

Level Name Abbrev.

Tra Per Opa Dup Und Rad Lac Int Ver Abbrev.

Translucidus Perlucidus Opacus Duplicatus Undulatus Radiatus Lacunosus Intortus Vertebratus High Cirrus Ci Fib Unc Fib Unc Fib Fib Cirrocumulus Cc Str Len Str, Cas Flo Cirrostratus Cs Fib Fib Middle Altocumulus Ac Str Str Str Str Len Str Len Str Str, Cas Flo Altostratus As + + + + + Towering vertical Cumulonimbus Cb Cumulus congestus Cu con or Tcu Moderate vertical Nimbostratus Ns Cumulus mediocris Cu med Med Low Stratocumulus Sc Str Str Str Str Len Str Len Str Str, Cas Flo Cumulus humilis Cu hum Hum Stratus St Neb Neb Neb WMO supplementary features [ edit ] Precipitation-based supplementary features Praecipitatio Latin for "falling": Cloud whose precipitation reaches the ground.

Cumulonimbus praecipitatio Virga "Twig" or "branch": Cloud whose precipitation evaporates before reaching the ground.

Cirrocumulus virga Cloud-based supplementary features Arcus Latin for "arch" or "bow": Feature mostly attached to cumulus, thick with ragged edges.

Cumulonimbus arcus Asperitas "Roughness": A highly disturbed and chaotic wave feature occasionally seen with a stratocumulus or altocumulus cloud.

Stratocumulus undulatus asperitas Cavum "Hole": Supercooled altocumulus or cirrocumulus distinguished by a hole with ragged edges and virga or wisps of cirrus.

Altocumulus cavum Cauda "Tail": A tail cloud that extends horizontally away from the murus cloud and is the result of air feeding into the storm.

Cumulonimbus murus cauda Fluctus Crested wave-like stratocumulus, altocumulus, or cirrus cloud formed by wind-shear.

Stratocumulus fluctus Incus "Anvil": Top part of a mature cumulonimbus cloud; anvil-shaped feature.

Cumulonimbus incus mamma Mammatus WMO term mamma : "Breast": A feature in the form of round pouches on under-surface of a cloud.

Mammatus over Squaw Valley Murus "Wall": Cumulonimbus wall cloud with a lowering rotating base that can portend tornadoes.

Cumulonimbus murus Tuba "Funnel" or "tube": Feature in the form of a column hanging from the bottom of cumulus or cumulonimbus.

Cumulonimbus tuba Accessory clouds Pannus Latin for "shredded cloth": A ragged or shredded accessory cloud that forms in precipitation below the main cloud.

Nimbostratus pannus Pileus "Capped": A hood-shaped accessory cloud.

Cumulonimbus pileus Velum "A ship's sail": An accessory cloud in the form of a sail.

Cumulonimbus velum The supplementary features are associated with particular genera as follows. They are sorted from left to right in approximate decreasing order of frequency of occurrence for each of three categories.  The genus types and some sub-types are arranged from top to bottom in approximate descending order of average overall altitude range.  Each box is marked where a particular genus or sub-type has a particular supplementary feature.

Level Name Class Precipitation-based Cloud-based Accessory cloud Abbrev.

Virga Praecipitatio Incus Mamma Arcus Tuba Pannus Pileus Velum High Cirrus Ci + Cirrocumulus Cc + + Cirrostratus Cs Middle Altocumulus Ac + + Altostratus As + + + + Towering vertical Cumulonimbus Cb + + + + + + + + + Cumulus congestus Cu con or Tcu + + + + + + + Moderate vertical Nimbostratus Ns + + + Cumulus mediocris Cu med + + + + + Low Stratocumulus Sc + + + Cumulus humilis Cu hum + Stratus St Genitus mother clouds [ edit ] Altocumulogenitus Formed by the partial transformation of altocumulus mother cloud.

Altostratogenitus Formed by the partial transformation of altostratus.

Cirrogenitus Partial transformation of cirrus.

Cirrocumulogenitus Partial transformation of cirrocumulus.

Cirrostratogenitus Partial transformation of cirrostratus.

Cumulogenitus Spreading out or partial transformation of cumulus.

Cumulonimbogenitus Spreading out or partial transformation of cumulonimbus.

Nimbostratogenitus Partial transformation of nimbostratus.

Stratogenitus Partial transformation of stratus.

Stratocumulogenitus Partial transformation of stratocumulus.

Other genitus clouds [ edit ] Cataractagenitus (cataracta-/pertaining to a river cataract) Formed from the mist at a waterfall, the downdraft caused from the cloud is counteracted by the ascending air displacement from the waterfall and may go on to form other types of clouds such as cumulus cataractagenitus .

[ 20 ] Flammagenitus (flamma-/pertaining to fire) Formed by convection associated with large wildfires.

Homogenitus (homo-/pertaining to humans) Formed as a result of human activities, particularly aircraft at high altitudes and heat-generating industrial activities at surface level.  If a homogenitus cloud of one genus changes to another genus type, it is then termed a homomutatus cloud.

Silvagenitus (silva-/pertaining to trees or forests) Formed by low-level condensation of water vapor released by vegetation, especially forest canopies.

Mutatus mother clouds [ edit ] Nomenclature works the same way as for genitus mother clouds except for the mutatus suffix to indicate the complete rather than the partial transformation of the original cloud type. e.g. Altocumulomutatus – formed by the complete transformation of altocumulus mother cloud.

The possible combinations of genera and mother clouds can be seen in this table. The genitus and mutatus clouds are each sorted from left to right in alphabetical order.  The genus types and some sub-types are arranged from top to bottom in approximate descending order of average overall altitude range.  Each box is marked where a particular genus or sub-type has a particular genitus or  mutatus mother cloud.

Level Name Class Genitus mother Mutatus mother Abbrev.

Ac As Ci Cc Cs Cu Cb Ns St Sc Ac As Ci Cc Cs Cu Cb Ns St Sc Abbrev.

altocumulo altostrato cirro cirrocumulo cirrostrato cumulo cumulonimbo nimbostrato strato stratocumulo altocumulo altostrato cirro cirrocumulo cirrostrato cumulo cumulonimbo nimbostrato strato stratocumulo High Cirrus Ci + + + + Cirrocumulus Cc + + + Cirrostratus Cs + + + + + Middle Altocumulus Ac + + + + + + Altostratus As + + + + Towering vertical Cumulonimbus Cb + + + + + + Cumulus congestus Cu con or Tcu Moderate vertical Nimbostratus Ns + + + + + Cumulus mediocris Cu med + + + + Low Stratocumulus Sc + + + + + + + Cumulus humilis Cu hum + + + + Stratus St + + + + Informal terms recently accepted for WMO classification with Latin nomenclature [ edit ] Aviaticus cloud Persistent condensation trails (contrails) formed by ice crystals originating from water vapor emitted by aircraft engines .  Usually resembles cirrus; recognized as a WMO genitus cloud cirrus homogenitus (man-made). Further transformation into cirrus, cirrocumulus, or cirrostratus homomutatus is possible depending on atmospheric stability and wind shear.

Fallstreak hole Supercooled altocumulus or cirrocumulus distinguished by a hole with ragged edges and virga or wisps of cirrus. Accepted as a WMO supplementary feature to be named cavum (hole).

Kelvin–Helmholtz cloud Fluctus clouds over Mount Duval in Australia Crested wave-like clouds formed by wind-shear instability that may occur at any altitude in the troposphere.  Accepted as a WMO supplementary feature with the Latin name fluctus .

Pyrocumulus and Pyrocumulonimbus Cumulus and cumulonimbus clouds formed by quickly generated ground heat; including forest fires, volcanic eruptions and low level nuclear detonation. Accepted as a WMO genitus cloud with the Latin name flammagenitus , or homogenitus in the case of small cumulus formed by contained human activity.

Roll cloud Roll cloud over Wisconsin Elongated, low-level, tube shaped, horizontal formation not associated with a parent cloud.  Accepted as a WMO stratocumulus or altocumulus species with the Latin name volutus .

[ 21 ] WMO and informal terms related to free-convective cloud types and storms [ edit ] Accessory cloud (WMO supplementary feature) – secondary cloud that is associated with but separate from a main cloud.

Anvil (WMO supplementary feature incus) – the anvil top of a cumulonimbus cloud.

Anvil dome (WMO supplementary feature incus) – the overshooting top on a Cb that is often present on a supercell .

Anvil rollover – (slang) circular protrusion attached to underside of anvil.

Anvil rollover Arcus cloud (WMO supplementary feature) – arch or a bow shape, attached to cumulus, thick with ragged edges.

Backsheared anvil – (slang) anvil that spreads upwind, indicative of extreme weather.

Clear slot or dry slot (informal term) – an evaporation of clouds as a rear flank downdraft descends and dries out cloud and occludes around a mesocyclone .

Cloud tags (WMO species fractus) – ragged detached portions of cloud.

Collar cloud (WMO velum accessory cloud) – ring shape surrounding upper part of wall cloud.

Condensation funnel (WMO supplementary feature tuba) – the cloud of a funnel cloud aloft or a tornado.

Altocumulus castellanus (WMO genus and species) – castle crenellation-shaped altocumulus clouds.

Cumulus (WMO genus) – heaped clouds.

Cumulus castellanus – (informal variation of WMO genus and species cumulus congestus) cumulus with tops shaped like castle crenellations.

Cumulus congestus (WMO genus and species) – considerable vertical development and heaped into cauliflower shapes.

Cumulus fractus (WMO genus and species) – ragged detached portions of cumulus cloud.

Cumulus humilis (WMO genus and species) – small, low, flattened cumulus, early development.

Cumulus mediocris (WMO genus and species) – medium-sized cumulus with bulges at the top.

Cumulus pileus (WMO genus and accessory cloud) – capped, hood-shaped cumulus cloud.

Cumulus praecipitatio (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – cumulus whose precipitation reaches the ground.

Cumulus radiatus (WMO genus and variety) – cumulus arranged in parallel lines that appear to converge near the horizon.

Cumulus radiatus clouds Cumulus tuba (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – column hanging from the bottom of cumulus.

Cumulonimbus (WMO genus) – heaped towering rain-bearing clouds that stretch to the upper levels of the troposphere.

Cumulonimbus calvus (WMO genus and species) – cumulonimbus with round tops like cumulus congestus.

Cumulonimbus capillatus (WMO genus and species) – Cb with cirriform top.

Cumulonimbus incus (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – Cb capillatus with anvil top.

Cumulonimbus mamma (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – Cb with pouch-like protrusions that hang from under anvil or cloud base.

Cumulonimbus pannus (WMO genus and accessory cloud) – shredded sections attached to main Cb cloud.

Cumulonimbus pileus (WMO genus and accessory cloud) – capped, hood-shaped cloud above a cumulonimbus cloud.

Cumulonimbus praecipitatio (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – Cb whose precipitation reaches the ground.

Cumulonimbus tuba (WMO genus and supplementary feature) – column hanging from the bottom of cumulonimbus.

Debris cloud (informal term) – rotating "cloud" of debris found at base of tornado .

Funnel cloud (WMO supplementary feature tuba) – rotating funnel of cloud hanging from under Cb, not making contact with ground.

Hail fog (informal term) – a shallow surface layer of fog that sometimes forms in vicinity of deep hail accumulation, can be very dense.

Hot tower (informal term) – a tropical cumulonimbus cloud that penetrates the tropopause .

Inflow band (informal term) – a laminar band marking inflow to a Cb, can occur at lower or mid levels of the cloud.

Inverted cumulus (informal variation of WMO supplementary feature mamma) – cumulus which has transferred momentum from an exceptionally intense Cb tower and is convectively growing on the underside of an anvil.

Knuckles (informal variation of WMO supplementary feature mamma) – lumpy protrusion that hangs from edge or underside of anvil.

Marine layer Overcast Pyrocumulus and Pyrocumulonimbus– intense ground-heat cloud proposed for WMO classification (see above).

Rope – (slang) narrow, sometimes twisted funnel type cloud seen after a tornado dissipates.

Rope cloud (informal term) – A narrow, long, elongated line of cumulus clouds that sometimes develop at the leading edge of an advancing cold front that is often visible in satellite imagery.

[ 22 ] Scud cloud (informal term for WMO species fractus) – ragged detached portions of cloud that usually form in precipitation.

Sea of clouds Shelf cloud (informal term for WMO supplementary feature arcus) – wedge-shaped cloud often attached to the underside of Cb.

Stratus fractus (WMO genus and species) – ragged detached portions of stratus cloud that usually form in precipitation (see also scud cloud).

Striations (informal term for WMO accessory cloud velum) – a groove or band of clouds encircling an updraft tower, indicative of rotation.

Tail cloud (informal term) – an area of condensation consisting of laminar band and cloud tags extending from a wall cloud towards a precipitation core.

Towering cumulus (TCu) -aviation term for WMO genus and species cumulus congestus, a large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil of a Cb.

Wall cloud (informal term) – distinctive fairly large lowering of the rain-free base of a Cb, often rotating.

Other planets [ edit ] Venus [ edit ] Thick overcast clouds of sulfur dioxide and carbon dioxide in three main layers at altitudes of 45 to 65 km that obscure the planet 's surface and can produce virga.

[ 23 ] Stratiform Overcast opaque clouds sheets.

Stratocumuliform Wave clouds with clear gaps through which lower stratiform layers may be seen.

[ 24 ] Cumuliform and cumulonimbiform Embedded convective cells that can produce lightning.

Mars [ edit ] Clouds resembling several terrestrial types can be seen over Mars and are believed to be composed of water - ice .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Extremely high cirriform Noctilucent clouds are known to form near the poles at altitudes similar to or higher than the same type of clouds over Earth.

[ 27 ] High cirriform Thin scattered wispy cloud resembling cirrus through which the planet's surface can be seen.

High stratocumuliform Thin scattered wave-cloud resembling cirrocumulus.

Low stratocumuliform Wave-cloud resembling stratocumulus, especially as a polar cap cloud over the winter pole which is mostly composed of suspended frozen carbon dioxide.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Surface-based Morning fog of water and/or carbon dioxide commonly forms in low areas of the planet.

Jupiter and Saturn [ edit ] Cloud decks in parallel bands of latitude at and below the tropopause alternately composed of ammonia crystals and ammonium hydrosulfate.

Cirriform Bands of cloud resembling cirrus located mainly in the highest of three main layers that cover Jupiter.

[ 28 ] Stratiform and stratocumuliform Wave and haze clouds that are seen mostly in the middle layer.

Cumuliform and cumulonimbiform Convective clouds in the lowest layer that are capable of producing thunderstorms and may be composed at least partly of water droplets.

[ 29 ] an intermediate deck of ammonium hydrosulfide , and an inner deck of cumulus water clouds.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Uranus and Neptune [ edit ] Cloud layers composed mainly of methane gas.

[ 32 ] Cirriform High wispy formations resembling cirrus.

Stratiform Layers of haze-cloud that lack any distinct features.

Cumuliform and cumulonimbiform Lower-based convective clouds that can produce thunderstorms.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Cloud species Notes and references [ edit ] ^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Cloud Identification Guide, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 4 April 2017 .

^ E.C. Barrett and C.K. Grant (1976).

"The identification of cloud types in LANDSAT MSS images" .

NASA . Retrieved 2012-08-22 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Definitions, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 30 March 2017 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Upper atmospheric clouds, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 31 July 2017 .

^ de Valk, Paul; van Westhrenen, Rudolf; Carbajal Henken, Cintia (2010).

"Automated CB and TCU detection using radar and satellite data: from research to application" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 November 2011 . Retrieved 15 September 2011 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (1975).

Noctilucent, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. p.

66 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ Michael Gadsden & Pekka Parviainen (September 2006).

Observing Noctilucent Clouds (PDF) . International Association of Geomagnetism & Aeronomy. p. 9. Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 October 2008 . Retrieved 31 January 2011 .

^ a b Les Cowley (2011).

"Nacreous and polar stratospheric clouds" .

Atmospheric optics, atoptics.co.uk . Retrieved 7 November 2014 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Clouds Online (2012).

"Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 1 February 2012 .

^ a b c d e JetStream (5 January 2010).

"Cloud Classifications" .

National Weather Service . Archived from the original on 29 November 2017 . Retrieved 31 January 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Boyd, Sylke (2008).

"Clouds – Species and Varieties" .

University of Minnesota . Archived from the original on December 30, 2010 . Retrieved 4 February 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Aerographer/Meteorology (2012).

"Cloud Variety" .

meteorologytraining.tpub.com . Archived from the original on 21 December 2012 . Retrieved 2 July 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Features, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

22–24 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ Burroughs, William James; Crowder, Bob (January 2007).

Weather , p.216. Fog City Press, San Francisco.

ISBN 978-1-74089-579-8 .

^ a b c d e f World Meteorological Organization , ed. (1975).

Species, International Cloud Atlas . Vol. I. pp.

17–20 .

ISBN 92-63-10407-7 . Retrieved 26 August 2014 .

^ Burroughs, William James; Crowder, Bob (January 2007).

Weather , p.215. Fog City Press, San Francisco.

ISBN 978-1-74089-579-8 .

^ "Cumulonimbus Incus" . Universities Space Research Association. 5 August 2009 . Retrieved 23 October 2012 .

^ de Valk, Paul; van Westhrenen, Rudolf & Carbajal Henken, Cintia (2010).

"Automated CB and TCU detection using radar and satellite data: from research to application" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-11-16 . Retrieved 2011-09-15 .

^ World Meteorological Organization (1995).

"Cloud Atlas" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-07-25 . Retrieved 2014-08-26 .

^ "Cataractagenitus International Cloud Atlas Section 2.1.3.6.5" .

International Cloud Atlas .

^ Task Team On Revision of the International Cloud Atlas (2013).

"Final Report" (PDF) .

World Meteorological Organization . Retrieved 2014-10-06 .

^ "Rope Cloud in the Gulf of Mexico « CIMSS Satellite Blog" . 23 October 2007.

^ Montmessin, Franck (2013).

"Clouds in the terrestrial planets" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-05-16 . Retrieved 2013-11-05 .

^ Shiga, David (2006).

"Mysterious waves seen in Venus's clouds" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 2013-11-05 .

^ a b "Clouds Move Across Mars Horizon" .

Phoenix Photographs .

National Aeronautics and Space Administration . 19 September 2008. Archived from the original on 2 June 2016 . Retrieved 15 April 2011 .

^ a b Carr, M. H.; Baum, W. A.; Blasius, K. R.; Briggs, G. A.; Cutts, J. A.; Duxbury, T. C.; Greeley, R.; Guest, J.; Masursky, H.; Smith, B. A. (January 1980).

"NASA SP-441: Viking Orbiter Views of Mars" . National Aeronautics and Space Administration . Retrieved 26 January 2013 .

^ SPACE.com staff (2006-08-28).

"Mars Clouds Higher Than Any On Earth" . SPACE.com . Retrieved 2008-10-19 .

^ Phillips, Tony (20 May 2010).

"Big Mystery: Jupiter Loses a Stripe" .

Nasa Headline News – 2010 .

National Aeronautics and Space Administration . Archived from the original on 20 April 2011 . Retrieved 15 April 2011 .

^ Dougherty, Michele; Esposito, Larry (November 2009).

Saturn from Cassini-Huygens (1st ed.). Springer. p. 118.

ISBN 978-1-4020-9216-9 .

OCLC 527635272 .

^ Ingersoll, A.P.; Dowling, T.E; Gierasch, P.J.; Orton, G.S.; Read, P.L.; Sanchez-Lavega, A.; Showman, A.P.; Simon-Miller, A.A.; Vasavada, A.R.

"Dynamics of Jupiter's Atmosphere" (PDF) . Lunar & Planetary Institute . Retrieved 2007-02-01 .

^ Monterrey Institute for Research in Astronomy (2006-08-11).

"Saturn" . Retrieved 2011-01-31 .

^ a b Nola Taylor Redd (2012).

"Neptune's Atmosphere: Composition, Climate, & Weather" . Space.com . Retrieved 2013-11-05 .

External links [ edit ] Introduction to Clouds (National Weather Service) Ten Basic Cloud Types (National Weather Service) International Cloud Atlas online (Archived) Cloud Appreciation Society Texas A&M Cloud Glossary Archived 2006-04-20 at the Wayback Machine Cloud-identification site UK Met Office cloud classification page Cloud Atlas (Atlas Chmur) (in Polish) NOAA v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Portals : Weather Environment Astronomy Stars Geography Earth sciences NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐qphwr
Cached time: 20250815123631
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.805 seconds
Real time usage: 0.990 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3509/1000000
Revision size: 80652/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 181305/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 939/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145167/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.401/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8520499/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  669.002      1 -total
 43.66%  292.069      1 Template:Reflist
 32.75%  219.099     25 Template:Cite_web
 25.02%  167.355     19 Template:Navbox
 16.94%  113.337      1 Template:Cloud_types
 11.07%   74.080      1 Template:Short_description
  6.47%   43.261      1 Template:CN
  6.19%   41.416      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.44%   36.376      1 Template:Portal_bar
  5.21%   34.875      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1461163:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815123631 and revision id 1306019070. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_cloud_types&oldid=1306019070 " Categories : Cloud types Satellite interpretation Weather-related lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 12:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of cloud types 11 languages Add topic

