Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Drake's Invention 3 The sport's first company 4 Patent disputes 5 Equipment 6 Technique Toggle Technique subsection 6.1 Learning and skill progression 6.2 Youth 6.3 Light winds 6.4 Strong winds 7 Racers Toggle Racers subsection 7.1 Long-board classes 7.2 Olympic class 7.3 One Design Racing classes 7.4 Formula class 7.5 Raceboard class 7.6 Short-board classes 7.7 Slalom 7.8 Ocean Slalom Marathon 7.9 Super X 7.10 Speedsailing 7.11 Indoor 8 Riders Toggle Riders subsection 8.1 Wavesailing 8.2 Wave riding 8.3 Wave jumping 8.4 Big wave riding 8.5 Storm riding 8.6 Freestyle 8.7 Big air 9 International stars Toggle International stars subsection 9.1 Top men 9.2 Top women 10 In popular culture 11 Related water sports 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Windsurfing 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water sport This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Windsurfing on Columbia River , Oregon Windsurfing is a wind-propelled water sport that is a combination of sailing and surfing .

[ 1 ] It is also referred to as "sailboarding" and "boardsailing", and emerged in the late 1960s from the Californian aerospace and surf culture.

[ 2 ] Windsurfing gained a popular following across Europe and North America by the late 1970s [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and had achieved significant global popularity by the 1980s.

[ 6 ] Windsurfing became an Olympic sport in 1984.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Darby sailboard, Popular Science , 1965 Newman Darby of Pennsylvania created a rudderless "sailboard" in 1964 that incorporated a pivoting "square rigged " or "kite rigged" sail which allowed the rider to steer a rectangular board by tilting the sail forward and back. Darby's design however had notable performance limitations. Unlike the modern windsurfer design, Darby's sailboard was operated "back winded", with the sailor's back to the lee side of a kite-shaped sail . This much less efficient and less desirable sailing position is opposite of how a modern windsurfer is operated.

Jim Drake's Windsurfer Invention Jim Drake , a California aeronautical engineer, invented and patented a sail powered surfboard in 1967 that became the modern Windsurfer we know today. Drake's version differed from Darby's in many significant ways. The sailor stood upright on a large, high-performance surfboard while holding directly onto the windward side of an aerodynamically shaped triangular sail.

[ 8 ] Peter Chilvers is also cited for inventing a kind of sailboard in England in 1958.

[ 9 ] Drake has stated in various interviews [ 10 ] that he recognizes Darby and Chilvers as early sailboard pioneers and sees himself as the sports "re-inventor".

Drake's Invention [ edit ] On May 21, 1967, Jim Drake made history by successfully sailing the world's first modern sailboard.

The details of Jim Drake's original windsurfing concept were published in 1969 by Drake's employer at the time, the RAND Corporation, in a technical paper he wrote and presented at a symposium, titled, Windsurfing - A New Concept in Sailing ." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Further details on the invention can be read in published interviews .

[ 8 ] Despite forty years of subsequent development, Drake's original Windsurfer design is still remarkably similar to today's equipment, and the word "windsurfing" has become synonymous with the sport itself.

The sport's first company [ edit ] Drake's revolutionary sailing concept , caught the attention of one of Drake's friends, a local businessman named Hoyle Schweitzer, who became interested in patenting and marketing Drake's new invention.

Jim Drake and Hoyle Schweitzer together started the sport's first company, Windsurfing International, in late 1968 out of Drake's Santa Monica, California home.

Windsurfing International registered the term "Windsurfer" as a trademark at the United States Patent and Trademark Office in 1970. Windsurfing International Inc. created a popular one-design racing class, which was influenced by the desire to provide a fleet of racers with a uniformly constructed "boat," so that rider skill, rather than equipment choice, would determine competitive results. The first Windsurfer Class World Championship regatta took place in San Diego, California in 1973.

Patent disputes [ edit ] On March 27, 1968, Jim Drake, an aeronautical engineer, and Hoyle Schweitzer, a businessman [ 13 ] filed [ 14 ] the very first windsurfing patent, which they were granted by the USPTO in 1970.

[ 15 ] Through the seventies, and early eighties windsurfing was the fastest growing sport on earth. Schweitzer aggressively protected his patent around the world through sub-licensing the rights to anyone who wanted to manufacture and sell sailboards. Windsurfing International's usurious royalty fee charges, which its competitors were forced to pay, were so high that many observers felt it needlessly limited the growth of the sport. Mr. Schweitzer claimed this was to promote his brand and the Windsurfer One Design racing class, but most believed it was so he could maximize his own profits.

[ 16 ] [1] The sport underwent very rapid growth however, particularly in Europe after the sale of a sub-license sold to Ten Cate Sports in the Netherlands.

[ 17 ] In 1975 Ten Cate Sports sold 45,000 boards in Europe.

Equipment [ edit ] Windsurfing equipment has evolved in design over the years and are often classified as either shortboards or longboards. Longboards are usually longer than 3 meters, with a retractable daggerboard , and are optimized for lighter winds or course racing. Shortboards are less than 3 meters long and are designed for planing conditions.

While windsurfing is possible under a wide range of wind conditions, most intermediate and advanced recreational windsurfers prefer to sail in conditions that allow for consistent planing with multi-purpose, not overly specialized, free-ride equipment. Larger (100 to 140 liters) free-ride boards are capable of planing at wind speeds as low as 12 kn (6 m/s) if rigged with an adequate, well-tuned sail in the six to eight square meter range. The pursuit of planing in lower winds has driven the popularity of wider and shorter boards, with which planing is possible in wind as low as 8 kn (4 m/s), if sails in the 10 to 12 square meter range are used.

Modern windsurfing boards can be classified into many categories: The original Windsurfer board had a body made out of polyethylene filled with PVC foam. Later, hollow glass-reinforced epoxy designs were used. Most boards produced today have an expanded polystyrene foam core reinforced with a composite sandwich shell, that can include carbon fiber , kevlar , or fiberglass in a matrix of epoxy and sometimes plywood and thermoplastics . Racing and wave boards are usually very light (5 to 7 kg), and are made out of carbon sandwich. Such boards are very stiff, and veneer is sometimes used to make them more shock-resistant. Boards aimed at the beginners are heavier (8 to 15 kg) and more robust, containing more fiberglass.

[ 18 ] Beginner boards : (Sometimes called funboards) these often have a daggerboard , are almost as wide as Formula boards, and have plenty of volume, hence stability.

Freeride : Boards meant for comfortable recreational cruising (mostly straight-line sailing and occasional turning) at planing speed (aka blasting), mainly in flat waters or in light to moderate swell. They typically fall into the volume range of 90 to 170 liters. The so-called freeride sailing movement diverged from course racing as more recreational sailors chose to sail freely without being constrained to sailing on courses around buoys.

Racing longboards : Internationally recognised One Design Classes such as the WINDSURFER Class, Mistral One Design , or the old Olympic RS:X class race boards, and the new 2024 Olympic Class iQFoil .

Formula Windsurfing Class : Shorter boards up to one meter in width, for use in Formula Windsurfing races. See below for a more detailed description.

Windsurfing in the late evening on a longboard at Sandbanks in the 1980s ( Poole Harbour , England) Slalom boards : In the past, the key feature of slalom boards was merely speed, but it has been proven that maneuverability and ease of use are as important as speed in order to get you around the slalom course faster, and therefore modern slalom boards are shortboards aimed at top speed, maneuverability and ease of use.

Speed boards : In essence an extremely narrow and sleek slalom board, built for top speed only.

Freestyle boards : Related to wave boards in terms of maneuverability, these are wider, higher volume boards geared specifically at performing acrobatic tricks (jumps, rotations, slides, flips and loops) on flat water. Usually 80 to 110 liters in volume, and about 203 to 230 centimeters in length, with widths frequently in excess of 60 centimeters. Freestyle boards began to diverge more noticeably in design from wave boards in the early part of the 2000 decade, as aerial tricks (the Vulcan, Spock, Grubby, Flaka, and related New School maneuvers, almost all involving a jump-and-spin component) became the predominant part of the freestyle repertoire, superseding Old School moves, in which the board did not leave contact with the water.

Wave boards : Smaller, lighter, more maneuverable boards for use in breaking waves. Characteristically, sailors on wave boards perform high jumps while sailing against waves, and they ride the face of a wave performing narrow linked turns (bottom turns, cutbacks, and top-turns) in a similar way to surfing . Wave boards usually have a volume between 65 and 105 liters, with a length between 215 and 235 centimeters, and 50 to 60 centimeters in width. A general rule is for a sailor to use a wave board whose volume in liters is about the same as the sailor's weight in kilograms – more volume providing additional flotation for sailing in light winds, and less for high winds, where less volume is needed to achieve planing. In recent years, the average width of wave boards has increased slightly, as the length has shrunk, while the range of volume has been maintained the same more or less—according to board designers this makes wave boards easier to use under a wider range of conditions by sailors of differing abilities. The most common sizes of sails used with wave boards are in the range of 3.4 to 6.0 square meters, depending on the wind speed and the weight of the sailor.

Sails Main article: Sail Modern windsurfing sails are often made of monofilm (clear polyester film), dacron (woven polyester ) and mylar . Areas under high load may be reinforced with kevlar .

Two designs of a sail are predominant: camber induced and rotational. Cambered sails have 1–5 camber inducers - plastic devices at the ends of battens which cup against the mast. They help create a rigid aerofoil shape for faster speed and stability, but at the cost of maneuverability and how light the sail feels. The trend is that racier sails have camber inducers while wave sails and most recreational sails do not. The rigidity of the sail is also determined by a number of battens .

Beginners' sails often do not have battens , so they are lighter and easier to use in light winds. However, as the sailor improves, a battened sail will provide greater stability in stronger winds.

Rotational sails have battens which protrude beyond the back aspect of the mast. They flip or "rotate" to the other side of the mast when tacking or jibing, hence the rotation in the name. Rotational sails have an aerofoil shape on the leeward side when powered, but are nearly flat when sheeted out (unpowered). In comparison with cambered sails, rotational designs offer less power and stability when sailing straight, but are easier to handle when maneuvering. Rotational sails are usually lighter and easier to rig.

A windsurfing sail is tensioned at two points: at the tack (by downhaul ), and at the clew (by outhaul ). There is a set of pulleys for downhauling at the tack, and a grommet at the clew . Most shape is given to the sail by applying a very strong downhaul, which by design bends the mast. The outhaul tension is relatively weak, mostly providing leverage for controlling the sail's angle of attack.

The sail is tuned by adjusting the downhaul and the outhaul tension. Generally, a sail is trimmed more (flatter shape) for stronger winds. More downhaul tension loosens the upper part of the leech, allowing the top of the sail to twist and "spill" wind during gusts, shifting the center of effort (strictly, the center of pressure ) down. Releasing downhaul tension shifts the center of effort up. More outhaul lowers the camber/draft, making the sail flatter and easier to control, but less powerful; less outhaul results in more draft, providing more low-end power, but usually limiting speed by increasing aerodynamic resistance.

The disciplines of windsurfing (wave, freestyle, freeride) require different sails. Wave sails are reinforced to survive the surf, and are nearly flat when depowered to allow riding waves. Freestyle sails are also flat when depowered, and have high low-end power to allow quick acceleration. Freeride sails are all-rounders that are comfortable to use and are meant for recreational windsurfing. Race sails provide speed at the expense of qualities like comfort or maneuverability.

The size of the sail is measured in square meters and can be from 3 m 2 to 5.5 m 2 for wave sails and 6 m 2 to 15 m 2 for race sails, with ranges for freestyle and freeride sails spanning somewhere between these extremes. Learning sails for children can be as small as 0.7 m 2 and race sails up to 15 m 2 .

Associated Equipment Mast Boom Fin (similar shape to a surfboard fin but is usually stronger for windsurfing) Universal joint ( elastic joints are more common, but some are mechanical ) Harness and Harness lines Wet suit / dry suit Footwear Helmet Personal flotation device Travel gear – sail bags, board bags, car racks Safety gear: line, distress strobe light, whistle, marine VHF radio [ 19 ] People windsurfing in Kanagawa , Japan Technique [ edit ] A sailboard is powered and controlled by the coordinated movements of the sail about its uni-joint and of the sailor around the board.  This is achieved by balancing the weight of the sailor against the wind pressure in the sail, while adjusting both factors relative to the board. Learning this involves the development of reflexes and "muscle memory" similar to the process of learning to ride a bicycle. These skills are typically and optimally done on large, buoyant boards in light winds on flat water.  Depending on wind conditions and the skill or intentions of the rider, at some point the sailboard will begin planing, resulting in a rapid increase in speed.  This higher speed requires the learning of new skills as the apparent wind changes and the board becomes steerable like a surfboard.

Learning and skill progression [ edit ] Learning is a strenuous activity with many falls into the water, climbs back onto the board and repeating.  The time taken to reach the point of significant enjoyment varies greatly.

Youth [ edit ] Windsurfing is suitable for children as young as 5, with several board and sail brands producing "Kids Rigs" to accommodate these short and light weight windsurfers.  In some countries, organisations exist to provide entry into the sport in a semi-formal or club-style environment (i.e. The RYA's Team 15 scheme).

[ 20 ] Robert (Robby) Naish took up the fledgling sport of windsurfing at the age of 11, and in 1976 won his first overall World Championship title at the age of 13.

[ 21 ] Light winds [ edit ] The board moves through the water – much like a sailing boat does – using an extendable centreboard (if available) and fin or skeg for stability and lateral resistance. The centreboard is retracted at broad points of sail , again similarly to a sailing boat, to allow for jibing control. In these conditions windsurf boards also tack and jibe like a sailing boat.

Directional control is achieved by moving the rig either forward (turning away from the wind) or aft (turning towards the wind). When jibing, the clew of the sail is let around and allowed to rotate out and around the mast.

Fall recovery : The rider climbs onto the board, grabs the pulling rope ( uphaul ), makes sure the mast foot is placed between his/her two feet, pulls the sail about one third out of the water, lets the wind turn the sail-board combination until he/she has the wind right in the back, pulls the sail all the way out, places the "mast hand" (hand closest to the mast) on the boom, pulls the mast over the center line of the board, places the "sail hand" (hand furthest from the mast) on the boom, then pulling on it to close the sail and power it.

Strong winds [ edit ] Ideal sail size (m 2 ) for different wind speeds and rider weights (recreational level). The red values indicate sail sizes that are unpractical or not available.

In planing conditions a harness is typically worn to more efficiently use the rider's weight to counter the force in the sail. As the wind increases, the rider continues to sheet the sail, the fin generates more lift, and the board gains speed, transitioning onto a plane . The volume of board in the water ( displacement ) decreases, and the rider moves rearward, stepping into the footstraps for improved control. When planing, the board skims on the surface rather than displacing water as it moves. Planing can be achieved at different wind speeds depending on the rider's weight, sail and fin size, wave conditions, and rider ability. With modern equipment planing can normally be achieved at a wind speed of around 12 kn (6 m/s). The transition from displacement motion to planing requires a jump in energy, but once planing, water resistance decreases dramatically. This means that it is possible to continue to plane, although the wind has dropped below a level that would be required to transition to plane. A board in plane can be much smaller than a board moving by displacement (thereby gaining an advantage in gear weight and board control). Lateral resistance to the wind is provided by the fin alone (generating more lift at higher speeds) and a centreboard is no longer used (smaller boards do not have one). A fin generates lift, transferring a strong load to the board, and so is usually constructed of carbon fiber for accurate shape and strength. A low-pressure area develops on the windward side of the fin, which can lead to cavitation , leading to a sudden loss of lift, called "spin-out" (equivalent to "stalling" in flight terminology). Ideal planing conditions for most recreational riders is 15–25 kn (7.7–13 m/s) of wind, but experts can windsurf in much windier conditions. Planing is considered one of the most exhilarating aspects of the sport.

Carving a jibe: the sailor is turning to the left, just past dead downwind. To finish the turn, he will jibe the sail by releasing with his left hand so that the sail flips around.

Steering: Windsurfers have no rudder. To steer, the sailor may lean the mast forward or aft to move the center of effort, or may tilt the board by putting pressure on the rail in order to carve a turn through the water (this works by shifting the center of lateral resistance ). When sailing in displacement mode, moving the sail is most effective, but once the board is on a plane, it is more easily steered by carving. In practice, most turns involve some combination of sail and board movement. For example, when a jibe (a turn in which the sail switches sides while heading downwind) is executed at full speed (a so-called "carve jibe", "power jibe" or "planing jibe"), the rider turns downwind by leaning the sail forward, sheeting and applying pressure to the inside rail, leaning into the turn much like a snowboarder making a toe-side turn. The windward boom is released after the board turns downwind, allowing the sail to switch sides. Tacking is turning around going upwind, and at higher speed has become an advanced maneuver, requiring quick movements and good balance. A heel-side turn while planing (called a "cut-back") is usually only executed in wave riding.

Windsurfer being pulled up onto the board during a water-start Waterstart : In strong winds it is difficult to uphaul the sail (pulling it out of the water while standing on the board) so waterstarting is necessary. This is done (while water treading ) by positioning the mast perpendicular to the wind, lifting the luff out of the water to allow the wind to catch the sail, and then having the sail pull the sailor onto the board. As the sail becomes powered, it is then trimmed to bring the rider, board, and sail back onto a plane. Occasionally a rider may be unable to waterstart if the wind has dropped. If this happens the rider can wait for a gust and " pump " the sail to get back on the board. If this becomes hopeless uphauling the sail will be necessary.

Racers [ edit ] Long-board classes [ edit ] Olympic class [ edit ] Main article: Sailboarding at the Summer Olympics Olympic Sailing included Olympic Boardsailing as a demonstration Sport, this test event was sailed on the Windglider fun board at the Olympic Games of 1984. Olympic Boardsailing was given full Sport status with the Lechner at the 1988 Olympic Games.

sailing events at the Summer Olympics A Women's Olympic Lechner 390 Boardsailing Class of Sailing was added the Summer of 1992.

The Olympic Games from 1896 did not include any women specific class of sailing until 1988. The Boardsailing Class officially began the year of 1988 with only a Men's Olympic Lechner Boardsailing Class. The Barcelona Games of 1992 was significant to the history of Women in Sport, when the Olympic Women's Boardsailing Class began in Spain on the Mediterranean Sea.* The first three classes were: Windglider(demo), Division II(men only), Lechner A-390 (Women Class & Men's Class) and the Mistral One Design Class. The Mistral had a worldwide organization with Mistral Schools to learn windsurfing. This manufacturer had a range of boards from short boards, wave boards, slalom boards, fun boards and race boards.
The Summer of 1992 the Olympic Mistral One Design was selected as versatile for youth, women and men. This gear was particularly ideal for a broad wind range from five knots to thirty-five knots of wind.
Olympic Windsurfing involves 'One Design' boards, each sailor windsurfing with the identical board design, daggerboards , fins and sails. The equipment is specifically selected to allow racing in a wide range of sailing conditions. The former Mistral Olympic class was better for youth, women and light weight men. Many women changed classes of Olympic Sailing when the gear was changed from Mistral to RSX. The next class was favoured by middle weight and heavy weight men with the shift to a significantly larger sail size. The Neil Pryde RS:X was used for the first time in the 2008 Summer Olympics . In 2024 the new Olympic Class windsurfer used advanced foil technology with the iQFoil one design class.

[ 22 ] One Design Racing classes [ edit ] These offer hugely popular class racing around the world thanks to relatively low cost, the same gear design is competitive for many years with no class changes. The pro gear in contrast has rapid design change as often as every six months, only with sponsorship is constant upgrading practical. The steady constant of the one design is fun for recreation, the introduction to competition that allows intermediate windsurfers to race on the same gear design as the best athletes from the Olympic Class. These one design classes are the most social of all racing classes. The most popular one design classes are: the original WINDSURFER class, which now includes the new Windsurfer LT board design, the long running Mistral One Design , the Youth development class Bic-Techno and the rapidly expanding new iQFoil .

Formula class [ edit ] Main article: Formula Windsurfing Formula racer in San Francisco Bay Formula windsurfing has developed over the last 15 years in order to facilitate high-performance competition in light and moderate winds. Formula is now a class of windsurfing boards controlled by World Sailing that has the principal characteristic of a maximum 1m width. They have a single fin of maximum length 70 cm and carry sails up to 12.5 m 2 . Class rules allow sailors to choose boards produced by multiple manufacturers, as long as they are certified as Formula boards and registered with ISAF, and use fins and sails of different sizes. With the sail, fin and board choices, the equipment is able to be tailored to suit sailors of all body shapes and formula windsurfing presents one of the fastest course-racing sailing craft on the water. Formula Windsurfing is popular in many locations around the globe with predominantly light winds and flat water.

Large sails in combination with the 'wide-style' design allow planing in very low wind conditions as well as control and usability in high winds and bigger sea conditions. Non-planing sailing is very difficult with this design and racing is only conducted with a strict 7 kn (4 m/s) wind minimum in place. Formula boards are used on "flat water" as opposed to coastal surf, but racing is still held in windy conditions involving swell and chop. In 2008, a Formula Windsurfing Grand-Prix World Tour began, with events in Europe and South America complementing the single-event World Championships as a professional tour for the Formula class.

Formula boards have excellent upwind and downwind ability, but are not as comfortable on a beam reach unless fin sizes are reduced. This explains why the course is usually a box with longer upwind and downwind legs, or just a simple upwind-downwind return course.

Raceboard class [ edit ] Raceboards are longer windsurf boards with a daggerboard and movable mast rail allowing the sailor to be efficient on all points of sail. Excellent upwind ability is combined with good reaching and even downwind ability typically sailed in an Olympic triangle course. Whilst in decline in manufacture since the advent of shortboard course racing (which evolved into Formula) there remains some models in production and most notably the IMCO One Design remains popular amongst amateur racing clubs.

Short-board classes [ edit ] Slalom [ edit ] Slalom is a high-speed race. Typically there are two sorts of slalom courses.

Figure of eight: All of the course should on a beam reach with two floating marks that have to be jibed around.

Downwind: More than two marks are laid and sailors sail a downwind course – jibing around each mark only once.

Slalom boards are small and narrow, and require high winds. Funboard class racing rules require winds of 9–35 kn (4.6–18 m/s) for the slalom event to take place.

Ocean Slalom Marathon [ edit ] There are 3 major Ocean Slalom Marathons in the world: The Defi-Wind in France, The Lancelin Ocean Classic in Western Australia, and the Hatteras Marathon in the USA.

Super X [ edit ] This discipline is a cross between freestyle and slalom. Competitors race on a short downwind slalom course, must duck jibe on all turns, and are required to perform several tricks along the way. Competitors are required to wear protective equipment. The Super X discipline was short lived and is now largely unpracticed; it reached its peak in the early 2000s, Speedsailing [ edit ] Speedsailing takes place in several forms. The International Speed Windsurfing Class (ISWC) organizes (under the umbrella of World Sailing ) competitions in various locations around the world known for conditions suitable for good speeds. The events are made up of heats sailed on a 500m course. The average of each sailor's best 2 speeds on the 500m course, which is typically open for 2 hours per heat, is their speed for that heat. As such it is possible for the sailor with the outright fastest time not to win the heat if his second best time pulls his average down. Points are given for the placings in the heats and the overall event winner is the sailor with the best point score (again not necessarily the fastest sailor). Likewise points are given for places in the events and at the last event a World Speedsurfing Champion is crowned.

On record attempts controlled by the World Sailing Speed Record Council (WSSRC) competitors complete timed runs on a 500m or 1 nautical mile (1,852m) course. The current 500m record (for Windsurfers) is held by French windsurfer Antoine Albeau .

[ 23 ] The women's 500m Record is 48.03 knots held by Jenna Gibson, from England, also in Luderitz . The Men's nautical mile record is held by Bjorn Dunkerbeck and the women's mile record is held by Zara Davis both set in Walvis Bay , Namibia With the advent of cheap and small GPS units and the website www.gps-speedsurfing.com, Speedsurfers have been able to organise impromptu competitions amongst themselves as well as more formal competitions such as the European Speed Meetings and Speedweeks/fortnights in Australia.

[ 24 ] With over 5000 sailors registered it is possible for windsurfers all over the world to compare speeds.

Men's Speed Sailing Records Date Sailor Location 53.49 kn (27.5 m/s) 1 December 2024 Antoine Albeau Luderitz, Namibia 53.27 kn (27.4 m/s) 5 November 2015 Antoine Albeau Luderitz, Namibia 52.05 kn (26.8 m/s) [ 25 ] November 2012 Antoine Albeau Luderitz, Namibia Women's Speed Sailing Records Date Sailor Location 48.03 kn (24.7 m/s) [ 26 ] 25 November 2024 Jenna Gibson Luderitz, Namibia 47.06 kn (24.2 m/s) 25 November 2022 Heidi Ulrich Luderitz, Namibia 46.49 kn (23.9 m/s) November 2017 Zara Davis Luderitz, Namibia Indoor [ edit ] "In 1990 indoor windsurfing was born with the Palais Omnisports de Paris – Bercy making its spectacular debut. It was during this first indoor event that Britain's Nik Baker, from the south coast, flourished and went on to add a whopping x6 Indoor World Championships to his name".

[ 27 ] Indoor windsurfing competitions are held, especially in Europe, during winter. Powerful fans lined up along the side of a large pool, propel the windsurfers. Indoor competition disciplines include slalom style races and ramp jumping competitions.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] It is extremely dangerous because the pool is barely one meter deep and is surrounded by concrete.

World Champion Jessica Crisp has had arguably the worst injury in the history of the indoor events when, during a warm up session jumping the ramp, she snapped her leg and had to have emergency surgery in a French hospital. This was at the height of her professional career and fame across Europe.

[ 30 ] The most famous indoor champions include Robert Teriitehau, Jessica Crisp, Robby Naish, Nick Baker, Eric Thieme, and Nathalie LeLievre.

[ 31 ] Riders [ edit ] Wavesailing [ edit ] Wave sailing took off during the rapid development of windsurfing on the Hawaiian islands of Oahu and Maui.  It can be seen as comprising two distinct (but related) parts, wave riding and wave jumping.

A typical wave contest will score two jumps going out and two wave rides coming in. A high scoring heat would consist of a double clean forward rotating jump, a high one foot backward rotating jump, a long wave ride with flowing bottom turns, radical top turns, a series of aerials and a 360 aerial manoeuvre on the face of the waves such as a 'goiter', 'taka', wave 360, planing forward or clean flowing back-loop. Depending on the conditions at the location, some competitions will focus more on jumping while others focus more on the wave-riding aspects.

The best wave riding locations on earth include: Ho'okipa on the north shore of Maui, Ponta Preta and Alibaba in Cabo Verde off the west coast of Africa, One Eye in Mauritius island off the east cost of Madagascar, Margaret River in Western Australia, Cloudbreak in Fiji islands, Pacasmayo and Chicama in Peru, Topocalma in Chile.

The PWA World Cup Wavesailing competitions crown the professional world champions each year.

[ 32 ] One of the most prestigious events in the windsurfing world is called The Aloha Classic at Ho'okipa Beach on the north shore of Maui, Hawaii.

The Aloha Classic held at Ho'okipa Beach Park on the north shore of Maui, takes place each year in late October and early November for the best wind and wave conditions and it is common to have 15–20 foot wave faces during the contest. Since 2011 the event has been run by the International Windsurfing Tour (IWT)[3] as the Grand Final of the IWT Wave Tour. The IWT is the Hawaiian-based organisation for the wave riders of the Asia Pacific hemisphere. The Aloha Classic has often been the final event of the Professional Windsurfers Association (PWA)[4] crowning the PWA Wave World Champions.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Wave riding [ edit ] Wave riding is a form of surfing with the extra speed and power afforded by the sail. It is strongly connected to its roots in surfing in style and culture. It involves the rider performing a series of bottom turns, top turns, and cutbacks whilst riding an unbroken wave back to the shore.  Top wave sailors are able to incorporate aerial moves into their wave riding and will use overhanging wave lips to launch themselves out in front of the wave in spectacular giant aerials.

Wave jumping [ edit ] Wave jumping involves stunts of varying levels of difficulty which are performed after the rider has jumped from the peak of an unbroken wave. These are commonly referred to as aerial moves and include both forward rotation and backward rotations. The rider and his equipment rotate, doing single and double rotations and jumps where the sailor contorts his or her body and equipment. Recent innovations have included combining moves whilst airborne and, for the first time in 2008, one professional sailor, Ricardo Campello, has made attempts at a triple forward loop during a 2008 PWA competition.

Big wave riding [ edit ] At the most extreme end of the sport is big wave riding which means riders on waves faces over 30 feet high. The most popular place for this is on the north shore of Maui at place called Pe'ahi to the local Hawaiians, and known as JAWS to the rest of the world. The biggest waves here can be up to 60 foot faces. It breaks only in the winter months from late October to March. Other famous big wave locations include Nazaré in Portugal. Famous contemporary big wave riders include Kai Lenny, Marcilio Browne, Robby Swift, Sarah Hauser, Jason Polakow, and Robby Naish. The inaugural Big Wave Challenge announced the first ever winners in this category on April 10, 2020.

[ 34 ] Storm riding [ edit ] The most famous storm riding event is known as The Red Bull Storm Chase. It occurs only when there is a massive storm forecast with winds over 60 knots and giant waves over 20 feet. It is an invitational event and is extremely dangerous. The most recent winner was West Australian Jaeger Stone.

Freestyle [ edit ] Freestyle is a timed event which is judged. The competitor who has the greatest repertoire, or manages to complete most stunts, wins. Freestyle is about show and competitors are judged on their creativity. Both the difficulty and the number of tricks make up the final score. Sailors who perform tricks on both tacks (port and starboard), and perform the tricks fully planing score higher marks. High scoring moves include Shifty (Shaka Pushloop), Double Air-Culo, Air-Kabikuchi, Air-Skopu and double Power-Moves, for example Air-Funnel Burner and Double Culo. The latest freestyle windsurfing is well documented and gets constantly updated on Continentseven . For novice windsurfers, low-wind freestyle tricks are an appropriate start, such as sailing backwards with the fin out of the water, or transitioning from a sailing stance to sitting on the board while continuing to sail.

Big air [ edit ] Competitors compete to see who can record the highest jump or maneuver. A 3D accelerometer is worn to measure and record heights of the jumps. Xensr is a manufacturer of 3D accelerometers and promoter of the Big Air competition. It is a popular discipline on the Columbia River near the town of Hood River, Oregon, USA.

International stars [ edit ] This list of "famous" or "notable"  people has no clear inclusion or exclusion criteria . Please help improve this article by defining clear inclusion criteria to contain only subjects that fit those criteria.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Top men [ edit ] Robby Naish (USA): one of the first windsurfing champions to gain international fame, he dominated the early years of competition in the 1970s and 1980s. World Champion from 1976 to 1979, Overall World Champion from 1983 to 1987, and Wave World Champion in 1988, 1989, and 1991. IWT BIG WAVE All-Time BIGGEST WAVE RIDER Champion 2020 (photo) [ 35 ] Björn Dunkerbeck (ESP): the successor to Naish, he dominated international professional competition from the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s. Twelve-time PWA Overall World Champion in a row. He won the Professional Windsurfers Association (PWA) World Championships for Slalom, Wave, Course Racing and Overall, a record forty one times in total. He is credited in the Guinness Book of World Records as the most successful athlete of all time with 42 World Titles.

[ 36 ] Antoine Albeau (FRA): 22 times World Champion in various disciplines: Formula windsurfing, Super X, Freestyle, Slalom, Race, Speed, Overall. Holder of the windsurf speed record 53.27 knots, on the 5th of November 2015.

Stephan van den Berg (NED), World Champion 1979–1983, gold medal winner first Olympic windsurfing contest in Los Angeles, California in 1984.

Anders Bringdal (SWE). Division 2 Heavyweight Champion 1984, Funboard World Champion 1985, Professional windsurfer PBA/PWA 1985 at Sylt. PBA Slalom Champion 1987, PBA Courseracing Champion 1988, Speed World Cup Champion 2009. First man over 50 knots in official timing over 500 metres in Lüderitz 2012.

Arnaud de Rosnay (FRA): Photographer, and windsurfing adventurer. Best known for his open-ocean windsurfing exploits, and numerous long distance crossings in conflict areas. Lost at sea in November 1984 in the Taiwan Strait.  He created the first speedsailing event in 1981, a 40 km race in Maui.  80 competitors participated in the first event, Arnaud de Rosnay finishing second behind Robby Naish. He is also credited with the invention of Kite surfing (1980) and land sailing (Speedsail 1977), even crossing a distance of 1380 km in the Sahara in 1979.

[ citation needed ] Christian Marty (FRA): Airline pilot for Air France. He was the first person to windsurf across the Atlantic Ocean in 1981, from Dakar, Senegal to Kourou, French Guiana.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] He was later captain of Air France Flight 4590 which crashed after takeoff killing everyone on board and several more people on the ground.

[ 39 ] Peter Boyd (USA): Moved to Maui in 1980, and pioneered several windsurfing maneuvers. He was the first to perform an aerial loop, which was considered impossible by many.

[ citation needed ] The maneuver opened the door to a variety of aerial loop variations, including the push loop and double rotations. While innovation was his main focus, Boyd did defeat World champion, Ken Winner several times at International competitions.

[ 40 ] Guy Cribb (GBR): four times world championships runner-up in the 1990s. 13 UK champion titles.

Mark Angulo (USA): Early pioneer of many wave sailing moves, including the wave-face 360.

[ 41 ] Jason Polakow (AUS): PWA Wave World Champion, 1997, 1998. First windsurfer to ride big wave of Nazare, in Portugal.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Kevin Pritchard (USA): PWA Overall World Champion, 2000. PWA Wave World Champion, 2006. Aloha Classic Wave Champion 2016.

Nik Baker (GBR): Three-time PWA Wave World 2nd Place, six-time Indoor World Champion.

Josh Angulo (USA): Mark's younger brother and early pioneer of Cape Verde.

[ 44 ] Tonky Frans (BON): 3rd world freestyle 2009. 1st Midwinters Merit Island Freestyle Competition in 2001.

Jean-Patrick van der Wolde (NED): IFCA Junior World Champion of 2011.

Mike Waltz (USA): first to put a windsurfing sail on a surfboard and sail the famed Hookipa beach on Maui in 1979. This shifted the entire sport from the original 370 cm (12 ft) long boards to the shorter boards ridden today.  Mike also hosted Maui's first professional wave sailing and slalom event in 1981, which became the foundation of the windsurfing world tour, and Maui became the mecca for the sport both as a design center and a training ground for professionals.

[ 45 ] Dave Kalama (USA): Although known for his big wave surfing and stand-up surfing accomplishments, he is an outstanding windsurfer and invented the move known as the Goiter.

[ citation needed ] Matt Schweitzer (USA): First World Champion (1974), and winner of 18 World Championship level events in subsequent years.

Josh Stone (USA): freestyle pioneer, inventor of the Spock, PWA Freestyle World Champion in 1999, 2000.

[ 46 ] Ricardo Campello (VEN): a freestyle innovator, he created many difficult moves, PWA Freestyle World Champion in 2003, 2004, and 2005.

Kauli Seadi (BRA): pioneered freestyle maneuvers in wave competition. Ranked first in PWA Wave competition in 2005, 2007, 2008.

[ 47 ] Gollito Estredo (VEN): 9 time PWA Freestyle World Champion 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2014, 2015, 2017, 2018, innovator of many new freestyle tricks.

[ 48 ] Thomas Traversa (FRA): PWA Wave World Champion 2014, 1st RedBull Storm Chase.

Steven van Broeckhoven (NED): European Freestyle Champion 2010, PWA Freestyle World Champion 2011.

Philip Köster (GER): 5 x Wave World Champion 2011, 2012, 2015, 2017, 2019.

Víctor Fernández (ESP): Wave World Champion 2010, 2016, and 2018.

Marcilio Browne (BRA): 4 x Wave World Champion 2013, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2 x Aloha Classic Champion, IWT BIG WAVE Most Radical All Time Champion 2020, [ 35 ] PWA Freestyle World Champion 2008.

Boujmaa Guilloul (MOR): 1st PWA event Hawaii Pro wave 2004, 2014 1st AWT Pro Fleet - Starboard Severne Aloha Classic, 9th PWA Starboard Severne Aloha Classic, 2010 ranked 20th overall PWA Wave, 2009 8th Cabo Verde Wave, 2008 ranked 19th overall PWA Wave, 2007 ranked 14th Wave, came 5th in Guincho. 1st Aloha Classic 2014, 2nd IWT Wave Overall Pro Men 2015, 1st IWT Wave Overall Pro Men 2016.

[ 49 ] Camille Juban (GDE): IWT BIG WAVE All-Time BIGGEST WAVE RIDER Champion 2020 (video), [ 35 ] 2 x Aloha Classic Champion 2011 and 2018. 3 time AWT overall Pro Men Wavesailing champion 2012, 2013 and 2015.

Bernd Roediger (USA): 2 x Aloha Classic Champion 2012 [ 50 ] (youngest ever winner at 16 years old), 2013.

[ 51 ] Frank Ervin : Formula windsurfing lightweight world champion.

Morgan Noireaux (USA): 3 x Aloha Classic Champion 2014, 2015, 2017. IWT overall Pro Men Wavesailing champion 2017.

[ 52 ] Antoine Martin (GDE): 2 x Aloha Classic Champion 2019 & 2023, 2 x IWT Wave Champion 2018, [ 53 ] 2019, [ 54 ] French National Wave Champion 2019.

Robby Swift (GB)  Competing internationally in the PWA World Tour as a wave/freestyle sailor. He was the Youth World Champion, in Racing and Slalom 2000.

[ 55 ] Top women [ edit ] Jill Boyer (USA): World Wave Champion 1984.

Julie de Werd (USA): World Wave Champion 1984.

Clare Seeger (GBR): One of the top female windsurfers in the 1980s. She was also No 1 British Champion for 10yrs and was the first Briton to obtain and overall World Title. Clare won numerous events around the World until finally settling in Hawaii. She was one of the first women who did forward loops, push loops and was the first person to do a double back loop at Ho'okipa,Maui, Hawaii.

Lisa Penfield (USA): Freestyle World Champion 1985, multiple Championships from 1981– 1986.

Dana Dawes (USA): World Wave Champion 1986, 1987.

Natalie Siebel (GER): World Wave Champion 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1994.

Angela Cocheran (USA): World Wave Champion 1989, 1991.

[ 56 ] Natalie Lelievre (FRA): overall World Champion, 1984, 1985. World Wave Champion 1995, 1996, 1997.

Barbara Kendall (NZ): 3 time Olympian representing New Zealand with Gold in Barcelona 1992, Silver in Atlanta 1996, Bronze in Sydney 2000.

[ citation needed ] Jessica Crisp (AUS): 5 time Olympian representing Australia. PWA Overall World Champion 1994. PWA World Wavesailing Champion 1993.

[ 57 ] Karin Jaggi (SUI): multiple PWA World Champion in freestyle, wave, speed competition, 1990s and 2000s. World Wave Champion 1998.

Daida Ruano Moreno (ESP): PWA Wave World Champion, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013. Freestyle World Champion 2003–2006. The Most dominant female athlete in the history of wavesailing.

Iballa Ruano Moreno (ESP): PWA Wave World Champion, 1999, 2006, 2007, 2012, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018. Twin sister of Daida Moreno.

Sarah-Quita Offringa (ARU): 25-time World Champion (15 Freestyle, 5 Slalom, 4 Wave & 1 Slalom-X), 3 x Aloha Classic Wave Champion 2016, 2019, 2023.

Sarah Hauser (NCL): IWT BIG WAVE All-Time BIGGEST WAVE RIDER Champion 2020 (photo), [ 35 ] 3 x Aloha Classic Wave Champion 2017, 2018, 2024, 3 x IWT Wave Champion 2015, 2016, 2018.

Jenna Gibson (GBR): Women's Speed World Record Holder (48.03 knots over 500m). First woman to go over 50 knots peak speed. 4 x IFCA Slalom World Champion.

In popular culture [ edit ] Due to the popularity of the sport in the 1970s, a song " Windsurfin' " was written by publisher Willem van Kooten and producer Jaap Eggermont. It sold over 200,000 copies and made it to no. 2 in the Netherlands in 1978. It was also a hit in Belgium and Germany.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Related water sports [ edit ] Other watersport variants using a board and wind power include Kiteboarding and Wingsurfing .

Kiteboarding uses a large kite (around 9 to 20qsm) on 20+m lines for wind power. Due to the strong possible upward lift, smaller boards with no significant buoyancy are used.

Wingsurfing or wing foiling uses a hand-held wing, a smaller version of a kite, to replace the sail . To offset the low wind power resulting from the comparatively small wing size (around 3 to 9 sqm), a Foilboard can be used.

[ 60 ] Windfoiling mounts in the fin box a hydrofoil which lifts the board off the water and improves speeds due to reduced drag.

See also [ edit ] Kite ice skating — ice skater propelled by kite Land sailing — yacht with wheels Land windsurfing — on large skateboard, propelled by sail Wakeboarding — water skiing on a board instead of skis Waterskiing References [ edit ] ^ Windsurfing, Starboard (July 18, 2011).

"Windsurfing Basics" .

Starboard Windsurfing Online . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ "Origins of Windsurfing: Jim Drake" .

American Windsurfer . 2015-12-06 . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ Fishman, Joanne A. (June 12, 1978).

"Windsurfing: Sailing's New Tack" .

The New York Times .

^ Fishman, Joanne A. (July 13, 1981).

"Boardsailing Is in the Race for Attention" .

The New York Times .

^ Brenner, Elsa (September 12, 1982).

"Windsurfing Gaining Popularity" .

The New York Times .

^ Greenhouse, Steven; Times, Special To the New York (August 17, 1987).

"Europe Gaining in U.S. Sailboard Battle" .

The New York Times .

^ "How the First Woman Windsurfer Helped Design the First Sailboard" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2024-02-05 .

^ a b "Origins of Windsurfing: Jim Drake" .

American Windsurfer . 2015-12-06 . Retrieved 2022-04-04 .

^ Windsurfing . Human Kinetics. January 1995. p.

2 .

ISBN 9780873227605 .

Peter Chilvers and windsurfing ^ "Origins of Windsurfing: Jim Drake" . 6 December 2015.

^ "Windsurfing – A New Concept in Sailing" .

American Windsurfer . 2015-12-06 . Retrieved 2022-03-20 .

^ Drake, James (1968-12-31).

Wind Surfing — A New Concept in Sailing (Report).

^ "Windsurfing | sport" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ "WIND-PROPELLED APPARATUS" (PDF) .

www.freepatentsonline.com . Retrieved August 11, 2018 .

^ "About.com: Inventors – History of Windsurfing" . Inventors.about.com. 2010-06-15. Archived from the original on July 10, 2012 . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ "Origins of windsurfing: Hoyle Schweitzer" . American Windsurfer Magazine. 8 July 2022.

^ "Origins of windsurfing: Jim Drake" .

American Windsurfer Magazine . 8 July 2022.

^ Hollman, Eva-M.

"Anatomy of an Epoxy Sandwich board" . The Board Lady . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ Windsurfing Safety Archived August 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , San Francisco Boardsailing Association (SFBA) ^ "Team 15" . "RYA . Retrieved 2012-08-01 .

^ "Naish, Robby" .

National Sailing Hall of Fame . Retrieved 2021-03-19 .

^ "iQFoil: the new Olympic windsurfing equipment" .

Surfertoday .

^ "Windsurfer Breaks Speed Record at Over 60 mph" .

www.redbull.com . Retrieved 2015-11-29 .

^ "Home – GPS-Speedsurfing.com :: for windsurfers by windsurfers" . GPS-Speedsurfing.com . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ "24 Hour Distance" . Sailspeedrecords.com . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

^ "Fastest Speed on a Yacht (women)" . Guinness World Records . Retrieved 2025-03-19 .

^ "Windsurfing history: N – Windsurfing UK Magazine" .

^ "The PWA World Tour" . Professional Windsurfers Association.

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : pedrowind (May 5, 2007).

"Indoor Windsurfing Kamasutra" . Youtube . Retrieved 2011-08-06 .

[ dubious – discuss ] ^ "Jessica Crisp Named Australian Sailor of the Year | News | Sportcal" .

www.sportcal.com .

^ "Indoor windsurfing returns to Paris" .

Surfertoday .

^ a b "PWA WORLD WINDSURFING TOUR: Home" .

www.pwaworldtour.com .

^ "Home - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

International Windsurfing Tour--Inspiring the Future of Our Sport .

^ "IWT Big Wave - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" . 26 February 2019.

^ a b c d "IWT Big Wave Awards - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" . 11 April 2020.

^ "Most windsurfing world championship titles" .

^ McWhirter, Norris (1988).

The Guinness book of records . Guinness Superlatives.

ISBN 9780851128788 . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ "Atlantique: La Premiere Traversee!" [Atlantic: The First Cross!].

www.tainosgpe.com (in French) . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ Ranter, Harro.

"ASN Aircraft accident Aérospatiale / BAC Concorde 101 F-BTSC Gonesse" .

aviation-safety.net .

Aviation Safety Network . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ Faurot, Russ (October 29, 2014).

"30 YEARS OF THE ALOHA CLASSIC: A HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Interview with Maui Surfer Mark Angulo – November 11, 1997" .

mauitime.com .

^ "jason polakow - Sport News Headlines - Nine Wide World of Sports" .

wwos.nine.com.au .

^ "10 Tracks Surfing Facts" .

Tracks Magazine . 20 May 2014.

^ "Josh Angulo" .

The Surfers Journal .

^ "MIKE WALTZE WINDSURFING MAUI" .

Windsurf Magazine . October 21, 2017.

^ "ROMANCING: Josh Stone" .

American Windsurfer . December 5, 2015.

^ "PERSPECTIVE - KAULI SEADI" .

Windsurf Magazine .

^ "PWA WORLD WINDSURFING TOUR: Athletes" .

www.pwaworldtour.com . Retrieved 2021-01-15 .

^ "Rankings 2016 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "AWT Rankings 2012 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Rankings 2013 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Rankings 2017 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Rankings 2018 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Rankings 2019 - International Windsurfing Tour-Inspiring the Future of Our Sport" .

^ "Robby Swift - Boards Windsurfing" .

boards.co.uk . Retrieved 24 April 2018 .

^ "IWT Chile Topocalma Infernal - Day 2 of heats" .

www.yachtsandyachting.com .

^ "Jessica Crisp wins The Australian RSX Windsurfing National CHampionships" .

Women's Sport - Women's sport news .

^ Surfer Today - The day The Surfers encouraged you to go 'Windsurfin ^ Dutch Charts - The Surfers - Windsurfin' ^ "What is wing surfing?" .

External links [ edit ] Windsurfing at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official Formula Class Website Continentseven , international windsurfing website WindsurfingMag Windsurfing Magazine FollowTheWinds , international windsurfing news website International Windsurfing Association v t e Types of sailing vessels and rigs Overviews Age of Sail Maritime history Age of Discovery Sailing rigs Bermuda rig Crab claw Fore-and-aft rig Gaff rig Gunter rig Junk rig Lateen rig Ljungström rig Lug rig Mast aft rig Pinisi rig Square rig Tanja rig By sailing rigs Barque Barquentine Brig Brigantine Catboat Cutter Full-rigged ship Jackass-barque Ketch Mistico Schooner Sloop Snow Yawl Multihull vessels ʻalia Amatasi Baurua Bigiw Camakau Catamaran Drua Guilalo Jukung Kaep Kalia Karakoa Kora kora Lakatoi Lanong Outrigger canoe Pahi Paraw Pentamaran Proa Quadrimaran Takia Tepukei Tipairua Tongiaki Trimaran Ungalawa Va'a-tele Vaka katea Vinta Wa Naval and merchant sailing ships and other vessels (by origin date) Ancient Balangay Boita Borobudur ship Dhow Fire ship Galley Penteconter Bireme Trireme Quadriremes Tessarakonteres Dromon Junk K'un-lun po Lepa Mtepe Uru Post-classical Balinger Benawa Birlinn Bomb vessel Cog Hulk Jong Knarr Koch Kondura Longship Malangbang Shitik Tongkang Zabra 15th c.

Carrack Chinese treasure ship Caravel Ghurab Lancaran Hoy Trabaccolo 16th c.

Crommesteven Galiot Galleon Galleass Ghali Flyboat Fluyt Full-rigged pinnace Lorcha Man-of-war Manchua Panokseon Patache Speronara Square-rigged caravel ( round or de armada ) Xebec 17th c.

Bermuda sloop Corvette Frigate Galeas Koff Pink Polacca Ship of the line 18th c.

Bilander Chialoup Chinaman Baltimore Clipper East Indiaman Gallivat Garay Grab Gundalow Lanong Padewakang Post ship 74-gun Ship of the line Sloop-of-war Toop Trincadour Slave ship West Indiaman 19th c.

Blackwall frigate Clipper Down Easter Golekan Iron-hulled sailing ship Warship Janggolan Lambo Leti leti Palari Tamar West Country Windjammer 20th c.

Montagu whaler Nordic Folkboat Fishing vessels Bagan Bago Barca-longa Falkuša Felucca Fifie Gableboat Herring buss Jangada Jukung Lugger Masula Mayang Patorani Nordland Sixareen Sgoth Smack Tartane Well smack Yoal Recreational vessels Dinghy Ljungström sailboat Mast aft rig Pocket cruiser Sailing hydrofoil Sailing yacht Sportsboat Trailer sailer Wharrams Windsurfer Yacht Special terms Inflatable Lashed lug Razee Sewn Tall ship Treenailed ULDB Other types Bristol Channel pilot cutter Floating restaurant Fusta Mersey flat Norfolk punt Norfolk wherry Pausik Pinnace (ship's boat) Pram Scow Sneakbox Thames sailing barge Wherry Related Nautical operations v t e Extreme and adventure sports Boardsports Bellyboarding Bodyboarding Dirtsurfing Kite landboarding Kiteboarding Longboarding Mountainboarding Riverboarding Sandboarding Skateboarding Skimboarding Skysurfing Snowboarding Snowskating Street luging Surfing River surfing Wakeboarding Windsurfing Motorsports Drifting Motocross Rallycross Rallying Rally raid Snocross Water sports Coasteering Freediving High diving Jet Skiing Scuba diving Cave diving Technical diving Snorkeling Water skiing Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater rafting Climbing Canyoning Crane climbing Ice climbing Mixed climbing Mountaineering Alpine climbing Rock climbing Big wall climbing Free solo climbing Traditional climbing Skyrunning Falling BASE jumping Free BASE Ski-BASE jumping Bungee jumping Cliff-diving Cliff jumping Tombstoning Parachuting/Skydiving Flying Aerobatics Air racing Gliding Hang gliding Paragliding Powered paragliding Parasailing Speed flying Wingsuit flying Cycling BMX BMX racing Freestyle BMX Mountain biking Downhill Rolling Freestyle scootering Inline skating Aggressive inline skating Vert skating Roller skating Skiing Extreme skiing Freeriding Freestyle skiing Speed skiing Ski mountaineering Sledding Bobsleigh Extreme sledding Luge Skeleton Others Adventure racing Caving Cheese rolling Extreme ironing Extreme Pogo Fell running Obstacle racing Orienteering Powerbocking Slacklining Ultramarathon Zip-lining v t e Surfing Terminology History Types Big wave Bellyboarding Bodyboarding Flowriding Kiteboarding Kneeboarding Lake surfing River surfing Shoulder surfing Skimboarding Standup paddleboarding Surf kayaking Tow-in Tube riding Windsurfing Windfoiling Wing foiling Women's surfing Surfers American Argentine Australian Brazilian British Filipino French Irish Maldivian New Zealand Peruvian Portuguese South African Uruguayan Environment Closeout Hawaiian scale Ocean surface wave Surf break Tidal bore Wave pool Equipment Surfboard Fins Wax Wax comb Foilboard Boardshorts Surfboard leash Windsurfing Boom Harness Locations By country Australia Brazil Canada Chile Ecuador India Indonesia Ireland Madeira Morocco New Zealand Peru South Africa Sri Lanka Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom Scotland United States Sites Banzai Pipeline Cyclops Jaws La Libertad Mavericks Puerto Escondido Shipstern Bluff Teahupoʻo Uluwatu Competitions Australian Boardriders Battle Australian Open of Surfing Beachley Classic Billabong Pipeline Masters Billabong Pro Teahupoo Copa Movistar Duke Kahanamoku Invitational Surfing Championship East Coast Surfing Championships Hawaiian Pro J-Bay Open Ku Ikaika Challenge Lion Foundation Surf League MEO Rip Curl Pro Portugal Noosa Festival of Surfing O'Neill Sebastian Inlet Pro O'Neill World Cup of Surfing Olympics Pipeline Bodysurfing Classic Quiksilver Pro France Quiksilver Pro Gold Coast Red Bull Big Wave Africa Rip Curl Pro Roxy Pro France Shark Island Challenge Smirnoff World Pro-Am Surfing Championships Stubbies Surfabout Surfest The Eddie Triple Crown of Surfing US Open of Surfing World Surfing Games World Surf League Organizations International Professional Surfers International Surfing Association International Surfing Day International Surfing Museum National Scholastic Surfing Association New York Surf Film Festival Santa Cruz Surfing Museum SurfAid International Surfers Against Sewage Surfline Surfrider Foundation Surfing Australia Surfing South Africa The Moonshine Conspiracy Uruguayan Surfing Union Welsh Surfing Federation World Surf League Culture Art Fictional surfers Films Hair Music Surfwear brands Shaka sign Hazards Shark attack Surfer's eye Surfer's ear Surfer's myelopathy Related topics Surf lifesaving Waterstart (windsurfing maneuver) v t e Water sports and activities Activities in water Aquajogging Diving synchronized Flyboarding Freediving Scuba diving Snorkeling Swimming Synchronized swimming Water aerobics Activities on water Boating Bodyboarding Bodysurfing Cable skiing Canoeing Fishing Kayaking Kiteboarding Kiteboating Kneeboarding Paddleboarding Standup paddleboarding Parasailing Rafting Riverboarding Rowing Sailing Skimboarding Skurfing Stone skipping Surfing Tubing Wakeboarding Wakeskating Wakesurfing Water skiing barefoot Windsurfing Yachting Team sports Canoe polo Dinghy racing Dragon boat racing Outrigger canoe racing Synchronized diving Synchronized swimming Waboba Water basketball Water polo Water volleyball Competitions Boat racing Modern pentathlon Sailing races Triathlon Yacht racing Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐644585b757‐prj2r
Cached time: 20250812180150
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.953 seconds
Real time usage: 1.131 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5030/1000000
Revision size: 61793/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 215942/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11644/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 237064/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.584/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9342534/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  902.053      1 -total
 43.67%  393.915      1 Template:Reflist
 22.31%  201.248     47 Template:Cite_web
 13.98%  126.100      6 Template:Navbox
 12.00%  108.268      7 Template:Cite_news
 11.48%  103.600      1 Template:Sailing_Vessels_and_Rigs
  9.10%   82.075      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.70%   69.470      1 Template:Short_description
  6.20%   55.967      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  5.59%   50.454      1 Template:Overly_detailed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:222354:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812180150 and revision id 1301984605. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Windsurfing&oldid=1301984605 " Categories : Windsurfing American inventions Sailboat types Surfing Boardsports Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2011 CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from November 2024 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2024 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2025 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Unverifiable lists of persons from April 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 19:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Windsurfing 51 languages Add topic

