Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Advocates and critics Toggle Advocates and critics subsection 2.1 Criticism 3 History and legacy 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Majoritarianism 15 languages العربية বাংলা Cymraeg Eesti Ελληνικά Español 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Jawa Magyar Bahasa Melayu Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political philosophy "Majoritarian" redirects here. For the decision-making process, see Majority rule .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article or section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Majoritarianism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Majoritarianism is a political philosophy or ideology with an agenda asserting that a majority , whether based on a religion , language , social class , or other category of the population, is entitled to a certain degree of primacy in society, and has the right to make decisions that affect the society. This traditional view has come under growing criticism, and liberal democracies have increasingly included constraints on what the parliamentary majority can do, in order to protect citizens' fundamental rights.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] Majoritarianism, as a concept of government, branches out into several forms. The classic form includes unicameralism and a unitary state . Qualified majoritarianism is a more inclusionary form, with degrees of decentralization and federalism. Integrative majoritarianism incorporates several institutions to preserve minority groups and foster moderate political parties.

[ 2 ] Advocates and critics [ edit ] Advocates of majoritarianism argue that majority decision making is intrinsically democratic and that any restriction on majority decision making is intrinsically undemocratic. If democracy is restricted by a constitution that cannot be changed by a simple majority decision, then yesterday's majority is being given more weight than today's. If it is restricted by some small group, such as aristocrats , judges, priests, soldiers, or philosophers, then society becomes an oligarchy . The only restriction acceptable in a majoritarian system is that a current majority has no right to prevent a different majority emerging in the future; this could happen, for example, if a minority persuades enough of the majority to change its position. In particular, a majority cannot exclude a minority from future participation in the democratic process. Majoritarianism does not prohibit a decision being made by representatives as long as this decision is made via majority rule, as it can be altered at any time by any different majority emerging in the future.

[ citation needed ] [ original research?

] Criticism [ edit ] One critique of majoritarianism is that systems without supermajority requirements for changing the rules for voting can be shown to likely be unstable.

[ 3 ] Among other critiques of majoritarianism is that most decisions in fact take place not by majority rule, but by plurality, unless the voting system purposefully channels votes for candidates or options in such a way as to guarantee a majority, such as is done under Contingent voting , two-round voting and Instant-runoff voting .

[ 4 ] According to Gibbard’s theorem and Arrow's paradox , it is not possible to have a voting system with more than two options that retains adherence to both certain "fairness" criteria and rational decision-making criteria.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Unchecked majoritarianism may threaten the rights of minority groups.

[ 6 ] Some democracies have tried to resolve this by requiring supermajority support to enact changes to basic rights. For example, in the United States, the rights to freedom of speech and freedom of religion are written into the Constitution , meaning it would take more than a simple majority of the members of Congress to repeal the rights.

[ 7 ] Other democracies have sought to address threats to minority rights by adopting proportional voting systems that guarantee at least some seats in their national legislatures to minority political factions. Examples include New Zealand, where mixed-member proportional voting is used, and Australia, where a single transferable vote system is used.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Whether these methods have succeeded in protecting minority interests, or have gone too far, remains a matter for debate.

[ 10 ] History and legacy [ edit ] There are relatively few instances of large-scale majority rule in recorded history, most notably the majoritarian system of Athenian democracy and other ancient Greek city-states . However, some [ who?

] argue that none of those Greek city-states were truly majority rule, particularly due to their exclusion of women, non-landowners, and slaves from decision-making processes. Most of the famous ancient philosophers staunchly opposed majoritarianism, because decisions based on the will of the uneducated and uninformed 'masses' are not necessarily wise or just.

Plato is a prime example with his Republic , which describes a societal model based on a tripartite class structure. Anarchist anthropologist David Graeber offers a reason as to why majority democratic government is so scarce in the historical record. "Majority democracy, we might say, can only emerge when two factors coincide: 1. a feeling that people should have equal say in making group decisions, and 2. a coercive apparatus capable of enforcing those decisions." Graeber argues that those two factors almost never meet: "Where egalitarian societies exist, it is also usually considered wrong to impose systematic coercion. Where a machinery of coercion did exist, it did not even occur to those wielding it that they were enforcing any sort of popular will." [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Politics portal Argumentum ad populum Appeal to the majority Collectivism and individualism Consensus decision-making Consensus democracy Counter-majoritarian difficulty Majoritarian democracy Minoritarianism (opposite) Minority rights Ochlocracy Popular democracy Populism Tyranny of the majority Utilitarian ethics References [ edit ] ^ A Przeworski, JM Maravall, I NetLibrary Democracy and the Rule of Law (2003) p. 223 ^ Reynolds, Andrew (December 9–11, 1999).

"Majoritarian or Power-Sharing Government" (PDF) .

www.nd.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 8, 2001 . Retrieved September 8, 2013 .

^ Salvador, Barbera; Jackson, Matthew O. (2004). "Choosing How to Choose: Self-Stable Majority Rules and Constitutions".

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

119 (3): 1011– 48.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.490.6553 .

doi : 10.1162/0033553041502207 .

^ a b Riker, William (1988) [First published in 1982].

Liberalism Against Populism . Prospect Heights, Illinois: Waveland Press.

ISBN 978-0-88133-367-1 .

^ Reny, Philip J. (2001-01-01).

"Arrow's theorem and the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem: a unified approach" .

Economics Letters .

70 (1): 99– 105.

doi : 10.1016/S0165-1765(00)00332-3 .

ISSN 0165-1765 .

^ ULRICH, SIEBERER; DUTKOWSKI, JULIA; MEIßNER, PETER; MÜLLER, WOLFGANG (October 18, 2019).

" 'Going institutional' to overcome obstruction: Explaining the suppression ofminority rights in Western European parliaments, 1945–2010" .

European Journal of Political Research .

59 (4): 731– 975.

doi : 10.1111/1475-6765.12376 .

S2CID 214451776 .

^ "Full Text of the U.S. Constitution | Constitution Center" .

National Constitution Center – constitutioncenter.org . Retrieved 2023-03-20 .

^ "What is MMP?" .

Elections . Retrieved 2023-03-20 .

^ Bowler, Shaun; Grofman, Bernard, eds. (2000).

Elections in Australia, Ireland, and Malta under the Single Transferable Vote: Reflections on an Embedded Institution . University of Michigan Press.

doi : 10.3998/mpub.16507 .

ISBN 978-0-472-11159-6 .

JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.16507 .

^ McGann, Anthony J. (2002-10-01).

"The Tyranny of the Super-Majority: How Majority Rule Protects Minorities" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Graeber, David.

Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology Archived 2008-11-18 at the Wayback Machine (2004) p. 89 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Majoritarianism&oldid=1299243524 " Categories : Political theories Majority–minority relations Majority Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from September 2011 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from May 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2025 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 07:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Majoritarianism 15 languages Add topic

