Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Common themes 3 Critiques 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Critical geography 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Hrvatski Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский کوردی Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variant of social science that seeks to interpret and change the world This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Critical geography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography v t e Critical geography is theoretically informed geographical scholarship that promotes social justice , liberation , and leftist politics .

[ 1 ] Critical geography is also used as an umbrella term for Marxist , feminist , postmodern , poststructural , queer , left-wing , and activist geography.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Critical geography is one variant of critical social science and the humanities that adopts Marx ’s thesis to interpret and change the world. Fay (1987) defines contemporary critical science as the effort to understand oppression in a society and use this understanding to promote societal change and liberation.

[ 4 ] Agger (1998) identifies a number of features of critical social theory practiced in fields like geography, which include: a rejection of positivism ; an endorsement of the possibility of progress; a claim for the structural dynamics of domination ; an argument that dominance is derived from forms of false consciousness, ideology, and myth; a faith in the agency of everyday change and self-transformation and an attendant rejection of determinism ; and a rejection of revolutionary expediency.

[ 5 ] Origin [ edit ] See also: History of geography The term 'critical geography' has been in use since at least 1749, when the book Geography reformed: a new system of general geography, according to an Accurate Analysis of the science in four parts dedicated a chapter to the topic titled "of Critical Geography." [ 6 ] This book proposed critical geography as the process by which geographers identify errors in the work of others and fix them in later publications.

[ 6 ] "This Species calls all Geography to an Account, and examines into the Accuracy of the Names, and Situation of Places, as well as the Division of Countries; pointing out the Errors and Defects in each, and proposing Remedies, chiefly with a view to improve and rectify Geography, in order to bring it to its desired Perfection." — Edward Cave [ Note 1 ] , [ 6 ] In this 1749 book, Cave uses examples of Eratosthenes , Hipparchus , and Ptolemy all correcting the errors of their predecessor before publishing their own work.

[ 6 ] In the 1970s, so-called "radical geographers" in the Anglo-American world began using the framework of critical geography to transform the scope of the discipline of geography in response to societal issues such as civil rights , environmental pollution , and war. Peet (2000) provides an overview of the evolution of radical and critical geography.

[ 7 ] The mid- to late-1970s saw ascending critiques of the quantitative revolution and the adoption of Marxist approaches through Marxist geography . The 1980s were marked by fissures between humanistic, feminist and Marxist streams, and a reversal of structural excess. In the late 1980s, critical geography emerged and gradually became a self-identified field.

[ citation needed ] Although closely related, critical geography and radical geography are not interchangeable. Critical geography has two crucial departures from radical geography: (1) a rejection of the structural excess of Marxism , in accordance with the post-modern turn ; and (2) an increasing interest in culture and representation , in contrast to radical geography's focus on the economy.

[ 1 ] Peet (2000) notices a rapprochement between critical and radical geography after heated debate in the 1990s.

[ 7 ] Nevertheless, Castree (2000) posits that critical and radical geography entail different commitments.

[ 3 ] He contends that the eclipse of radical geography indicates the professionalization and academicization of Left geography, and therefore worries about the loss of the "radical" tradition.

[ 3 ] Common themes [ edit ] As a consequence of the post-modern turn , critical geography doesn't have a unified commitment. Hubbard, Kitchin, Bartley, and Fuller (2002) asserts that critical geography has a diverse epistemology , ontology , and methodology , and does not have a distinctive theoretical identity.

[ 8 ] Nonetheless, Blomley (2006) identifies six common themes of critical geography, [ 9 ] encompassing: A commitment to theory and a rejection of empiricism .

Critical geographers consciously deploy theories of some form, but they draw from a variety of theoretical wells, such as political economy , governmentality , feminism , anti-racism , and anti-imperialism .

A commitment to reveal the processes that produce inequalities . Critical geographers seek to unveil power , uncover inequality , expose resistance, and cultivate liberating politics and social changes .

An emphasis on representation as a means of domination and resistance . A common focus of critical geography is to study how representations of space sustain power; or on the contrary, how representations of space can be used to challenge power.

An optimistic faith in the power of critical scholarship . Critical geographers believe that scholarship can be used to resist dominant representations, and that scholars can undo said domination and help free the oppressed. There exists an implicit confidence in the power of critical scholarship to reach the uninformed, and in the capacities of people to defeat alienation by means of reflexive self-education.

A commitment to progressive practices . Critical geographers want to make a difference through praxis . They claim to be united with social movements and activists with commitments to social justice . The actual relationship between critical geography and activism has been much debated.

[ 10 ] An understanding of space as a critical tool.

Critical geographers pay special attention to how spatial arrangements and representations can be used to produce oppression and inequality . Critical geographers identify to varying degrees how space can be used as both a veil and tool of power.

Critiques [ edit ] There are many criticisms of critical geography.

[ 1 ] Physical geographers and those who embraced the new techniques developed during the quantitative revolution are often the target of criticisms from critical geographers.

[ 11 ] These geographers argue that critical geographers argue from a place of ignorance on quantitative geography .

[ 11 ] The popularity of critical geography, and the resulting decline in quantitative methods, is argued to be in large part due to the difficulty of the subject matter causing people to "jump ship." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Further, some believe that critical geographers are antiscience .

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] Many quantitative geographers acknowledge the early criticisms pointed out by critical geographers and contend that new technology and techniques have addressed these criticisms and that they no longer apply.

[ 11 ] [ 14 ] There has also been relatively limited discussion over the shared commitments of critical geographers, with a few exceptions such as Harvey (2000).

[ 15 ] The question such as "what are geographers critical of", and "to what end" needs to be answered.

[ 1 ] Barnes (2002) comments that critical geographers are better at providing explanatory diagnoses than offering anticipatory-utopian imaginations to reconfigure the world.

[ 16 ] Some critical geographers are concerned with the institutionalization of critical geography. Even though critical geographers conceive themselves as rebels and outsiders, critical thinking has become prevalent in geography.

[ 17 ] Critical geography is now situated at the very heart of the discipline of geography.

[ 3 ] Some see institutionalization as a natural result of the analytical strength and insights of critical geography, while others fear that institutionalization has entailed cooptation.

[ 1 ] The question is whether critical geography still holds its commitment to political change.

[ 1 ] Further, as critical geography is practiced across the world, the insights of critical geographers outside the Anglophone world should be better acknowledged.

[ 18 ] In this regard, Mizuoka et al. (2005) offered an overview of Japanese critical geography praxis since the 1920s.

[ 19 ] In addition, critical geography should also forge stronger linkage with critical scholars in other disciplines.

See also [ edit ] Activism Critical theory Feminist geography Left-wing politics Marxist geography Postmodernism Post-structuralism Quantitative revolution Queer theory Notes [ edit ] ^ While Cave published the "Geography reformed: a new system of general geography, according to an accurate analysis of the science in four parts", how much he wrote or edited is unclear. Other authors are not given within the text.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Gregory, Derek; Johnston, Ron; Pratt, Geraldine; Watts, Michael; Whatmore, Sarah (2011).

The Dictionary of Human Geography . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781444359954 .

^ Best, U. (2009). Kitchin, Rob; Thrift, Nigel (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Human Geography . Oxford: Elsevier. pp.

345 –357.

ISBN 9780080449104 .

^ a b c d Castree, Noel (2000).

"Professionalisation, Activism, and the University: Whither 'Critical Geography'?" .

Environment and Planning A .

32 (6): 955– 970.

doi : 10.1068/a3263 .

^ Fay, Brian (1987).

Critical social science: liberation and its limits . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801494581 .

^ Agger, Ben (1988).

Critical Social Theories: An Introduction . Avalon Publishing.

ISBN 9780813321745 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d Cave, Edward, ed. (1749).

Geography reformed: a new system of general geography, according to an Accurate Analysis of the science in four parts (2 ed.). St John's Gate, Clerkenwell. p. 241 . Retrieved 19 January 2024 .

^ a b Peet, Richard (2000). "Celebrating Thirty Years of Radical Geography".

Environment and Planning A .

32 (6): 951– 953.

doi : 10.1068/a32202 .

S2CID 128738768 .

^ Hubbard, Phil; Bartley, Brendan; Fuller, Duncan; Kitchin, Rob (2002).

Thinking Geographically: Space, Theory and Contemporary Human Geography . A&C Black.

ISBN 9780567259882 .

^ Blomley, Nicholas (2006). "Uncritical critical geography?".

Progress in Human Geography .

30 (1): 87– 94.

doi : 10.1191/0309132506ph593pr .

S2CID 143963933 .

^ Fuller, Duncan; Kitchin, Rob (2004).

Radical Theory/critical Praxis: Making a Difference Beyond the Academy?

. Praxis (e)Press.

ISBN 9780973456103 .

^ a b c d e Fotheringham, A. Stewart; Brunsdon, Chris; Charlton, Martin (2000).

Quantitative Geography: Perspectives on Spatial Data Analysis . Sage Publications Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7619-5948-9 .

^ Hepple, L. (1998). "Context, Social Construction and Statistics: Regression, Social Science and Human geography".

Environment and Planning A .

30 (2): 225– 234.

doi : 10.1068/a300225 .

S2CID 144335512 .

^ Graf, W. (1998). "Why Physical Geographers Whine so Much".

The Association of American Geographers' Newsletter .

33 (8).

^ Robinson, G.M. (1988).

Methods and Techniques in Human Geography . Wiley.

^ Harvey, David (2000).

Spaces of Hope . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520225787 .

^ Barnes, Trevor J. (2002).

"Critical notes on economic geography from an aging radical. Or radical notes on economic geography from a critical age" .

ACME: An International Journal for Critical Geographies .

1 (1): 8– 14.

ISSN 1492-9732 .

^ Byles, Jeff (2001-07-31).

"Maps and Chaps" .

Village Voice . Retrieved 2017-04-04 .

^ Bialasiewicz, Luiza (2003). "The Many Wor(l)ds of Difference and Dissent".

Antipode .

35 (1): 14– 23.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8330.00299 .

hdl : 10278/5080701 .

ISSN 1467-8330 .

^ Mizuoka, Fujio; Mizuuchi, Toshio; Hisatake, Tetsuya; Tsutsumi, Kenji; Fujita, Tetsushi (2005). "The Critical Heritage of Japanese Geography: Its Tortured Trajectory for Eight Decades".

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space .

23 (3): 453– 473.

doi : 10.1068/d2204r .

S2CID 140725013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Blomley, Nicholas (2006).

"Uncritical critical geography?" .

Progress in Human Geography .

30 (1): 87–94.

doi : 10.1191/0309132506ph593pr .

Blunt, Alison; Wills, Jane (2000).

Dissident Geographies: An Introduction to Radical Ideas and Practice . Prentice Hall.

ISBN 9780582294899 .

Castree, Noel (2000).

"Professionalisation, Activism, and the University: Whither 'Critical Geography'?" .

Environment and Planning A .

32 (6): 955–970.

doi : 10.1068/a3263 .

Castree, Noel ; Gregory, Derek (2006).

David Harvey: A Critical Reader . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9780470775318 .

Peet, Richard (2000).

"Celebrating Thirty Years of Radical Geography" .

Environment and Planning A .

32 (6): 951–953.

doi : 10.1068/a32202 .

Sidaway, James D.; Lin, Shaun; Chouinard, Vera; Ferretti, Federico; Gibson, Katherine; Kenney-Lazar. Miles; Philo, Chris; van Meeteren, Michiel; Wills, Jane; Wisner, Ben; Barnes, Trevor; Sheppard, Eric (2020).

Book review forum: Reading Trevor Barnes and Eric Sheppard's Spatial histories of radical geography: North America and beyond .

Trevor Barnes and Eric Sheppard Wiley (Antipode Book Series), NJ, USA; West Sussex, UK: Wiley.

The AAG Review of Books , 8(4):236-258.

v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory Portal : Geography Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_geography&oldid=1296386153 " Categories : Critical theory History of geography Human geography Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2016 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 18:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical geography 19 languages Add topic

