Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Executor of will Toggle Executor of will subsection 1.1 Executor pay 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Executor 18 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Slovenčina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Administrator in estate law For other uses, see Executor (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Executioner .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Executor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Executor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An executor is someone who is responsible for executing, or following through on, an assigned task or duty.
The feminine form, executrix , is sometimes used.

Executor of will [ edit ] An executor is a legal term referring to a person named by the maker of a will or nominated by the testator to carry out the instructions of the will. Typically, the executor is the person responsible for offering the will for probate , although it is not required that they fulfill this. The executor's duties also include handing over property to the beneficiaries as designated in the will, obtaining information of potential heirs , collecting and arranging for payment of debts of the estate and approving or disapproving creditors ' claims.

An executor makes sure estate taxes are calculated, necessary forms are filed, and the corresponding payments are made. They also assist the attorney with the estate. Additionally, the executor acts as a legal conveyor who designates where the donations will be sent using the information left in bequests, whether they be sent to charity or other organizations. In most circumstances, the executor is the representative of the estate for all purposes, and has the ability to sue or be sued on behalf of the estate.
The executor holds legal title to the estate property, but must not use the title or property for their own benefit, unless permitted by the terms of the will.

A person who deals with a deceased person's property without proper authority is known as an executor de son tort . Such a person's actions can subsequently be ratified by the lawful executors or administrators if the actions do not contradict the substantive provisions of the deceased's will or the rights of heirs at law.

If there is no will, a person is said to have died intestate —"without testimony". As a result, there is no tangible "testimony" to follow, and hence there can be no executor.
If there is no will or the executors named in a will do not wish to act, an administrator of the deceased's estate can instead be appointed.
The generic term for executors or administrators is personal representative . In England and Wales , when a person dies intestate in a nursing home , and has no family members who can be traced, those responsible for their care automatically become their executors.

In Scots law , a personal representative of any kind is referred to as an executor, using executor nominate to refer to an executor in the English sense and executor dative to an administrator in the English sense.

Any person designated as an executor can choose not to administer the estate. In the UK, upon making that choice the designated person can execute a "power reserved" letter, which allows the person to later act as executor if the person named on the grant of probate is removed or is no longer able to act.

[ 1 ] Executor pay [ edit ] In some countries, such as the United States, an executor is automatically entitled to compensation for his or her services, although this amount varies dramatically by jurisdiction. Unless specifically set by the will, this compensation is often determined by what is considered "reasonable" for the effort involved, although in a number of jurisdictions, the amount is instead set as a percentage of the overall estate. For example, in California the executor is entitled to 4% of the first $100K of estate value, 3% of the next $100K, and so on. In other countries, such as the United Kingdom, the executor is not automatically entitled to compensation, although compensation can be directed within the will or on application to a court.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Administration of Estates Act 1925 – Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom that consolidated, reformed, and simplified the rules relating to the administration of estates in England and Wales.

Digital estate – Passing down of digital assets after a person's death Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Estate – Value of a person's assets minus their liabilities Executorial trustee – Someone appointed to be an executor Inheritance – Practice of passing on property upon the death of individuals Literary executor – Deceased author's copyright and intellectual property Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Probate sale – Legal sale of real estate for division References [ edit ] ^ "Executor's Guide" (PDF) .

Alzheimer's Society . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ "Executor Pay: Fees for the Executor or Administrator of an Estate" .

Archived 2019-03-06 at the Wayback Machine . Duhaime. Retrieved 19 January 2012 External links [ edit ] Canadian legislation and regulation ( searchable by Province ) governing executors of estates. Via CanLII .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Executor&oldid=1284399446 " Categories : Legal terminology Legal professions Insurance law legal terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2019 Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia introduction cleanup from January 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from January 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 7 April 2025, at 10:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Executor 18 languages Add topic

