Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Collections 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Daniel Jones (phonetician) 20 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ مصرى မြန်မာဘာသာ Naijá Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Удмурт 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British phonetician (1881–1967) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Daniel Jones Daniel Jones, age 40 Born ( 1881-09-12 ) 12 September 1881 London, England Died 4 December 1967 (1967-12-04) (aged 86) Gerrards Cross , Buckinghamshire, England Nationality British Education University of Cambridge Occupation Phonetician Employer University College London Known for The cardinal vowel diagram Notable work The English Pronouncing Dictionary Daniel Jones (12 September 1881 – 4 December 1967) was a British phonetician who studied under Paul Passy , professor of phonetics at the École des Hautes Études at the Sorbonne ( University of Paris ). He was head of the Department of Phonetics at University College London .

Biography [ edit ] In 1900, Jones studied briefly at William Tilly's Marburg Language Institute in Germany , where he was first introduced to phonetics. In 1903, he received his BA degree in mathematics at the University of Cambridge and by right his MA in 1907. From 1905 to 1906, he studied in Paris under Paul Passy , who was one of the founders of the International Phonetic Association , and in 1911 he married Passy's niece Cyrille Motte. He briefly took private lessons from the British phonetician Henry Sweet .

In 1907 he became a part-time lecturer at University College London and was afterwards appointed to a full-time position. In 1912 he became the head of the Department of Phonetics and was appointed to a chair in 1921, a post he held until his retirement in 1949. From 1906 onwards Jones was an active member of the International Phonetic Association; he held the roles of assistant secretary (1907 to 1927), secretary (1927 to 1949), and president (1950 to 1967).

In 1909 Jones wrote the short Pronunciation of English , a book he later radically revised. The resulting work, An Outline of English Phonetics , followed in 1918 and is the first comprehensive description of British Received Pronunciation , and the first such description of the standard pronunciation of any language.

The year 1917 was a landmark for Jones in many ways. He became the first linguist in the western world to use the term phoneme in its current sense, employing the word in his article "The phonetic structure of the Sechuana Language".

[ 1 ] Jones had made an earlier notable attempt at a pronunciation dictionary but it was now that he produced the first edition of his famous English Pronouncing Dictionary , a work which in revised form is still in print.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] It was here that the cardinal vowel diagram made a first appearance.

[ 5 ] The problem of the phonetic description of vowels is of long standing, going back to the era of the ancient Indian linguists. Three nineteenth-century British phoneticians worked on this topic.

Alexander Melville Bell (1867) devised a phonetic alphabet which included an elaborate system for vowels.

Alexander John Ellis had also suggested vowel symbols for his phonetic alphabets. Sweet did much work on the systematic description of vowels, producing an elaborate system of vowel description involving a multitude of symbols. Jones however was the one who is generally credited with having gone much of the way towards a practical solution through his scheme of 'cardinal vowels', a relatively simple system of reference vowels which for many years has been taught systematically to students within the British tradition. Much of the inspiration for this scheme can be found in the earlier publications of Passy.

The standard IPA vowel trapezium, an application of Jones's work In the original form of the cardinal vowels, Jones employed a dual-parameter system of description based on the supposed height of the tongue arch together with the shape of the lips. This he reduced to a simple quadrilateral diagram which could be used to help visualize how vowels are articulated. Tongue height (close vs. open) is represented on the vertical axis and front vs. back on the horizontal axis indicates the portion of the tongue raised on the horizontal axis. Lip-rounding is also built into the system, so that front vowels (such as [i, e, a]) have spread or neutral lip postures, but the back vowels (such as [o, u]) have more marked lip-rounding as vowel height increases. Jones thus arrived at a set of eight "primary Cardinal Vowels", and recorded these on gramophone disc for His Master's Voice in 1917.

Later modifications to his theory allowed for an additional set of eight "secondary Cardinal Vowels" with reverse lip shapes, permitting the representation of eight secondary cardinal vowels (front rounded and back unrounded). Eventually, Jones also devised symbols for central vowels and positioned these on the vowel diagram. He made two further disc recordings for Linguaphone in 1943 and 1956.

In recent years the accuracy of many of Jones's statements on vowels has come increasingly under question. Most linguists now consider that the vowel quadrilateral must be viewed as a way of representing auditory space in visual form, rather than the tightly defined articulatory scheme envisaged by Jones. Nevertheless the International Phonetic Association still uses a version of Jones's model, and includes a Jones-type vowel diagram on its influential International Phonetic Alphabet leaflet contained in the "Handbook of the International Association".  Many phoneticians (especially those trained in the British school) resort to it constantly as a quick and convenient form of reference.

Although Jones is especially remembered for his work on the phonetics and phonology of English, he ranged far more widely. He produced phonetic/phonological treatments which were masterly for their time on the sound systems of Cantonese, Tswana (Sechuana as it was then known), Sinhalese, and Russian. He was the first phonetician to produce, in his "Sechuana Reader", a competent description of an African tone language, including the concept of downstep . Jones helped develop new alphabets for African languages, and suggested systems of romanisation for Indian languages and Japanese. He also busied himself with support for revised spelling for English through the Simplified Spelling Society .

Apart from his own vast array of published work, Jones acted as mentor to numerous scholars who later went on to become famous linguists in their own right. These included such names as Lilias Armstrong , Harold Palmer , Ida C. Ward , Hélène Coustenoble, Arthur Lloyd James , Dennis Fry , A. C. Gimson , Gordon Arnold, J.D. O'Connor , Clive Sansom , and many more. For several decades, his department at University College was pivotal in the development of phonetics and in making its findings known to the wider world. Beverley Collins and Inger M. Mees (1998) speculate that it is Jones, not as is often thought Sweet, who provided George Bernard Shaw with the basis for his fictional character Professor Henry Higgins in Pygmalion .

[ 6 ] After retirement, Jones worked at his publications almost up to the end of his life. He died at his home in Gerrards Cross in Buckinghamshire on 4 December 1967.

Collections [ edit ] Jones' archive was deposited at University College London in 1993 and 2024.

[ 7 ] The collection contains personal history, documents relating to Jones' time at the Department of Phonetics, lecture notes, and research material.

[ 7 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Jones, 1917b ^ Michaelis and Jones, 1913 ^ Daniel Jones, Cambridge English Pronouncing Dictionary, 18th edition , Product Information.

^ Jones 1917a ^ p. ii ^ Collins and Mees 1998: 97–103 ^ a b UCL Special Collections.

"Jones Papers" .

UCL Archives Catalogue . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

References [ edit ] Asher, R. E. (1994), Encyclopedia of language and linguistics , Oxford: Pergamon Press.

Bell, A. Melville (1967), "Visible Speech", London: Simpkin Marshall; rpt in facsimile in B. Collins and I. Mees (2006), "Phonetics of English in the 19th Century", London: Routledge.

Collins, B. and I. Mees (1998), The Real Professor Higgins: The Life and Career of Daniel Jones , Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.

IPA (1999), "Handbook of the International Phonetic Association", Cambridge: CUP.

Jones, D. (1909), "The Pronunciation of English", Cambridge: CUP; rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. (1917a), "An English Pronouncing Dictionary", London: Dent, rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002). 17th edn, P. Roach, J. Hartman and J. Setter (eds), Cambridge: CUP, 2006.

Jones, D. (1917b), The phonetic structure of the Sechuana language, Transactions of the Philological Society 1917–20, pp. 99–106; rpt in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. (1918), "An Outline of English Phonetics", Leipzig: Teubner; rpt in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. and Kwing Tong Woo (1912), "A Cantonese Phonetic Reader", London: University of London Press; rpt in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. and S. Plaatje (1916), "A Sechuana Reader", London: ULP; rpt in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. and H. S. Perera (1919), "A Colloquial Sinhalese Reader", Manchester: Manchester University Press; rpt in Jones (2002).

Jones, D. and M. Trofimov (1923), "The Pronunciation of Russian", Cambridge: CUP; rpt in facsimile in Jones (2002).

Jones, Daniel and Dahl, Ivar (1944).

Castellano bonaerense , en Fundamentos de escritura fonética . London, University College, págs. 16–17.

Jones, D. (2002), Daniel Jones: Selected Works, Vols. 1–8, ed. B. Collins and I.M. Mees, London: Routledge.

Michaelis, H. and D. Jones (1913), "A Phonetic Dictionary of the English Language", Hanover-Berlin: Carl Meyer and Gustav Prior; rpt in Jones (2002).

External links [ edit ] Ling Links, People, I-M, Section on Daniel Jones Parts of his book An Outline of English Phonetics Jones Papers at University College London Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daniel_Jones_(phonetician)&oldid=1304240350 " Categories : 1881 births 1967 deaths 20th-century British linguists Academic staff of the University of Paris Academics of University College London Alumni of King's College, Cambridge British expatriates in France Cantonese language English-language spelling reform advocates Linguists of English Members of the German Academy of Sciences at Berlin People educated at Ludgrove School Phoneticians University of Paris alumni English Theosophists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2021 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues Use dmy dates from February 2023 Use British English from May 2013 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Daniel Jones (phonetician) 20 languages Add topic

