Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Letters Toggle Letters subsection 3.1 Majuscule and minuscule 3.2 Numbers 3.3 Computer support 3.4 Currency signs 4 Letterforms and type design Toggle Letterforms and type design subsection 4.1 Lowercase forms 4.2 Italic and cursive forms 4.3 Accessing variant forms 5 Cyrillic alphabets 6 Usage of Cyrillic versus other scripts Toggle Usage of Cyrillic versus other scripts subsection 6.1 Latin script 6.2 Romanization 6.3 Cyrillization 7 Summary table 8 Computer encoding Toggle Computer encoding subsection 8.1 Unicode 8.2 Other 8.3 Keyboard layouts 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Internet top-level domains in Cyrillic 10 Notes 11 Footnotes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyrillic script 170 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 贛語 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Ladin ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень Монгол Nāhuatl Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Тыва дыл Удмурт Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba Batak Mandailing Kumoring ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Writing system used for various Eurasian languages "Cyrillic" and "Cyrillic alphabet" redirect here. For the national variants of the Cyrillic script, see Cyrillic alphabets . For other uses, see Cyrillic (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cyrillic script" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cyrillic script 1850s Romanian text (Lord's Prayer), written with the Cyrillic script Script type Alphabet Period Earliest variants exist c.

893 [ 1 ] – c.

940 Direction Left-to-right Official script 7 sovereign states Belarus Bulgaria Kyrgyzstan Russia Serbia [ a ] Ukraine Tajikistan 3 partially recognised states Abkhazia South Ossetia Transnistria 5 intergovernmental organizations Commonwealth of Independent States Eurasian Economic Union European Union Shanghai Cooperation Organisation United Nations Co-official script in: 5 sovereign states [ h ] Bosnia and Herzegovina [ b ] Kazakhstan [ c ] [ citation needed ] Mongolia [ d ] Montenegro [ e ] North Macedonia [ f ] 1 partially recognised state Kosovo [ g ] Languages See Languages using Cyrillic Related scripts Parent systems Egyptian hieroglyphs [ 4 ] Proto-Sinaitic Phoenician Greek script Glagolitic also inspired by Uncial script Early Cyrillic script Cyrillic script Child systems Old Permic script Sister systems Armenian Coptic Latin ISO 15924 ISO 15924 Cyrl (220) , ​Cyrillic Cyrs ( Old Church Slavonic variant) Unicode Unicode alias Cyrillic Unicode range U+0400–U+04FF Cyrillic U+0500–U+052F Cyrillic Supplement U+2DE0–U+2DFF Cyrillic Extended-A U+A640–U+A69F Cyrillic Extended-B U+1C80–U+1C8F Cyrillic Extended-C U+1E030–U+1E08F Cyrillic Extended-D Names: Belarusian : кірыліца ; Bulgarian : кирилица [ˈkirilit͡sɐ] ; Macedonian : кирилица [kiˈrilit͡sa] ; Russian : кириллица [kʲɪˈrʲilʲɪtsə] ; Serbian : ћирилица [t͡ɕirǐlit͡sa] ; Ukrainian : кирилиця [kɪˈrɪlɪt͡sʲɐ] .

This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) . For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA . For the distinction between [ ] , / / and ⟨ ⟩, see IPA § Brackets and transcription delimiters .

The Cyrillic script ( / s ɪ ˈ r ɪ l ɪ k / ⓘ sih- RI -lik ) [ 5 ] [ 6 ] is a writing system used for various languages across Eurasia . It is the designated national script in various Slavic , Turkic , Mongolic , Uralic , Caucasian and Iranic -speaking countries in Southeastern Europe , Eastern Europe , the Caucasus , Central Asia , North Asia , and East Asia , and used by many other minority languages .

As of 2019 [update] , around 250 million people in Eurasia use Cyrillic as the official script for their national languages , with Russia accounting for about half of them.

[ 7 ] With the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union on 1 January 2007, Cyrillic became the third official script of the European Union , following the Latin and Greek alphabets.

[ 8 ] The Early Cyrillic alphabet was developed during the 9th century AD at the Preslav Literary School in the First Bulgarian Empire during the reign of Tsar Simeon I the Great , probably by the disciples of the two Byzantine brothers Cyril and Methodius , who had previously created the Glagolitic script . Among them were Clement of Ohrid , Naum of Preslav , Constantine of Preslav , Joan Ekzarh , Chernorizets Hrabar , Angelar , Sava and other scholars.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The script is named in honor of Saint Cyril .

Etymology [ edit ] Since the script was conceived and popularised by the followers of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, rather than by Cyril and Methodius themselves, [ 13 ] its name denotes homage rather than authorship.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Main article: Early Cyrillic alphabet Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana attributed Cyrillic script to Saint Cyril and Methodius ,14th century View of the cave monastery near the village of Krepcha , Opaka Municipality in Bulgaria. Found here is the oldest Cyrillic inscription, dated to 921.

[ 15 ] I A page from Буквар (ABC (Reader)), the first Old Slavonic textbook, printed by Ivan Fyodorov in 1574 in Lviv . This page features the Cyrillic alphabet.

The Cyrillic script was created during the First Bulgarian Empire .

[ 16 ] Modern scholars believe that the Early Cyrillic alphabet was created at the Preslav Literary School , the most important early literary and cultural center of the First Bulgarian Empire and of all Slavs : Unlike the Churchmen in Ohrid, Preslav scholars were much more dependent upon Greek models and quickly abandoned the Glagolitic scripts in favor of an adaptation of the Greek uncial to the needs of Slavic, which is now known as the Cyrillic alphabet.

[ 11 ] A number of prominent Bulgarian writers and scholars worked at the school, including Naum of Preslav until 893; Constantine of Preslav ; Joan Ekzarh (also transcr. John the Exarch); and Chernorizets Hrabar , among others. The school was also a center of translation, mostly of Byzantine authors. The Cyrillic script is derived from the Greek uncial script letters, augmented by ligatures and consonants from the older Glagolitic alphabet for sounds not found in Greek. Glagolitic and Cyrillic were formalized by the Byzantine Saints Cyril and Methodius and their Bulgarian disciples, such as Saints Naum , Clement , Angelar , and Sava . They spread and taught Christianity in the whole of Bulgaria.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Paul Cubberley posits that although Cyril may have codified and expanded Glagolitic, it was his students in the First Bulgarian Empire under Tsar Simeon the Great that developed Cyrillic from the Greek letters in the 890s as a more suitable script for church books.

[ 16 ] History of the alphabet Egyptian hieroglyphs 32nd c.

BCE Hieratic 32nd c. BCE Demotic 7th c. BCE Meroitic 3rd c. BCE Proto-Sinaitic 19th c. BCE Ugaritic 15th c. BCE Ancient South Arabian 9th c. BCE Geʽez c.

5th c. BCE Phoenician 12th c. BCE (see below ) Hangul 1443 Thaana c.

1601 Adlam 1989 Phoenician 12th c. BCE Paleo-Hebrew 10th c. BCE Samaritan 6th c. BCE Aramaic 8th c. BCE Unknown Kushan script 600–200 BCE Kharosthi 3rd c. BCE Brahmi 3rd c. BCE ( Brahmic ) Pallava 4th century Cham 4th century Dhives Akuru 6th century Khmer 611 Tibetan 7th century ʼPhags-pa 1269 Devanagari 10th century Canadian Aboriginal 1840 Hebrew 3rd c. BCE Pahlavi 2nd c. BCE Avestan 4th century Palmyrene 1st c. BCE Nabataean 2nd c. BCE Arabic 4th century N'Ko 1949 Syriac 1st century Sogdian 2nd century Old Turkic 8th century Old Hungarian c.

650 Old Uyghur Mongolian 1204 Mandaic 2nd century Greek 8th c. BCE Etruscan 8th c. BCE Latin 7th c. BCE Deseret 1854 Great Lakes Algonquian 19th century Blackfoot 1888 Fraser 1915 Saanich 1978 Osage 2006 Runic 2nd century Ogham 4th century Lycian 5th c. BCE Coptic 3rd century Gothic 3rd century Armenian 405 Caucasian Albanian c.

420 Georgian c.

430 Glagolitic 862 Cyrillic c.

940 Old Permic 1372 Libyco-Berber 10th c. BCE Tifinagh 4th century Neo-Tifinagh 1970 Paleohispanic 7th c. BCE Cyrillic spread among other Slavic peoples, as well as among non-Slavic Romanians . The earliest datable Cyrillic inscriptions have been found in the area of Preslav , in the medieval city itself and at nearby Patleina Monastery , both in present-day Shumen Province , as well as in the Ravna Monastery and in the Varna Monastery . The new script became the basis of alphabets used in various languages in Orthodox Church -dominated Eastern Europe, both Slavic and non-Slavic languages (such as Romanian , until the 1860s). For centuries, Cyrillic was also used by Catholic and Muslim Slavs.

Cyrillic and Glagolitic were used for the Church Slavonic language , especially the Old Church Slavonic variant. Hence expressions such as "И is the tenth Cyrillic letter" typically refer to the order of the Church Slavonic alphabet; not every Cyrillic alphabet uses every letter available in the script. The Cyrillic script came to dominate Glagolitic in the 12th century.

The literature produced in Old Church Slavonic soon spread north from Bulgaria and became the lingua franca of the Balkans and Eastern Europe.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Cyrillic in modern-day Bosnia [ 26 ] [ 27 ] is an extinct and disputed variant of the Cyrillic alphabet that originated in medieval period . Paleographers consider the earliest features of script had likely begun to appear between the 10th or 11th century, with the Humac tablet to be the first such document using this type of script and is believed to date from this period.

[ 28 ] It was used continuously until the 18th century, with sporadic usage extending into the 20th century.

[ 29 ] With the orthographic reform of Saint Evtimiy of Tarnovo and other prominent representatives of the Tarnovo Literary School of the 14th and 15th centuries, such as Gregory Tsamblak and Constantine of Kostenets , the school influenced Russian, Serbian, Wallachian and Moldavian medieval culture. This is known in Russia as the second South-Slavic influence.

In 1708–10, the Cyrillic script used in Russia was heavily reformed by Peter the Great , who had recently returned from his Grand Embassy in Western Europe . The new letterforms, called the Civil script , became closer to those of the Latin alphabet; several archaic letters were abolished and several new letters were introduced designed by Peter himself. Letters became distinguished between upper and lower case. West European typography culture was also adopted.

[ 30 ] The pre-reform letterforms, called poluustav ( Russian : полуустав ), were notably retained in Church Slavonic and are sometimes used in Russian even today, especially if one wants to give a text a 'Slavic' or 'archaic' feel.

The alphabet used for the modern Church Slavonic language in Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic rites still resembles early Cyrillic. However, over the course of the following millennium, Cyrillic adapted to changes in spoken language, developed regional variations to suit the features of national languages, and was subjected to academic reform and political decrees. A notable example of such linguistic reform can be attributed to Vuk Stefanović Karadžić , who updated the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet by removing certain graphemes no longer represented in the vernacular and introducing graphemes specific to Serbian (i.e., Љ Њ Ђ Ћ Џ Ј), distancing it from the Church Slavonic alphabet in use prior to the reform. Today, many languages in the Balkans , Eastern Europe, and northern Eurasia are written in Cyrillic alphabets.

Letters [ edit ] Example of the Cyrillic script. Excerpt from the manuscript "Bdinski Zbornik". Written in 1360.

[ 31 ] Cyrillic script spread throughout the East Slavic and some South Slavic territories, being adopted for writing local languages, such as Old East Slavic . Its adaptation to local languages produced a number of Cyrillic alphabets, discussed below.

The early Cyrillic alphabet [ 32 ] [ 33 ] А Б В Г Д Є [ i ] Ж Ꙃ [ j ] Ꙁ [ k ] И [ l ] Ї [ m ] Ꙉ К Л М Н [ n ] О [ o ] П Ҁ [ 34 ] Р С Т ОУ [ p ] Ф Х Ѡ [ q ] Ѿ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ ЪI [ r ] Ь Ѣ Ꙗ Ѥ Ю [ s ] Ѫ [ t ] Ѭ Ѧ [ u ] Ѩ [ v ] Ѯ Ѱ Ѳ Ѵ Majuscule and minuscule [ edit ] Capital and lowercase letters were not distinguished in old manuscripts.

A page from the Church Slavonic Grammar of Meletius Smotrytsky (1619) Yeri ( Ы ) was originally a ligature of Yer and I ( Ъ + І = Ы ).

Iotation was indicated by ligatures formed with the letter І: Ꙗ (not an ancestor of modern Ya, Я, which is derived from Ѧ ), Ѥ , Ю (ligature of І and ОУ ), Ѩ , Ѭ . Sometimes different letters were used interchangeably, for example И = І = Ї , as were typographical variants like О = Ѻ . There were also commonly used ligatures like ѠТ = Ѿ .

Numbers [ edit ] The letters also had numeric values, based not on Cyrillic alphabetical order, but inherited from the letters' Greek ancestors .

[ citation needed ] Cyrillic numerals 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 А В Г Д Є ( Е ) Ѕ ( Ꙃ , Ꙅ ) З ( Ꙁ ) И Ѳ 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 І ( Ї ) К Л М Н Ѯ ( Ч ) Ѻ ( О ) П Ч ( Ҁ ) 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 Р С Т Ѵ ( Ѵ , Оу , Ꙋ ) Ф Х Ѱ Ѡ ( Ѿ , Ꙍ ) Ц ( Ѧ ) Computer support [ edit ] Computer fonts for early Cyrillic alphabets are not routinely provided. Many of the letterforms differ from those of modern Cyrillic, varied a great deal between manuscripts , and changed over time.  In accordance with Unicode policy, the standard does not include letterform variations or ligatures found in manuscript sources unless they can be shown to conform to the Unicode definition of a character: this aspect is the responsibility of the typeface designer.

The Unicode 5.1 standard, released on 4 April 2008, greatly improved computer support for the early Cyrillic and the modern Church Slavonic language. In Microsoft Windows, the Segoe UI user interface font is notable for having complete support for the archaic Cyrillic letters since Windows 8.

[ citation needed ] Currency signs [ edit ] Some currency signs have derived from Cyrillic letters: The Ukrainian hryvnia sign (₴) is from the cursive minuscule Ukrainian Cyrillic letter He ( г ).

The Russian ruble sign (₽) from the majuscule Р.

The Kyrgyzstani som sign (⃀) from the majuscule С (es) The Kazakhstani tenge sign (₸) from Т The Mongolian tögrög sign (₮) from Т Letterforms and type design [ edit ] The development of Cyrillic letter forms passed directly from the medieval stage to the late Baroque , without a Renaissance phase as in Western Europe . Late Medieval Cyrillic letters (categorized as vyaz' and still found on many icon inscriptions today) show a marked tendency to be very tall and narrow, with strokes often shared between adjacent letters.

Peter the Great , Tsar of Russia, mandated the use of westernized letter forms ( ru ) in the early 18th century.

[ citation needed ] Over time, these were largely adopted in the other languages that use the script. Thus, unlike the majority of modern Greek typefaces that retained their own set of design principles for lower-case letters (such as the placement of serifs , the shapes of stroke ends, and stroke-thickness rules, although Greek capital letters do use Latin design principles), modern Cyrillic types are much the same as modern Latin types of the same typeface family. The development of some Cyrillic computer fonts from Latin ones has also contributed to a visual Latinization of Cyrillic type.

Lowercase forms [ edit ] Letters Ge , De , I , Short I , Em , Te , Tse , Be and Ve in upright (printed) and cursive (handwritten) variants. (Top is set in Georgia type, bottom in Odesa Script.) Cyrillic uppercase and lowercase letter forms are not as differentiated as in Latin typography. Upright Cyrillic lowercase letters are essentially small capitals (with exceptions: Cyrillic ⟨а⟩ , ⟨е⟩ , ⟨і⟩ , ⟨ј⟩ , ⟨р⟩ , and ⟨у⟩ adopted Latin lowercase shapes, lowercase ⟨ф⟩ is typically based on ⟨p⟩ from Latin typefaces, lowercase ⟨б⟩ , ⟨ђ⟩ and ⟨ћ⟩ are traditional handwritten forms), although a good-quality Cyrillic typeface will still include separate small-caps glyphs.

[ 35 ] Cyrillic typefaces, as well as Latin ones, have roman and italic forms (practically all popular modern computer fonts include parallel sets of Latin and Cyrillic letters, where many glyphs, uppercase as well as lowercase, are shared by both). However, the native typeface terminology in most Slavic languages (for example, in Russian) does not use the words "roman" and "italic" in this sense.

[ w ] Instead, the nomenclature follows German naming patterns: [ citation needed ] Alternative variants of lowercase (cursive) Cyrillic letters: Б/б, Д/д, Г/г, И/и, П/п, Т/т, Ш/ш.

Default Russian (Eastern) forms on the left.

Alternate Bulgarian (Western) upright forms in the middle.

Alternate Serbian/Macedonian (Southern) italic forms on the right.

See also: Roman type is called pryamoy shrift ("upright type") – compare with Normalschrift ("regular type") in German Italic type is called kursiv ("cursive") or kursivniy shrift ("cursive type") – from the German word Kursive , meaning italic typefaces and not cursive writing Cursive handwriting is rukopisniy shrift ("handwritten type") – in German: Kurrentschrift or Laufschrift , both meaning literally 'running type' A (mechanically) sloped oblique type of sans-serif faces is naklonniy shrift ("sloped" or "slanted type").

A boldfaced type is called poluzhirniy shrift ("semi-bold type"), because there existed fully boldfaced shapes that have been out of use since the beginning of the 20th century.

Italic and cursive forms [ edit ] Similarly to Latin typefaces, italic and cursive forms of many Cyrillic letters (typically lowercase; uppercase only for handwritten or stylish types) are very different from their upright roman types. In certain cases, the correspondence between uppercase and lowercase glyphs does not coincide in Latin and Cyrillic types: for example, italic Cyrillic ⟨ т ⟩ is the lowercase counterpart of ⟨ Т ⟩ not of ⟨ М ⟩ .

Differences between upright and italic Cyrillic letters of the Russian alphabet ; italic forms significantly different from their upright analogues, or especially confusing to users of a Latin alphabet, are highlighted; also available as a graphical image .

upright а б в г д е ё ж з и й к л м н о п р с т у ф х ц ч ш щ ъ ы ь э ю я italic а б в г д е ё ж з и й к л м н о п р с т у ф х ц ч ш щ ъ ы ь э ю я Note: in some typefaces or styles, ⟨ д ⟩ , i.e. the lowercase italic Cyrillic ⟨д⟩ , may look like Latin ⟨ g ⟩ , and ⟨ т ⟩ , i.e. lowercase italic Cyrillic ⟨т⟩ , may look like small-capital italic ⟨T⟩ .

In Standard Serbian, as well as in Macedonian, [ 36 ] some italic and cursive letters are allowed to be different, to more closely resemble the handwritten letters. The regular (upright) shapes are generally standardized in small caps form.

[ 37 ] Mandatory (blue) and optional (green) italic lowercase variants, alongside unique letters (red), in South-European orthography Russian а б в г д — е ж з и й — к л — м н — о п р с т — у ф х ц ч — ш щ ъ ы ь э ю я Serbian а б в г д ђ е ж з и — ј к л љ м н њ о п р с т ћ у ф х ц ч џ ш — — — — — — — Simulation а δ в ī ɡ ђ е ж з и — ј к л љ м н њ о ū р с ш̄ ћ у ф х ц ч џ ш̱ — — — — — — — Notes: Depending on fonts available, the Serbian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the faux row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems.

In the Bulgarian alphabet , many lowercase letterforms may more closely resemble the cursive forms on the one hand and Latin glyphs on the other hand, e.g. by having an ascender or descender or by using rounded arcs instead of sharp corners.

[ 38 ] Sometimes, uppercase letters may have a different shape as well, e.g. more triangular, Д and Л, like Greek delta Δ and lambda Λ.

Differences between Russian and Bulgarian glyphs of upright Cyrillic lowercase letters; Bulgarian glyphs significantly different from their Russian analogues or different from their italic form are highlighted default а б в г д е ж з и й к л м н о п р с т у ф х ц ч ш щ ъ ь ю я Bulgarian а б в г д е ж з и й к л м н о п р с т у ф х ц ч ш щ ъ ь ю я Simulation а б ϐ ƨ ɡ е ж l ȝ u ŭ k ʌ м н o n р с m у ɸ х u̡ ч ɯ ɯ̡ ъ ƅ lo я Notes: Depending on fonts available, the Bulgarian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the faux row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems; in some cases, such as ж with k -like ascender, no such approximation exists.

Accessing variant forms [ edit ] Computer fonts typically default to the Central/Eastern, Russian letterforms, and require the use of OpenType Layout (OTL) features to display the Western, Bulgarian or Southern, Serbian/Macedonian forms. Depending on the choices made by the (computer) font designer, they may either be automatically activated by the local variant locl feature for text tagged with an appropriate language code , or the author needs to opt-in by activating a stylistic set ss## or character variant cv## feature. These solutions only enjoy partial support and may render with default glyphs in certain software configurations, and the reader may not see the same result as the author intended.

[ 39 ] Cyrillic alphabets [ edit ] Main article: Cyrillic alphabets Among others, Cyrillic is the standard script for writing the following languages: Slavic languages : Belarusian Bulgarian Macedonian Russian Rusyn Serbo-Croatian ( Bosnian , Montenegrin and Serbian ) Ukrainian Non-Slavic languages of Russia : Abaza Adyghe Avar Azerbaijani (in Dagestan ) Bashkir Buryat Chechen Chuvash Erzya Ingush Kabardian Kalmyk Karachay-Balkar Kildin Sami Komi Mari Moksha Nogai Ossetian (in North Ossetia–Alania ) Romani Sakha/Yakut Tatar Tuvan Udmurt Yuit (Yupik) Non-Slavic languages in other countries : Abkhaz Aleut (mostly in church texts) Dungan Kazakh (to be replaced by Latin script by 2031 [ 40 ] ) Kyrgyz Mongolian (to also be written with traditional Mongolian script by 2025 [ 41 ] ) Tajik Tlingit (only in church texts) Turkmen (officially replaced by Latin script) Uzbek (generally replaced by Latin script but still used officially) Yupik (in Alaska ) [ citation needed ] The Cyrillic script has also been used for languages of Alaska, [ 42 ] Slavic Europe (except for Western Slavic and Slovenian ), the Caucasus , the languages of Idel-Ural , Siberia , and the Russian Far East .

The first alphabet derived from Cyrillic was Abur , used for the Komi language .

[ 43 ] Other Cyrillic alphabets include the Molodtsov alphabet for the Komi language and various alphabets for Caucasian languages .

[ 44 ] Usage of Cyrillic versus other scripts [ edit ] Cyrillic Script Monument in Antarctica near the Bulgarian base St. Kliment Ohridski Latin script [ edit ] A number of languages written in a Cyrillic alphabet have also been written in a Latin alphabet , such as Azerbaijani , Uzbek , Serbian , and Romanian (in the Moldavian SSR until 1989 and in the Danubian Principalities until the early 19th century). After the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, some of the former republics officially shifted from Cyrillic to Latin. The transition is complete in most of Moldova (except the breakaway region of Transnistria , where Moldovan Cyrillic is official), Turkmenistan , and Azerbaijan .

Uzbekistan still uses both systems, and Kazakhstan has officially begun a transition from Cyrillic to Latin (scheduled to be complete by 2025). The Russian government has mandated that Cyrillic must be used for all public communications in all federal subjects of Russia , to promote closer ties across the federation. This act was controversial for speakers of many Slavic languages; for others, such as Chechen and Ingush speakers, the law had political ramifications. For example, the separatist Chechen government mandated a Latin script which is still used by many Chechens.

[ citation needed ] Countries with widespread use of the Cyrillic script: Sole official script Co-official with another script (either because the official language is biscriptal, or the state is bilingual) Being replaced with Latin, but is still in official use Legacy script for the official language, or large minority use Cyrillic is not widely used Cyrillic Script in Europe Standard Serbian uses both the Cyrillic and Latin scripts . Cyrillic is nominally the official script of Serbia's administration according to the Serbian constitution; [ 45 ] however, the law does not regulate scripts in standard language, or standard language itself by any means. In practice the scripts are equal, with Latin being used more often in a less official capacity.

[ 46 ] The Zhuang alphabet , used between the 1950s and 1980s in portions of the People's Republic of China, used a mixture of Latin, phonetic, numeral-based, and Cyrillic letters. The non-Latin letters, including Cyrillic, were removed from the alphabet in 1982 and replaced with Latin letters that closely resembled the letters they replaced.

[ 47 ] Romanization [ edit ] Main article: Romanization of Cyrillic There are various systems for romanization of Cyrillic text, including transliteration to convey Cyrillic spelling in Latin letters, and transcription to convey pronunciation .

Standard Cyrillic-to-Latin transliteration systems include: Scientific transliteration , used in linguistics, is based on the Serbo-Croatian Latin alphabet .

The Working Group on Romanization Systems [ 48 ] of the United Nations recommends different systems for specific languages. These are the most commonly used around the world.

ISO 9 :1995, from the International Organization for Standardization.

American Library Association and Library of Congress Romanization tables for Slavic alphabets ( ALA-LC Romanization ), used in North American libraries.

BGN/PCGN Romanization (1947), United States Board on Geographic Names & Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use).

GOST 16876 , a defunct Soviet transliteration standard. Replaced by GOST 7.79-2000 , which is based on ISO 9.

Various informal romanizations of Cyrillic, which adapt the Cyrillic script to Latin and sometimes Greek glyphs for compatibility with small character sets.

See also Romanization of Belarusian , Bulgarian , Kyrgyz , Russian , Macedonian and Ukrainian .

Cyrillization [ edit ] Representing other writing systems with Cyrillic letters is called Cyrillization .

Summary table [ edit ] Slavic Cyrillic letters А A А́ A with acute А̀ A with grave А̂ A with circumflex А̄ A with macron Ӑ A with breve Ӓ A with diaeresis Б Be В Ve Г Ge (Ghe) Ґ Ghe upturn Д De Ђ Dje Ѓ Gje Е Ye Е́ Ye with acute Ѐ Ye with grave Е̂ Ye with circumflex Е̄ Ye with macron Ё Yo Є Ukrainian Ye Є́ Ukrainian Ye with acute Ж Zhe З Ze З́ Zje Ѕ Dze И I І Dotted I І́ Dotted I with acute Ї Yi Ꙇ Iota И́ I with acute Ѝ I with grave И̂ I with circumflex Ӣ I with macron Й Short I Ӥ I with diaeresis Ј Je К Ka Л El Љ Lje М Em Н En Њ Nje О O О́ O with acute О̀ O with grave О̂ O with circumflex О̄ O with macron Ӧ O with diaeresis П Pe Р Er С Es С́ Sje Т Te Ћ Tje Ќ Kje У U У́ U with acute У̀ U with grave У̂ U with circumflex Ӯ U with macron Ў Short U Ӱ U with diaeresis Ф Ef Х Kha Ц Tse Ч Che Џ Dzhe Ш Sha Щ Shcha Ꙏ Neutral Yer Ъ Hard sign (Yer) Ъ̀ Hard sign with grave Ы Yery Ы́ Yery Ь Soft sign (Yeri) Э E Э́ E with acute Ю Yu Ю́ Yu with acute Ю̀ Yu with grave Я Ya Я́ Ya with acute Я̀ Ya with grave Examples of non-Slavic Cyrillic letters (see List of Cyrillic letters for more) А̊ A with ring Ә Schwa Ӛ Schwa with diaeresis Ӕ Ae Ғ Ghayn Ҕ Ge with middle hook Ӻ Ghayn with hook Ӷ Ge with descender Ӂ Zhe with breve Ӝ Zhe with diaeresis Ҙ Dhe Ӡ Abkhazian Dze Ҡ Bashkir Qa Ҟ Ka with stroke Ӊ En with tail Ң En with descender Ӈ En with hook Ҥ En-ge О̆ O with breve Ө Oe Ҩ O-hook Ҏ Er with tick Ҫ The Ҭ Te with descender Ӳ U with double acute Ү Ue Ұ Kazakh Short U Ҳ Kha with descender Ӽ Kha with hook Ӿ Kha with stroke Һ Shha (He) Ҵ Te Tse Ҷ Che with descender Ӌ Khakassian Che Ҹ Che with vertical stroke Ҽ Abkhazian Che Ҍ Semisoft sign Ӏ Palochka Cyrillic letters used in the past Ѣ Yat Ꙗ Iotated A Ѥ Iotated E Ѧ Small yus Ѫ Big yus Ѩ Iotated small yus Ѭ Iotated big yus Ѯ Ksi Ѱ Psi Ꙟ Yn Ѳ Fita Ѵ Izhitsa Ѷ Izhitsa okovy Ҁ Koppa ОУ Uk Ѡ Omega Ѿ Ot Cyrillic alphabets comparison table Early/Reference scripts Greek Α Β Γ Δ Ε Ζ Η Θ Ι Κ Λ Μ Ν Ξ Ο Π Ϙ Ρ Σ Τ Υ Φ Χ Ψ Ω Church Slavonic А Б В Г Д Ѕ Е Ж З И Ѳ І К Л М Н Ѯ О П Ҁ Р С Т У Ф Х Ѱ Ѡ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ѣ Ь Ю Ꙗ Ѥ Ѧ Ѩ Ѫ Ѭ Ѵ Most common shared letters Common А Б В Г Д Е Ж З И Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я South Slavic languages Bulgarian А Б В Г Д Дз Е Ж З И Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Дж Ш Щ Ъ Ь Ю Я Macedonian А Б В Г Д Ѓ Ѕ Е Ж З И Ј К Л Љ М Н Њ О П Р С Т Ќ У Ф Х Ц Ч Џ Ш Serbian А Б В Г Д Ђ Е Ж З И Ј К Л Љ М Н Њ О П Р С Т Ћ У Ф Х Ц Ч Џ Ш Montenegrin А Б В Г Д Ђ Е Ж З З́ И Ј К Л Љ М Н Њ О П Р С С́ Т Ћ У Ф Х Ц Ч Џ Ш East Slavic languages Russian А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Belarusian А Б В Г Ґ Д Дж Дз Е Ё Ж З І Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ў Ф Х Ц Ч Ш ’ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Ukrainian А Б В Г Ґ Д Е Є Йо Ж З И І Ї Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ ’ Ь Ю Я Rusyn А Б В Г Ґ Д Е Є Ё Ж З И І Ї Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Ю Я Iranian languages Kurdish А Б В Г Г' Д Е Ә Ә' Ж З И Й К К' Л М Н О Ӧ П П' Р Р' С Т Т' У Ф Х Һ Һ' Ч Ч' Ш Щ Ь Э Ԛ Ԝ Ossetian А Ӕ Б В Г Гъ Д Дж Дз Е Ё Ж З И Й К Къ Л М Н О П Пъ Р С Т Тъ У Ф Х Хъ Ц Цъ Ч Чъ Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Tajik А Б В Г Ғ Д Е Ё Ж З И Ӣ Й К Қ Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ӯ Ф Х Ҳ Ч Ҷ Ш Ъ Э Ю Я Romance languages Moldovan (Romanian) А Б В Г Д Е Ж Ӂ З И Й К Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Ы Ь Э Ю Я Uralic languages Komi-Permyak А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И І Й К Л М Н О Ӧ П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Meadow Mari А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Л М Н Ҥ О Ӧ П Р С Т У Ӱ Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Hill Mari А Ӓ Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Л М Н О Ӧ П Р С Т У Ӱ Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ӹ Ь Э Ю Я Kildin Sami А Ӓ Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й Ҋ Ј К Л Ӆ М Ӎ Н Ӊ Ӈ О П Р Ҏ С Т У Ф Х Һ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Ҍ Э Ӭ Ю Я Udmurt А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж Ӝ З Ӟ И Ӥ Й К (К̈) Л М Н О Ӧ П Р С Т У Ф Х Ц Ч Ӵ Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Turkic languages Azerbaijani А Б В Г Ғ Д Е Ә Ё Ж З И Ј Й К Ҝ Л М Н О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Ф Х Һ Ц Ч Ҹ Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Bashkir А Б В Г Ғ Д Ҙ Е Ё Ж З И Й К Ҡ Л М Н Ң О Ө П Р С Ҫ Т У Ү Ф Х Һ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ә Ю Я Chuvash А Ӑ Б В Г Д Е Ё Ӗ Ж З И Й К Л М Н О П Р С Ҫ Т У Ӳ Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Kazakh А Ә Б В Г Ғ Д Е Ё Ж З И І Й К Қ Л М Н Ң О Ө П Р С Т У Ұ Ү Ф Х Һ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Kyrgyz А Б Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Л М Н Ң О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Х Ч Ш Ы Э Ю Я Tatar А Ә Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж Җ З И Й К Л М Н Ң О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Ф Х Һ Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Uzbek А Б В Г Ғ Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Қ Л М Н О П Р С Т У Ў Ф Х Ҳ Ч Ш Ъ Э Ю Я Mongolian languages Buryat А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й Л М Н О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Х Һ Ц Ч Ш Ы Ь Э Ю Я Khalkha А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж З И Й К Л М Н О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Kalmyk А Ә Б В Г Һ Д Е Ж Җ З И Й К Л М Н Ң О Ө П Р С Т У Ү Х Ц Ч Ш Ь Э Ю Я Caucasian languages Abkhaz А Б В Г Ҕ Д Дә Џ Е Ҽ Ҿ Ж Жә З Ӡ Ӡә И Й К Қ Ҟ Л М Н О Ҩ П Ҧ Р С Т Тә Ҭ Ҭә У Ф Х Ҳ Ҳә Ц Цә Ҵ Ҵә Ч Ҷ Ш Шә Щ Ы Sino-Tibetan languages Dungan А Б В Г Д Е Ё Ж Җ З И Й К Л М Н Ң Ә О П Р С Т У Ў Ү Ф Х Ц Ч Ш Щ Ъ Ы Ь Э Ю Я Ё in Russian is usually spelled as Е ; Ё is typically printed in texts for learners and in dictionaries, and in word pairs which are differentiated only by that letter ( все – всё ).

[ 49 ] Computer encoding [ edit ] Unicode [ edit ] Main article: Cyrillic script in Unicode As of Unicode version 16.0, Cyrillic letters, including national and historical alphabets, are encoded across several blocks : Cyrillic : U+0400–U+04FF Cyrillic Supplement : U+0500–U+052F Cyrillic Extended-A : U+2DE0–U+2DFF Cyrillic Extended-B : U+A640–U+A69F Cyrillic Extended-C : U+1C80–U+1C8F Cyrillic Extended-D : U+1E030–U+1E08F Phonetic Extensions : U+1D2B, U+1D78 Combining Half Marks : U+FE2E–U+FE2F The characters in the range U+0400 to U+045F are essentially the characters from ISO 8859-5 moved upward by 864 positions. The characters in the range U+0460 to U+0489 are historic letters, no longer used. The characters in the range U+048A to U+052F are additional letters for various languages that are written with Cyrillic script.

Unicode as a general rule does not include accented Cyrillic letters. A few exceptions include: combinations that are considered as separate letters of respective alphabets, like Й , Ў , Ё , Ї , Ѓ , Ќ (as well as many letters of non-Slavic alphabets); two most frequent combinations orthographically required to distinguish homonyms in Bulgarian and Macedonian: Ѐ , Ѝ ; a few Old and New Church Slavonic combinations: Ѷ , Ѿ , Ѽ .

To indicate stressed or long vowels, combining diacritical marks can be used after the respective letter (for example, U+0301 ◌́ COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT : е́ у́ э́ etc.).

Some languages, including Church Slavonic , are still not fully supported.

[ citation needed ] Unicode 5.1, released on 4 April 2008, introduces major changes to the Cyrillic blocks. Revisions to the existing Cyrillic blocks, and the addition of Cyrillic Extended A (2DE0 ... 2DFF) and Cyrillic Extended B (A640 ... A69F), significantly improve support for the early Cyrillic alphabet , Abkhaz , Aleut , Chuvash , Kurdish , and Moksha .

[ 50 ] Other [ edit ] Other character encoding systems for Cyrillic: CP866 – 8-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by Microsoft for use in MS-DOS also known as GOST-alternative. Cyrillic characters go in their native order, with a "window" for pseudographic characters.

ISO/IEC 8859-5 – 8-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by International Organization for Standardization KOI8-R – 8-bit native Russian character encoding. Invented in the USSR for use on Soviet clones of American IBM and DEC computers. The Cyrillic characters go in the order of their Latin counterparts, which allowed the text to remain readable after transmission via a 7-bit line that removed the most significant bit from each byte – the result became a very rough, but readable, Latin transliteration of Cyrillic. Standard encoding of early 1990s for Unix systems and the first Russian Internet encoding.

KOI8-U – KOI8-R with addition of Ukrainian letters.

MIK – 8-bit native Bulgarian character encoding for use in DOS .

Windows-1251 – 8-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by Microsoft for use in Microsoft Windows . The simplest 8-bit Cyrillic encoding – 32 capital chars in native order at 0xc0–0xdf, 32 usual chars at 0xe0–0xff, with rarely used "YO" characters somewhere else. No pseudographics. Former standard encoding in some Linux distributions for Belarusian and Bulgarian, but currently displaced by UTF-8 .

GOST-main.

GB 2312 – Principally simplified Chinese encodings, but there are also the basic 33 Russian Cyrillic letters (in upper- and lower-case).

JIS and Shift JIS – Principally Japanese encodings, but there are also the basic 33 Russian Cyrillic letters (in upper- and lower-case).

Keyboard layouts [ edit ] See also: Keyboard layouts for non-Latin alphabetic scripts Each language has its own standard keyboard layout , adopted from traditional national typewriters . With the flexibility of computer input methods, there are also transliterating or phonetic/homophonic keyboard layouts made for typists who are more familiar with other layouts, like the common English QWERTY keyboard . When practical Cyrillic keyboard layouts are unavailable, computer users sometimes use transliteration (translit) or look-alike (volapuk encoding) to type in languages that are normally written with the Cyrillic alphabet. Potentially, these proxy versions could be transformed programmatically into Cyrillic at a later date.

See also [ edit ] Writing portal Languages portal Cyrillic Alphabet Day Cyrillic digraphs Cyrillic script in Unicode Faux Cyrillic , real or fake Cyrillic letters used to give Latin-alphabet text a Soviet or Russian feel List of Cyrillic digraphs and trigraphs Russian Braille Russian cursive Russian manual alphabet Bulgarian Braille Vladislav the Grammarian Yugoslav Braille Yugoslav manual alphabet Internet top-level domains in Cyrillic [ edit ] gTLDs .мон .бг .қаз .рф .срб .укр .мкд .бел Notes [ edit ] ^ The Serbian language can be written in both Cyrillic and Latin script. Only Cyrillic script is used in official documents.

^ Two of the three official languages in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bosnian and Serbian, can be written in Cyrillic.

^ Kazakh language will be transitioned to a Latin script from 2023 to 2031. Russian, the co-official language in Kazakhstan, will continue to be written in Cyrillic.

^ Cyrillic is used co-officially alongside the Mongolian script .

^ The Montenegrin language, the official language of Montenegro, is written in Latin and Cyrillic.

^ North Macedonia has two official languages, Macedonian, which is written in Cyrillic, and Albanian, written in Latin.

^ Serbian, one of the two official languages in Kosovo, can be written in Cyrillic.

^ Turkmenistan has one official language, Turkmen, which is written in Latin. The daily official newspaper is published in both Turkmen ( Türkmenistan ) [ 2 ] and Russian ( Нейтральный Туркменистан ) .

[ 3 ] ^ Variant form: E.

^ Variant  forms: Ƨ, Ѕ.

^ Variant  form: З.

^ Early form: Η, which later evolved into И.

^ Variant form: І.

^ Early form: Ν, which later evolved into Н.

^ Variant form: Ѻ.

^ Variant forms: ОѴ, Ꙋ.

^ Variant forms: Ꙍ, Ѽ.

^ Variant forms: ЪІ, ЪИ, ЬЇ, Ы, ЬИ.

^ Variant form: Ꙕ.

^ Variant form: Ꙛ.

^ Variant form: Ꙙ.

^ Variant form: Ꙝ.

^ The Russian name ital'yanskiy shrift (Italian type) refers to a particular typeface family, whereas rimskiy shrift (roman type) is just a synonym for Latin type, Latin alphabet.

Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Auty, R.

Handbook of Old Church Slavonic, Part II: Texts and Glossary.

1977.

^ "Gazetler | TDNG" .

metbugat.gov.tm .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 March 2021 .

^ "Gazetler | TDNG" .

metbugat.gov.tm .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 March 2021 .

^ Oldest alphabet found in Egypt . BBC. 1999-11-15. Retrieved 2015-01-14.

^ "Cyrillic" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/OED/1142284800 . Retrieved 15 April 2025 .

^ "Cyrillic" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 15 April 2025 .

^ List of countries by population ^ Orban, Leonard (24 May 2007).

"Cyrillic, the third official alphabet of the EU, was created by a truly multilingual European" (PDF) .

European Union .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 August 2014 .

^ Columbia Encyclopedia , Sixth Edition. 2001–05, s.v. "Cyril and Methodius, Saints"; Encyclopædia Britannica , Encyclopædia Britannica Incorporated, Warren E. Preece – 1972, p. 846, s.v., "Cyril and Methodius, Saints" and "Eastern Orthodoxy, Missions ancient and modern"; Encyclopedia of World Cultures , David H. Levinson, 1991, p. 239, s.v., "Social Science"; Eric M. Meyers, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Archaeology in the Near East , p. 151, 1997; Lunt, Slavic Review , June 1964, p. 216; Roman Jakobson, Crucial problems of Cyrillo-Methodian Studies ; Leonid Ivan Strakhovsky, A Handbook of Slavic Studies , p. 98; V. Bogdanovich, History of the ancient Serbian literature , Belgrade, 1980, p. 119.

^ Dvornik, Francis (1956).

The Slavs: Their Early History and Civilization . Boston: American Academy of Arts and Sciences. p.

179 .

The Psalter and the Book of Prophets were adapted or "modernized" with special regard to their use in Bulgarian churches and it was in this school that the Glagolitic script was replaced by the so-called Cyrillic writing, which was more akin to the Greek uncial, simplified matters considerably and is still used by the Orthodox Slavs.

^ a b Curta (2006) , pp. 221–222.

^ Hussey, J. M.; Louth, Andrew (2010).

"The Orthodox Church in the Byzantine Empire" .

Oxford History of the Christian Church . Oxford University Press. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0-19-161488-0 .

^ Bidwell, Charles Everett (1967).

Alphabets of the Modern Slavic Languages . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh. p. 4.

Cyrillic was apparently adopted by the followers of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria (where they had retired at the invitation of the Czar of the Bulgars as a more favorable field for their activities, after encountering opposition from western oriented missionaries in Moravia).

^ MacCulloch, Diarmaid (2020).

A History of Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years . London: The Folio Society.

Cyrillic ... in reference to the monastic name he adopted right at the end of his life, Cyril. That was an adroit piece of homage ...

^ "Провежда се международна конференция в гр. Опака за св. Антоний от Крепчанския манастир" [An international conference is being held in the town of Opaka for St. Anthony of the Krepchan Monastery]. 15 October 2021.

Another inscription found by Popkonstantinov during the survey of the monastery speaks of the time of its creation. It consists of nine lines and has come down to us much damaged. 59 letters are saved. The first three lines are readable. What is preserved of him reads: "In the year 921, in the month of October, the servant of God Anton died..." ^ a b Paul Cubberley (1996) "The Slavic Alphabets". In Daniels and Bright, eds.

The World's Writing Systems.

Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-507993-0 .

^ Columbia Encyclopedia , Sixth Edition. 2001–05, s.v. "Cyril and Methodius, Saints"; Encyclopædia Britannica , Encyclopædia Britannica Incorporated, Warren E. Preece – 1972, p. 846, s.v., "Cyril and Methodius, Saints" and "Eastern Orthodoxy, Missions ancient and modern"; Encyclopedia of World Cultures , David H. Levinson, 1991, p. 239, s.v., "Social Science"; Eric M. Meyers, The Oxford Encyclopedia of Archaeology in the Near East , p. 151, 1997; Lunt, Slavic Review , June, 1964, p. 216; Roman Jakobson, Crucial problems of Cyrillo-Methodian Studies ; Leonid Ivan Strakhovsky, A Handbook of Slavic Studies , p. 98; V. Bogdanovich, History of the ancient Serbian literature , Belgrade, 1980, p. 119.

^ The Columbia Encyclopaedia, Sixth Edition. 2001–05, O.Ed. Saints Cyril and Methodius "Cyril and Methodius, Saints) 869 and 884, respectively, "Greek missionaries, brothers, called Apostles to the Slavs and fathers of Slavonic literature." ^ Encyclopædia Britannica, Major alphabets of the world, Cyrillic and Glagolitic alphabets , 2008, O.Ed. "The two early Slavic alphabets, the Cyrillic and the Glagolitic, were invented by St. Cyril, or Constantine (c. 827–869), and St. Methodii (c. 825–884). These men from Thessaloniki who became apostles to the southern Slavs, whom they converted to Christianity." ^ Hollingsworth, P. A. (1991). "Constantine the Philosopher". In Kazhdan, Alexander (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press. p. 507.

ISBN 0-19-504652-8 .

Constantine (Cyril) and his brother Methodius were the sons of the droungarios Leo and Maria, who may have been a Slav.

^ Lunt, Horace G. (January 1987). "On the relationship of old Church Slavonic to the written language of early Rus".

Russian Linguistics .

11 (2): 133– 162.

doi : 10.1007/BF00242073 .

S2CID 166319427 .

^ Schenker, Alexander (1995).

The Dawn of Slavic . Yale University Press. pp.

185– 186, 189– 190.

^ Lunt, Horace (2001).

Old Church Slavonic Grammar . Mouton de Gruyter. pp.

3 –4.

ISBN 9783110162844 .

^ Wien, Lysaght (1983).

Old Church Slavonic (Old Bulgarian)-Middle Greek-Modern English dictionary . Verlag Bruder Hollinek.

^ Benjamin W. Fortson.

Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction , p. 374.

^ Balić, Smail (1978).

Die Kultur der Bosniaken, Supplement I: Inventar des bosnischen literarischen Erbes in orientalischen Sprachen . Vienna: Adolf Holzhausens, Vienna. pp.

49– 50, 111.

^ Algar, Hamid (1995).

The Literature of the Bosnian Muslims: a Quadrilingual Heritage . Kuala Lumpur: Nadwah Ketakwaan Melalui Kreativiti. pp.

254– 268.

^ "Srećko M. Džaja vs. Ivan Lovrenović – polemika o kulturnom identitetu BiH" .

Ivan Lovrenović (in Croatian). Polemics appeared between Srećko M. Džaja & Ivan Lovrenović in Zagreb's biweekly "Vijenac", later in whole published in Journal of Franciscan theology in Sarajevo, "Bosna franciscana" No.42. 2014. Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ Iliev, Ivan G. (2013).

"Short history of the Cyrillic alphabet" .

International Journal of Russian Studies (2) . Retrieved 4 July 2016 .

^ Yefimov, Vladimir (2002).

"Civil Type and Kis Cyrillic" . In Berry, John D. (ed.).

Language Culture Type: International Type Design in the Age of Unicode . New York City: Graphis Press.

ISBN 978-1932026016 .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2017 .

^ "Bdinski Zbornik[manuscript]" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 26 August 2020 .

^ А. Н. Стеценко.

Хрестоматия по Старославянскому Языку , 1984.

^ Cubberley, Paul.

The Slavic Alphabets , 1996.

^ Lunt, Horace G.

Old Church Slavonic Grammar, Seventh Edition , 2001.

^ Bringhurst (2002) writes: "in Cyrillic, the difference between normal lower case and small caps is more subtle than it is in the Latin or Greek alphabets" (p. 32) and "in most Cyrillic faces, the lower case is close in color and shape to Latin small caps" (p. 107).

^ Pravopis na makedonskiot jazik (PDF) . Skopje: Institut za makedonski jazik Krste Misirkov. 2017. p. 3.

ISBN 978-608-220-042-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Peshikan, Mitar; Jerković, Jovan; Pižurica, Mato (1994).

Pravopis srpskoga jezika . Beograd: Matica Srpska. p. 42.

ISBN 978-86-363-0296-5 .

^ "Cyrillicsly: Two Cyrillics: a critical history I" .

^ "Cyrillic script variations and the importance of localisation - Fontshare.com" . 24 September 2020. Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2021 .

^ "Alphabet soup as Kazakh leader orders switch from Cyrillic to Latin letters" .

The Guardian . Reuters. 26 October 2017.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 30 October 2017 .

^ The Times (20 March 2020).

"Mongolia to restore traditional alphabet by 2025" .

News.MN . Retrieved 8 June 2020 .

^ "Alaskan Orthodox texts" .

All Saints of North America Orthodox Church . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 20 June 2011 .

^ Iliev, Ivan G.

"SHORT History of the Cyrillic ALPHABET" .

International Journal of Russian Studies . Retrieved 4 February 2023 .

^ "Komi language and alphabet" .

omniglot.com . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ "Serbian constitution" . Archived from the original on 23 July 2011 . Retrieved 12 March 2014 .

^ "Serbian signs of the times are not in Cyrillic" .

Christian Science Monitor . 29 May 2008.

^ Grey, Alexandra (14 December 2021), "8 How Standard Zhuang has Met with Market Forces", Language Standardisation and Language Variation in Multilingual Contexts , Multilingual Matters, pp.

163– 182, doi : 10.21832/9781800411562-011 , hdl : 10453/150285 , ISBN 978-1-80041-156-2 , S2CID 245301540 .

^ " UNGEGN Working Group on Romanization Systems " .

^ Лопатин, В. В., ed. (2009).

"Употребление буквы ё в текстах разного назначения" [Rules of Russian orthography and punctuation online. Usage of the letter ё in texts of varied purposes].

Правила русской орфографии и пунктуации онлайн (in Russian) . Retrieved 4 September 2023 .

^ "IOS Universal Multiple-Octet Coded Character Set" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 June 2012 .

References [ edit ] Bringhurst, Robert (2002).

The Elements of Typographic Style . 2.5. Vancouver: Hartley & Marks. pp.

262– 264.

ISBN 0-88179-133-4 .

Curta, Florin (2006).

Southeastern Europe in the Middle Ages, 500–1250 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-81539-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Isailović, Neven G.; Krstić, Aleksandar R. (2015). "Serbian Language and Cyrillic Script as a Means of Diplomatic Literacy in South Eastern Europe in 15th and 16th Centuries".

Literacy Experiences concerning Medieval and Early Modern Transylvania . Cluj-Napoca: George Bariţiu Institute of History. pp.

185– 195.

Nezirović, M. (1992).

Jevrejsko-španjolska književnost [ Jewish-Spanish literature ]. Sarajevo: Svjetlost.

[cited in Šmid, 2002] Prostov, Eugene Victor (1931). "Origins of Russian Printing".

Library Quarterly .

1 (1 (January)): 255– 77.

doi : 10.1086/612949 .

S2CID 144864717 .

[ when?

] Šmid, Katja (2002).

"Los problemas del estudio de la lengua sefardí" [The problems of studying the Sephardic language] (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2008.

in Verba Hispanica . Vol. X. Liubliana: Facultad de Filosofía y Letras de la Universidad de Liubliana.

ISSN 0353-9660 .

.

'The Lives of St. Tsurho and St. Strahota', Bohemia, 1495, Vatican Library Ammon, Philipp (2016).

"Tractatus slavonicus (in: Sjani (Thoughts) )" (PDF) .

Georgian Scientific Journal of Literary Theory and Comparative Literature (17): 248– 256. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 July 2020 . Retrieved 16 September 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cyrillic alphabet .

Look up Appendix:Cyrillic script in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Cyrillic Charset Soup overview and history of Cyrillic charsets.

Transliteration of Non-Roman Scripts , a collection of writing systems and transliteration tables History and development of the Cyrillic alphabet Cyrillic Alphabets of Slavic Languages review of Cyrillic charsets in Slavic Languages.

data entry in Old Cyrillic / Стара Кирилица (archived 22 February 2014) Cyrillic and its Long Journey East – NamepediA Blog , article about the Cyrillic script Vladimir M. Alpatov (24 January 2013).

"Latin Alphabet for the Russian Language" .

Soundcloud (Podcast). The University of Edinburgh . Retrieved 28 January 2016 .

Unicode collation charts —including Cyrillic letters, sorted by shape v t e Cyrillic script Italics indicate that the language no longer uses Cyrillic Cyrillic alphabets Early Abkhaz Aleut Azerbaijani Bashkir Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Crimean Tatar Dargwa Even Evenki Gagauz Kazakh Khakas Kildin Sámi Komi Kyrgyz Lezgin Macedonian Mansi Mongolian Montenegrin Mordvinic Nivkh Nogai Polish Romanian transitional Moldovan Russian Serbian Tat Tatar Tlingit Turkmen Udege Udmurt Ukrainian Uyghur Uzbek Yakut Siberian Yupik Chaplino dialect Naukan Yupik Cyrillization of Arabic Chinese French German Greek Japanese Korean Lithuanian Polish Letters of the Cyrillic script Primary letters Аа Бб Вв Гг Дд Ее Жж Зз Ии Іі Йй Кк Лл Мм Нн Оо Пп Рр Сс Тт Уу Фф Хх Цц Чч Шш Щщ Ъъ Ыы Ьь Ээ Юю Яя Other Slavic letters Ґґ Ђђ Ѓѓ Ёё Єє З́з́ Ѕѕ Її Јј Љљ Њњ С́с́ Ћћ Ќќ Ўў Џџ Non-Slavic letters А̊ А̃ Ӓ̄ Ӕ Ә Ә̃ Ӛ В̌ Ԝ Г̌ Г̊ Ҕ Ғ Ӻ Ғ̌ Ғ̊ Ӷ/Г̡ Д́ Д̌ Д̆ Ӗ Е̃ Ё̄ Є̈ Ԑ Җ Ӝ Ӂ Ҙ Ӟ З̌ Ӡ И̃ И̇ Ҋ Қ Ӄ Ҡ Ҟ Ҝ К̊ Қ̊ Ԛ Л́ Ӆ Ԯ Ԓ Ӎ ᵸ Н́ Ӊ Ԩ Ң Ӈ Ҥ О̆ О̃ Ө Ө̄ Ө̆ Ӫ Ԥ Р̌ Ҏ С̌ Ҫ Т́ Т̌ Ҭ Ᲊ Ӱӱ У̃ Ӳ У̊ Ұ Ү Ү́ Х̑ Х̌ Ҳ Ӽ Х̊ Ӿ Ӿ̊ Һ Ԧ Ҵ Ҷ Ҷ̣ Ӵ Ӌ Ҹ Ч̇ Ч̣ Ҽ Ҿ Ы̆ Ы̄ Ӹ Ҍ Ҩ Э̆ Э̄ Э̇ Ӭ Ӭ́ Ӭ̄ Ю̆ Ю̈ Ю̄ Я̆ Я̄ Ӏ Slavic archaic letters Ꙣꙣ Ꙉꙉ Ꙥꙥ Ꙧꙧ Ҥҥ O variants Ꙋꙋ Ѡѡ Ѿѿ Ѣѣ Ѣ̈ѣ̈ Я̈я̈ Ꙗꙗ Ѥѥ Ѫѫ Ѧѧ Ѯѯ Ѱѱ Ѳѳ Ѵѵ Ҁҁ Non-Slavic archaic letters А̨ Б̣ Г̧ Г̄ Г̆г̆ Д̨ Ԁ Ԃ Ꚁ Ꚅ Ԅ Ԇ Ꚉ Ԫ Ꚃ Ꚕꚕ Ј̵ К̀ К̄ К̂ Ԟ Ԡ Ԉ Ԕ Ԋ Ԣ Ҧ Ԗ Ԍ Ԏ Ꚋ Ꚍ Х̾ Ꚏ Ꚑ Ԭ Ꚓ Ꚗ Ԙ Ꙟ Archaic diacritics palatalization mark (◌҄) pokrytie (◌҇) titlo (◌҃) Combinations of Cyrillic letters Digraphs Multigraphs Glagolitic script Cyrillic numerals Scientific transliteration of Cyrillic v t e Types of writing systems Overview History of writing Grapheme Lists Writing systems undeciphered inventors constructed Languages by writing system / by first written accounts Types Abjads Numerals Aramaic Hatran Arabic Elifba Egyptian hieroglyphs Elymaic Hebrew Ashuri Cursive Rashi Solitreo Tifinagh Mandaic Manichaean Nabataean Ancient North Arabian Pahlavi Book Inscriptional Inscriptional Parthian Psalter Pegon Phoenician Paleo-Hebrew Pitman shorthand Proto-Sinaitic Punic Samaritan South Arabian Zabur Musnad Sogdian Syriac ʾEsṭrangēlā Serṭā Maḏnḥāyā Teeline Shorthand Ugaritic Abugidas Brahmic Northern Bengali–Assamese Bhaiksuki Brahmi script Devanagari Dogri Gujarati Gupta Gurmukhi Kaithi Kalinga Khema Khojki Khudabadi Laṇḍā Lepcha Mahajani Marchen Meitei Modi Multani Nagari Nandinagari Nepalese scripts Bhujimol Golmol Himmol Kummol Kvemmol Pachumol Pracalit Ranjana Tamyig Tirhuta Limbu Litumol Odia Karani ʼPhags-pa Sharada Siddhaṃ Soyombo Sylheti Nagri Takri Tibetan Uchen Umê Tocharian Zanabazar square Southern Ahom Balinese Batak Baybayin Bhattiprolu Buda Buhid Chakma Cham Fakkham Grantha Goykanadi Hanunoo Javanese Kadamba Kannada Karen Kawi Khmer Khom Thai Kulitan Lanna Langdi Lao Leke Lontara Bilang-bilang Makasar Malayalam Old Maldivian Dhives Akuru Eveyla Akuru Mon–Burmese Pallava Pyu Saurashtra Shan Sinhala Sukhothai Sundanese Old Sundanese Tagbanwa Tai Le New Tai Lue Tai Noi Tai Tham Tai Viet Lai Tay Tamil Tamil-Brahmi Tanchangya Telugu Thai Tigalari Ulu scripts Incung Lampung Lembak Ogan Pasemah Rejang Serawai Vatteluttu Kolezhuthu Malayanma Others Bharati Boyd's syllabic shorthand Canadian syllabics Blackfoot Déné syllabics Dham Fox I Geʽez Gunjala Gondi Japanese Braille Sarati Jenticha Kharosthi Mandombe Masaram Gondi Meroitic Miao Mwangwego Pahawh Hmong Sorang Sompeng Tengwar Thaana Thomas Natural Shorthand Warang Citi Mwangwego Rma Alphabets Linear Adlam Ariyaka Armenian Avestan Pazend Avoiuli Bassa Vah Carian Caucasian Albanian Cirth Coelbren Coorgi–Cox alphabet Coptic Cyrillic Serbian Early Deseret Duployan shorthand Chinook Eclectic shorthand Elbasan Enochian Etruscan Formosan Fox II Fraser Gabelsberger shorthand Gadabuursi Garay alphabet Georgian Asomtavruli Nuskhuri Mkhedruli Veso Bey Glagolitic Gothic Gregg shorthand Greek ( Archaic ) Greco-Iberian alphabet Hangul Hanifi Sunuwar Kaddare Kayah Li Klingon Latin Beneventan Blackletter Carolingian minuscule Fraktur Gaelic Insular IPA Kurrent Merovingian Sigla Sütterlin Tironian notes Visigothic Luo Lycian Lydian Manchu Medefaidrin Molodtsov Mru Mundari Bani N'Ko Ogham Ol Chiki Old Hungarian Old Italic Old Permic Orkhon Old Uyghur Mongolian Evenki Galik alphabet Manchu Oirat Vagindra Ol Onal Osage Osmanya Pau Cin Hau Phrygian Pisidian Runic Anglo-Saxon Cipher Dalecarlian Elder Futhark Younger Futhark Gothic Marcomannic Medieval Staveless Shavian Sidetic Sorang Sompeng Sunuwar Tifinagh Todhri Tolong Siki Vellara Visible Speech Vithkuqi Wancho Warang Citi Yezidi Zaghawa Non-linear Braille Maritime flags Telegraph code New York Point Flag semaphore Moon type Ideograms Adinkra Aztec Blissymbols Dongba Ersu Shaba Emoji Isotype Kaidā Miꞌkmaw Mixtec New Epoch Notation Painting Nsibidi Anishinaabewibii'iganan Olmec Siglas poveiras Testerian Yerkish Zapotec Logograms Chinese family of scripts Chinese characters Simplified Traditional Oracle bone script Bronze scripts Seal script large small bird-worm Hanja Kanji Chữ Nôm Sawndip Bowen Chinese-influenced Jurchen Khitan large script Sui Tangut Cuneiform Akkadian Assyrian Elamite Hittite Luwian Sumerian Other logosyllabic Anatolian Bagam Cretan Isthmian Maya Proto-Elamite Tenevil Yi (Classical) Logoconsonantal Demotic Hieratic Hieroglyphs Numerals Hindu-Arabic Abjad Attic (Greek) Muisca Roman Other Sitelen Pona Semi-syllabaries Full Linear Elamite Celtiberian Iberian Northeastern Southeastern Khom Dunging Redundant Espanca script Pahawh Hmong Khitan small script Southwest Paleohispanic Bopomofo Quốc Âm Tân Tự Sign languages ASLwrite SignWriting si5s Stokoe notation Syllabaries Afaka Bamum Bété Byblos Canadian Aboriginal Cherokee Cypriot Cypro-Minoan Ditema tsa Dinoko Eskayan Geba Great Lakes Algonquian Iban Idu Kana Hiragana Katakana Man'yōgana Hentaigana Sōgana Jindai moji Kikakui Kpelle Linear B Linear Elamite Lisu Loma Nüshu Nwagu Aneke script Old Persian cuneiform Sumerian Vai Woleai Yi Yugtun v t e Braille ⠃⠗⠁⠊⠇⠇⠑ Braille cell 1829 braille International uniformity ASCII braille Unicode braille patterns Braille scripts French-ordered Albanian Azerbaijani Cantonese Catalan Chinese (mainland Mandarin) (largely reassigned) Czech Dutch English ( Unified English ) Esperanto French German Ghanaian Guarani Hawaiian Hungarian Iñupiaq IPA Irish Italian Latvian Lithuanian Luxembourgish (extended to 8-dot) Maltese Māori Navajo Nigerian Philippine Polish Portuguese Romanian Samoan Slovak South African Spanish Taiwanese Mandarin (largely reassigned) Turkish Vietnamese Welsh Yugoslav Zambian Nordic family Estonian Faroese Icelandic Scandinavian Danish Finnish Greenlandic Northern Sámi Norwegian Swedish Russian lineage family i.e.

Cyrillic -mediated scripts Belarusian Bulgarian Kazakh Kyrgyz Mongolian Russian Tatar Ukrainian Egyptian lineage family i.e.

Arabic -mediated scripts Arabic Persian Urdu (Pakistan) Indian lineage family i.e.

Bharati Braille Devanagari (Hindi / Marathi / Nepali) Bengali (Bangla / Assamese) Gujarati Kannada Malayalam Odia Punjabi Sinhala Tamil Telugu Urdu (India) Other scripts Amharic Armenian Burmese Dzongkha (Bhutanese) Georgian Greek Hebrew Inuktitut (reassigned vowels) Khmer Thai and Lao (Japanese vowels) Tibetan Reordered Algerian Braille (obsolete) Frequency-based American Braille (obsolete) Independent Chinese semi-syllabaries Cantonese Mainland Chinese Mandarin Taiwanese Mandarin Two-cell Chinese (Shuangpin) Japanese Korean Eight-dot Luxembourgish Kanji Gardner–Salinas braille codes (GS8) Symbols in braille Braille music Canadian currency marks Computer Braille Code Gardner–Salinas braille codes (science; GS8/GS6) International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) Nemeth braille code Braille technology Braille e-book Braille embosser Braille translator Braille watch Mountbatten Brailler Optical braille recognition Perforation Perkins Brailler Refreshable braille display Slate and stylus Braigo People Louis Braille Charles Barbier Róża Czacka Valentin Haüy Harris Mowbray Thakur Vishva Narain Singh Sabriye Tenberken William Bell Wait Organisations Braille Institute of America Braille Without Borders Japan Braille Library National Braille Association Blindness organizations Schools for the blind American Printing House for the Blind Other tactile alphabets Decapoint Moon type New York Point Night writing Vibratese Related topics Accessible publishing Braille literacy RoboBraille Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Internet Encyclopedia of Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkqnk
Cached time: 20250817211812
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.643 seconds
Real time usage: 1.936 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20291/1000000
Revision size: 96245/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 499514/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 48789/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 23/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 323117/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.757/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24181119/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1417.155      1 -total
 20.33%  288.176      2 Template:Reflist
 18.84%  267.021      1 Template:Infobox_writing_system
 18.35%  260.106      1 Template:Infobox
 10.44%  147.922     17 Template:Cite_web
  6.19%   87.725      7 Template:Langx
  5.72%   81.116     17 Template:Cite_book
  5.56%   78.856      8 Template:Citation_needed
  4.98%   70.641    104 Template:Script
  4.95%   70.113      9 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5639:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817211812 and revision id 1306157523. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyrillic_script&oldid=1306157523 " Categories : Cyrillic script Bulgarian inventions Eastern Europe Central Asia Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Russian-language text CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from November 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Scripts with ISO 15924 four-letter codes Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Pages with Bulgarian IPA Articles containing Macedonian-language text Pages with Macedonian IPA Pages with Russian IPA Articles containing Serbian-language text Pages with Serbian IPA Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Pages with Ukrainian IPA Pages with plain IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 07:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyrillic script 170 languages Add topic

