Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Before the Goryeo period 1.2 Joseon Dynasty 1.3 Korea under Japanese rule 1.4 United States Army Military Government in Korea and Republic of Korea 1.4.1 National Fire Service 1.4.2 Local Fire Service 2 Fire service structure Toggle Fire service structure subsection 2.1 Central Fire Service 2.2 Local Fire Service 2.2.1 City Fire Service 2.2.2 Provincial Fire Service 2.3 Lack of Fire Stations 3 Fire officers Toggle Fire officers subsection 3.1 Rank 3.2 Problem of disease 3.3 Manpower shortage problem 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fire services in South Korea 3 languages Deutsch 한국어 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Logo of the Korea Fire Service The Fire Service in South Korea (or Korea Fire Service ) is an organization to prevent danger, to protect the Republic of Korea people's lives and property, fire suppression and rescue, relief of emergency patients, prevention of disaster, disaster response, and providing recovery after a disaster occurs.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Fire fighters in South Korea are Fire officers, members of an obligatory fire-fighting unit, and volunteer fire fighters .

[ 1 ] Regarding fire fighting activities, the Framework Act on Fire Service, rescue and emergency activities are regulated by Act of 119 Rescue and Emergency Medical Services. The national fire department is the responsibility of the Ministry of Public Safety and Security, and the local fire department is in charge of the city and circuit fire headquarters.

[ 3 ] There are multiple criticisms such as the problem of the command system, the status of the firefighting organization, and the poor treatment of the firefighters, although a plurality of organizations are set up to carry out firefighting activities.

History [ edit ] Before the Goryeo period [ edit ] Fires in the Three Kingdoms of Korea were rather common. According to the Samguk sagi , fires occurred at the temple Hwangnyongsa in the 2nd, 6th, and 8th years of the reign of King Munmu . Furthermore, there are some records indicating that arson happened during this period as well.

[ 4 ] During the Goryeo period, a national-level firefighting system started to emerge. Whilst no specialized organization existed at the time, fires were still controlled and prevented via the 'Gold Coin System' (금화제도 [ verification needed ] ).

[ 5 ] This system worked on a basis of punishment and insurance. Any officials found guilty of arson (or otherwise causing a fire) faced immediate dismissal. If a fire destroyed company property, the perpetrator would be sentenced to three years of imprisonment. Victims of the fire would receive compensation if their house was destroyed by the fire or if they were injured by the fire.

[ 4 ] [ verification needed ] Local governments appointed one official to be in charge of these funds - initially with little oversight. However, following a fire during the 20th year of Munjong of Goryeo 's reign, these officials were subject occasional inspections by the Royal Inspectorate to ensure that the funds had not been misused. If the appointed individuals could not be found or were otherwise neglecting their duty, they were liable to face imprisonment or further punishment.

[ 4 ] [ verification needed ] Whilst this successfully did prevent some fires, the Goryeo era still suffered more fires than previous eras, as a consequence of rapid urbanization (with booming urban populations living in larger, densely-packed, flammable buildings providing ample opportunities for fires to start and spread).

[ 4 ] Joseon Dynasty [ edit ] Training of the court fire brigade of the 1900s The fire fighting system of the Joseon period was established in 1426 (Sejong 8th year), the first firefighting organization specialized in the Korean Peninsula was set up under the salary, and began taking charge of the fire protection work.

[ 6 ] Initially, the forbidden army suppressed the fire, renamed the fire battalion as Ghum-Hwa(금화,禁火. fire fighter) in the dynasty era and working for 24 hours.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Korea under Japanese rule [ edit ] Fire department in the Japanese emperor's fortune occupation is responsible for the Department of Protection or Security Department of the Governor-General of Korea . In the 1910s, firefighters were placed at the police office in Seoul and other major cities. They organized firefighting groups and arranged firefighters. In 1922, the Gyeongseong firefighting group was rebuilt by the Gyeongseong fire house, and in 1925, the first fire station of the Gyeongseong fire station rewrote.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] United States Army Military Government in Korea and Republic of Korea [ edit ] National Fire Service [ edit ] In 1950 the National Fire Department of the Security Bureau was established, but in the same year it was reduced to being a directorate of the security department, and in 1955 the safety and protection department in charge of the fire department was in charge of the security department together with the guard department guard. The fire department was installed again in 1961 and was in charge of fire fighting work in the fire department of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Security Department of the Internal Affairs Department until 1971. In 1975 the civil defense fund law came into force and the Ministry became responsible for civil defense affairs, in which the NFD was partly responsible.

[ 5 ] Since then, the National Emergency Management Agency was established in 2004 after the fire accident of the Daegu subway and the typhoon, [ 9 ] but was dismantled by the Sinking of MV Sewol in 2014 and was transferred to the Ministry of Public Safety and Security. In 2017, on the basis of the Central Fire Service, the National Fire Agency was established as the country's singular firefighting service.

Local Fire Service [ edit ] In 1945, the fire department was established in the local government police department during the US military rule. In 1946, the Fire Fire Defense Committee and the municipal fire department were established, the Fire Department was established in 1947 and it was autonomous under the Ministry of Commerce, but in 1948 belonged to the state police administration regime. The fire department was established in Seoul and Busan in 1972, and in 1975, it was responsible for firefighting affairs in the fire department of the Civil affairs administration of each circuit. Since 1976 the mayor and county guard were in charge of firefighting work only in areas where fire stations were not established, [ 5 ] but in 1992 the circuit Fire headquarters was established and reached the present.

[ 10 ] Fire service structure [ edit ] Gyeonggi Provincial Fire and Rescue Services The firefighting organization of the Republic of Korea consists of the National Fire Agency under the Ministry of Interior and Security and the city or circuit firefighting headquarters. Under the NFA's administrative supervision there are National 119 Rescue Headquarters and a National Fire Service Academy , and under the city or circuit Firefight Headquarters there are fire stations and local fire academies. The NFA is responsible to the central government, while the city or county fire headquarters is managed by the local government respectively.

Central Fire Service [ edit ] National Fire Agency National 119 Rescue Headquarters [ ko ] Local Fire Service [ edit ] City Fire Service [ edit ] Seoul Fire Services Busan Fire Safety Headquarters [ ko ] Daegu Fire Department [ ko ] Incheon Fire Department [ ko ] Gwangju Fire Department [ ko ] Daejeon Fire Department [ ko ] Sejong Fire Department [ ko ] Ulsan Fire Department [ ko ] Changwon Fire Service Headquarters [ ko ] Provincial Fire Service [ edit ] Gyeonggi Disaster and Safety Headquarters [ ko ] Gyeonggi Northern Fire Headquarters [ ko ] Gangwon Fire Headquarters [ ko ] Chungbuk Fire Service Headquarter [ ko ] Chungnam Fire Service Headquarter [ ko ] Jeonbuk Fire Service [ ko ] Jeonnam Fire Service [ ko ] Gyeongbuk Fire Service Headquarters [ ko ] Gyeongsangnam-do Fire Department [ ko ] Jeju Fire Safety Headquarters [ ko ] Lack of Fire Stations [ edit ] Although it is in principle to set up one fire station in one city, county, or ward, [ 11 ] it was not protected, and as a result of the Fire headquarters in Gangwon Province analyzing fire life damage, there is a significant difference in death rate depending on the presence or absence of a fire station and insist on the necessity of establishing a fire station. However, a budget of about 7 billion won is consumed for establishing one fire station, and in municipalities with poor financial autonomy passively responding to the establishment of a fire station.

[ 12 ] Fire officers [ edit ] Firefighters extinguishing the flames during the 2008 Namdaemun fire .

The firefighters of the Republic of Korea are divided into 119 Fire Fighting Corps, 119 Rescue Squad, 119 Ambulance Corps by their work.

Rank [ edit ] Rank insignia of Fire Sub-deputy Chief Rank insignia of Fire Captain Rank insignia of Probationary Firefighter It can be divided into 11 classes of national workers and 10 classes of regional workers.

[ 13 ] Ranks: General Fire Marshal Fire Marshal Deputy Fire Marshal Major Fire Marshal Fire Chief Assistant Fire Chief Fire Captain Fire Lieutenant Senior Fire Sergeant Fire Sergeant Firefighter Acting Firefighter Problem of disease [ edit ] South Korean firefighters work for about 84 hours a week, [ 14 ] and there is little support for treatment of post-traumatic stress disorder .

[ 15 ] Indeed, the fire fighter with occupational illness is 14.3%.

[ 16 ] However, 88 percent of the firemen who wounded injured due to disadvantage did not declare that they were official illness.

[ 17 ] Diseases such as leukemia and blood cancer are not acknowledged to be official affairs in the state, and such a tone is maintained even after the Supreme Court's ruling.

[ 18 ] Manpower shortage problem [ edit ] In order to solve the problem of excessive working hours, the local fire department changed the shift from two shifts to three shifts, but the total number of firefighters worked on the job wasn't added.

[ 19 ] In addition, the number of firefighters needed to be dispatched at the end of 2014 amounted to 50493, but only about 41 percent of the respondents are able to fill the vacancy.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Ministry of Public Safety and Security References [ edit ] ^ a b "Framework Act on Fire Services" . Ministry of Government Legislation . Retrieved 2014-12-30 .

^ "Act on 119 Rescue and Emergency Medical Services" . Ministry of Government Legislation . Retrieved 2016-03-16 .

^ "Local Autonomy Act" . Ministry of Government Legislation . Retrieved 2014-01-21 .

^ a b c d e "Gyeongsangbuk-do Fire Service Headquarters History" (in Korean). Gyeongsangbuk-do. Archived from the original on 2017-01-09 . Retrieved 2017-01-08 .

^ a b c d "Chungcheongbuk-do Fire Service History" (in Korean). Chungcheongbuk-do. Archived from the original on 2017-01-09 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ (in Korean) "Gyeongsangbuk-do Fire Service Headquarters History" . Gyeongsangbuk-do . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ a b (in Korean) "Doopedia - Firefighting" .

Naver . Doosan . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ a b (in Korean) "The Encyclopedia of Korean National Culture - Firefighting" .

Naver . Central Research Institute of Korea Studies . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ (in Korean) 백소용 (2014-05-29).

"다시 행정직 지휘받나" 소방방재청 부글부글 .

Segye Ilbo . Retrieved 2016-02-01 .

^ (in Korean) 최고 (2012-11-09).

"<119의 날 50주년 특집> 50주년 소방의 날을 맞아 돌아보는 소방의 역사" . 소방방재신문 . Retrieved 2014-03-21 .

^ (in Korean) "Regulations concerning the Establishment of Municipal Fire Service Facilities" . Ministry of Government Legislation. 2013-02-22 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ (in Korean) 이강일·박영서·전승현·홍인철 (2016-08-07).

불나면 산 넘고넘어 1시간 걸려 와요…소방서 없는 지자체 많아 . Yeonhapnews . Retrieved 2016-08-13 .

^ (in Korean) 울산소방본부 소방복제 및 장비 . Ulsan Metropolitan City. Archived from the original on 6 May 2015 . Retrieved 8 January 2017 .

^ (in Korean) 채희선 (2012-03-02).

홍제동 참사 11년… 소방관 안전 대책은 아직도 빨간불 .

Hankook Ilbo . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ (in Korean) 정성호 (2013-12-31).

소방관 '외상 후 스트레스 장애' 심각 . Korea Broadcasting System . Retrieved 2014-02-26 .

^ (in Korean) 소방관 절반 이상이 '건강 이상자'…14.3%는 직업병 앓아 . Moneytoday. 2015-07-20 . Retrieved 2015-07-20 .

^ (in Korean) 강버들 (2015-11-13).

소방관 절반 가까이 불면증, 다쳐도 '쉬쉬'…불이익 우려 .

JTBC . Retrieved 2015-11-30 .

^ (in Korean) 차상은·박수철·김윤호·강태우·김호 (2015-11-30).

"이젠 그 누구에게도 소방관을 권하고 싶지 않습니다" .

JoongAng Ilbo . Retrieved 2015-11-30 .

^ (in Korean) 윤나라 (2012-10-07).

소방관들 무리한 3교대… "불 끌 사람 없다" .

Seoul Broadcasting System . Retrieved 2014-01-04 .

^ (in Korean) 장민성 (2015-09-04).

"소방관 현장출동인력, 기준보다 41% 부족" .

Newsis . Retrieved 2015-09-04 .

v t e Geography of firefighting Albania Algeria Andorra Australia Belgium Brunei China (People's Republic) Cyprus Denmark - Copenhagen Fire Department Estonia Finland France Germany Ghana Greece Hong Kong SAR Indonesia Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Luxembourg Macau SAR Malaysia ( JBPM • MCDF ) Netherlands New Zealand Poland Philippines Romania Russia Singapore Sri Lanka South Korea Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Vatican City/Holy See List of fire departments v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_services_in_South_Korea&oldid=1288046799 " Categories : Fire and rescue in South Korea Emergency services in South Korea Hidden categories: CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Articles with Korean-language sources (ko) CS1 uses Korean-language script (ko) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2024 This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire services in South Korea 3 languages Add topic

