Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effects Toggle Effects subsection 1.1 Harmattan haze 1.2 Health 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Harmattan 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Беларуская भोजपुरी Català Čeština Dagbanli Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Farefare فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia West African dry weather season For the French publisher, see L'Harmattan . For the Maemo release code-named Harmattan, see Maemo § Naming .

Harmattan haze surrounding Abuja National Mosque in Abuja Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e The Harmattan is a season in West Africa that occurs between the end of November and the middle of March. It is characterized by a dry and dusty northeasterly trade wind , of the same name, which blows from the Sahara over West Africa into the Gulf of Guinea .

[ 1 ] The name is related to the word haramata in the Twi language.

[ 2 ] The temperature is cold mostly at night in but can be very hot in certain places during the day. Generally, temperature differences can depend on local circumstances.

[ 3 ] The Harmattan blows during the dry season, which occurs during the months with the lowest sun. In this season, the subtropical ridge of high pressure stays over the central Sahara and the low-pressure Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) stays over the Gulf of Guinea. On its passage over the Sahara, the Harmattan picks up fine dust and sand particles (between 0.5 and 10 micrometres). It is also known as the "doctor wind", because of its invigorating dryness compared with humid tropical air.

Effects [ edit ] This season differs from winter because it is characterized by cold, dry, [ 4 ] dust-laden wind, and also wide fluctuations in the ambient temperatures between the day and night. Temperatures can easily be as low as 9 °C (48 °F) early in the day, but in the afternoon the temperature can climb to as high as 35 °C (95 °F), while the relative humidity drops under 5%. It can also be hot in some regions, like in the Sahara.

[ 5 ] Harmattan haze over Ho, Ghana Before-and-after comparison of harmattan in Abuja (2004) The air is particularly dry and desiccating when the Harmattan blows over the region.

[ 4 ] The Harmattan brings desert-like weather conditions: it lowers the humidity, dissipates cloud cover, prevents rainfall formation and sometimes creates big clouds of dust which can result in dust storms or sandstorms .

[ citation needed ] The wind can increase fire risk [ 6 ] and cause severe crop damage.

[ 7 ] The interaction of the Harmattan with monsoon winds can cause tornadoes .

[ 1 ] Harmattan haze [ edit ] In some countries in West Africa, the heavy amount of dust in the air can severely limit visibility and block the sun for several days, [ 8 ] comparable to a heavy fog . This effect is known as the Harmattan haze. It costs airlines millions of dollars in cancelled and diverted flights each year.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] When the haze is weak, the skies are clear.

[ 11 ] The extreme dryness of the air may cause branches of trees to die.

[ 12 ] Health [ edit ] A 2024 study found that dust carried by the Harmattan increases infant and child mortality, as well as persistent adverse health impacts on surviving children.

[ 13 ] Humidity can drop below 15%, which can result in spontaneous nosebleeds for some people.

[ 7 ] Other health effects on humans may include dryness of the skin, dried or chapped lips, eyes, and respiratory system, including aggravation of asthma .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Khamsin References [ edit ] ^ a b "Harmattan" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 22 July 2015 .

^ "Harmattan" .

Merriam-Webster . 2012.

^ Geographical Review (1919): "Knox writes of this wind : The Harmattan is experienced as a wind which blows, especially in the months of December, January, and February, from the NE. and is a hot wind in some localities and a cold wind in others, according to circumstances." ^ a b Minka, Ndazo Salka; Ayo, Joseph (2014).

"Influence of cold–dry (harmattan) season on colonic temperature and the development of pulmonary hypertension in broiler chickens, and the modulating effect of ascorbic acid" .

Open Access Animal Physiology : 1.

doi : 10.2147/OAAP.S51741 .

^ Sivakumar, Mannava V. K.; Ndiang'ui, Ndegwa, eds. (2007).

Climate and Land Degradation . Environmental Science and Engineering.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-72438-4 .

ISBN 978-3540724377 .

At the southern fringe of the Sahara Desert, a special dry and hot wind, locally termed Harmattan, occurs.

^ Oladipupo, Akolade R (13 December 2014).

"Harmattan: Behold A Season" .

Leadership . Archived from the original on 12 February 2015.

^ a b Terazono, Emiko; Blas, Javier (19 January 2012).

"Saharan wind stirs cocoa market" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 28 January 2012 .

^ "Tuareg unrest" .

Temoust . BBC News. 7 September 2007. Archived from the original on 30 December 2007 . Retrieved 8 October 2007 .

^ Eze, Chinedu (15 January 2013).

"Nigerian Civil Aviation warns pilots, airlines of Harmattan haze" .

This Day – via All Africa.

^ Valdmanis, Richard (8 February 2012).

"Giant dust cloud chokes west Africa" . Reuters. Archived from the original on 11 February 2012 . Retrieved 9 February 2012 .

^ Akinrefon, Dapo (16 December 2014).

"As harmattan finally hits Lagos" .

Vanguard . Retrieved 11 October 2015 .

^ "Arago on Comets" .

The North American Review .

42 (90). Boston: Charles Bowen: 213. January 1836.

JSTOR 25103785 .

^ Adhvaryu, Achyuta; Bharadwaj, Prashant; Fenske, James; Nyshadham, Anant; Stanley, Richard (18 March 2024).

"Dust and Death: Evidence from the West African Harmattan" .

The Economic Journal .

134 (659): 885– 912.

doi : 10.1093/ej/uead088 .

PMC 10945368 .

PMID 38505244 .

^ Anuforo, Emeka; Chukwu, Lilian (20 January 2015).

"Coping With Health Hazards of Harmattan Haze" .

Rivers State News .

External links [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Harmattan" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

v t e Seasons Temperate seasons Spring Summer Autumn Winter Weather portal Tropical seasons Wet season Dry season Specific Cyclone season Fog season Harmattan (West Africa) Monsoon season Mud / breakup / minoskamin bezdorizhzhia / rasputitsa Rainy season Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harmattan&oldid=1305331497 " Categories : Cold Geography of Ghana Geography of Nigeria Geography of West Africa Seasons Winds Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Articles containing Twi-language text Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2014 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harmattan 47 languages Add topic

