Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contemporary theory Toggle Contemporary theory subsection 2.1 Philosophical perspectives 2.1.1 Cosmic values 2.1.2 John Rawls 2.1.3 Thomas Pogge 2.1.4 United Nations 3 Religious perspectives Toggle Religious perspectives subsection 3.1 Abrahamic religions 3.1.1 Christianity 3.1.1.1 Evangelicalism 3.1.1.1.1 Methodism 3.1.1.2 Catholicism 3.1.2 Islam 3.1.3 Judaism 3.2 Eastern religions 3.2.1 Hinduism 3.2.2 Traditional Chinese religion 4 Social justice movements Toggle Social justice movements subsection 4.1 Liberation theology 4.2 Health care 4.3 Health inequalities 4.4 Human rights education 4.5 Ecology and environment 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Articles 8.2 Books Toggle the table of contents Social justice 53 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Lombard Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Social injustice ) Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 10 August 2025 .

Concept in political philosophy For other uses, see Social justice (disambiguation) .

Social justice is justice in relation to the distribution of wealth , opportunities , and privileges within a society where individuals' rights are recognized and protected.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In Western and Asian cultures , the concept of social justice has often referred to the process of ensuring that individuals fulfill their societal roles and receive their due from society.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] In the current movements for social justice, the emphasis has been on the breaking of barriers for social mobility , the creation of safety nets , and economic justice .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ excessive citations ] Social justice assigns rights and duties in the institutions of society, which enables people to receive the basic benefits and burdens of cooperation. The relevant institutions often include taxation , social insurance , public health , public school , public services , labor law and regulation of markets , to ensure distribution of wealth , and equal opportunity .

[ 11 ] Modernist interpretations that relate justice to a reciprocal relationship to society are mediated by differences in cultural traditions, some of which emphasize the individual responsibility toward society and others the equilibrium between access to power and its responsible use.

[ 12 ] Hence, social justice is invoked today while reinterpreting historical figures such as Bartolomé de las Casas , in philosophical debates about differences among human beings, in efforts for gender, ethnic, and social equality , for advocating justice for migrants , prisoners, the environment , and the physically and developmentally disabled .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] While concepts of social justice can be found in classical and Christian philosophical sources, from early Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle to Catholic saints Augustine of Hippo and Thomas Aquinas, the term social justice finds its earliest uses in the late eighteenth century, albeit with unclear theoretical or practical meanings.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] The use of the term was subject to accusations of rhetorical flourish, perhaps related to amplifying one view of distributive justice.

[ 19 ] In the coining and definition of the term in the natural law social scientific treatise of Luigi Taparelli , in the early 1840s, [ 20 ] Taparelli established the natural law principle that corresponded to the evangelical principle of brotherly love—i.e. social justice reflects the duty one has to one's other self in the interdependent abstract unity of the human person in society.

[ 21 ] After the Revolutions of 1848 , the term was popularized generically through the writings of Antonio Rosmini-Serbati .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] In the late industrial revolution, Progressive Era American legal scholars began to use the term more, particularly Louis Brandeis and Roscoe Pound . From the early 20th century it was also embedded in international law and institutions; the preamble to establish the International Labour Organization recalled that "universal and lasting peace can be established only if it is based upon social justice." In the later 20th century, social justice was made central to the philosophy of the social contract , primarily by John Rawls in A Theory of Justice (1971). In 1993, the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action treats social justice as a purpose of human rights education .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] History [ edit ] Main articles: Social contract , Justice , Corrective justice , and Distributive justice An artist's rendering of what Plato might have looked like. From Raphael's early 16th century painting " Scuola di Atene" .

The different concepts of justice , as discussed in ancient Western philosophy , were typically centered upon the community.

Roman copy in marble of a Greek bronze bust of Aristotle by Lysippos, c.

330 BC . The alabaster mantle is modern.

Plato wrote in The Republic that it would be an ideal state that "every member of the community must be assigned to the class for which he finds himself best fitted." [ 26 ] In an article for J.N.V University, author D.R. Bhandari says, "Justice is, for Plato, at once a part of human virtue and the bond, which joins man together in society. It is the identical quality that makes good and social. Justice is an order and duty of the parts of the soul, it is to the soul as health is to the body. Plato says that justice is not mere strength, but it is a harmonious strength. Justice is not the right of the stronger but the effective harmony of the whole. All moral conceptions revolve about the good of the whole-individual as well as social".

[ 27 ] Plato believed rights existed only between free people, and the law should take "account in the first instance of relations of inequality in which individuals are treated in proportion to their worth and only secondarily of relations of equality."  Reflecting this time when slavery and subjugation of women was typical, ancient views of justice tended to reflect the rigid class systems that still prevailed. On the other hand, for the privileged groups, strong concepts of fairness and the community existed.

Distributive justice was said by Aristotle to require that people were distributed goods and assets according to their merit.

[ 28 ] Bust of Socrates Socrates (through Plato's dialogue Crito ) is credited with developing the idea of a social contract , whereby people ought to follow the rules of a society, and accept its burdens because they have accepted its benefits.

[ 29 ] During the Middle Ages, religious scholars particularly, such as Thomas Aquinas continued discussion of justice in various ways, but ultimately connected being a good citizen to the purpose of serving God. The Waldensians were a medieval sect that advocated for social justice.

[ 30 ] After the Renaissance and Reformation , the modern concept of social justice, as developing human potential, began to emerge through the work of a series of authors.

Baruch Spinoza in On the Improvement of the Understanding (1677) contended that the one true aim of life should be to acquire "a human character much more stable than [one's] own", and to achieve this "pitch of perfection... The chief good is that he should arrive, together with other individuals if possible, at the possession of the aforesaid character." [ 31 ] During the enlightenment and responding to the French and American Revolutions , Thomas Paine similarly wrote in The Rights of Man (1792) society should give "genius a fair and universal chance" and so "the construction of government ought to be such as to bring forward... all that extent of capacity which never fails to appear in revolutions." [ 32 ] Social justice has been traditionally credited to be coined by Jesuit priest Luigi Taparelli in the 1840s, but the expression is older.

Although there is no certainty about the first use of the term "social justice", early sources can be found in Europe in the 18th century.

[ 33 ] Some references to the use of the expression are in articles of journals aligned with the spirit of the Enlightenment , in which social justice is described as an obligation of the monarch; [ 34 ] [ 35 ] also the term is present in books written by Catholic Italian theologians, notably members of the Society of Jesus .

[ 36 ] Thus, according to this sources and the context, social justice was another term for "the justice of society", the justice that rules the relations among individuals in society, without any mention to socio-economic equity or human dignity.

[ 33 ] The usage of the term started to become more frequent by Catholic thinkers from the 1840s, beginning with the Jesuit Luigi Taparelli in Civiltà Cattolica , and based on the work of St.

Thomas Aquinas . Taparelli argued that rival capitalist and socialist theories, based on subjective Cartesian thinking, undermined the unity of society present in Thomistic metaphysics as neither were sufficiently concerned with ethics.

[ 19 ] Writing in 1861, the influential British philosopher and economist, John Stuart Mill stated in Utilitarianism his view that "Society should treat all equally well who have deserved equally well of it, that is, who have deserved equally well absolutely. This is the highest abstract standard of social and distributive justice; towards which all institutions, and the efforts of all virtuous citizens, should be made in the utmost degree to converge." [ 37 ] In the later 19th and early 20th century, social justice became an important theme in American political and legal philosophy, particularly in the work of John Dewey , Roscoe Pound and Louis Brandeis . One of the prime concerns was the Lochner era decisions of the US Supreme Court to strike down legislation passed by state governments and the Federal government for social and economic improvement, such as the eight-hour day or the right to join a trade union . After the First World War, the founding document of the International Labour Organization took up the same terminology in its preamble, stating that "peace can be established only if it is based on social justice". From this point, the discussion of social justice entered into mainstream legal and academic discourse.

In 1931, the Pope Pius XI explicitly referred to the expression, along with the concept of subsidiarity , for the first time in Catholic social teaching in the encyclical Quadragesimo anno . Then again in Divini Redemptoris , the church pointed out that the realization of social justice relied on the promotion of the dignity of human person .

[ 38 ] During the 1930s, the term was widely associated with pro- Nazi and antisemitic groups, such as the Christian Front .

[ citation needed ] Social Justice was the name of Charles Coughlin 's newspaper .

[ 39 ] Because of the documented influence of Divini Redemptoris in its drafters, [ 40 ] the Constitution of Ireland was the first one to establish the term as a principle of the economy in the State, and then other countries around the world did the same throughout the 20th century, even in socialist regimes such as the Cuban Constitution in 1976.

[ 33 ] In the late 20th century, several liberal and conservative thinkers, notably Friedrich Hayek rejected the concept by stating that it did not mean anything, or meant too many things.

[ 41 ] However the concept remained highly influential, particularly with its promotion by philosophers such as John Rawls . Even though the meaning of social justice varies, at least three common elements can be identified in the contemporary theories about it: a duty of the State to distribute certain vital means (such as economic, social, and cultural rights ), the protection of human dignity , and affirmative actions to promote substantive equality and social equity for everybody.

[ 33 ] Contemporary theory [ edit ] Philosophical perspectives [ edit ] Cosmic values [ edit ] Hunter Lewis ' work promoting natural healthcare and sustainable economies advocates for conservation as a key premise in social justice. His manifesto on sustainability ties the continued thriving of human life to real conditions, the environment supporting that life, and associates injustice with the detrimental effects of unintended consequences of human actions. Quoting classical Greek thinkers like Epicurus on the good of pursuing happiness, Hunter also cites ornithologist, naturalist, and philosopher Alexander Skutch in his book Moral Foundations: The common feature which unites the activities most consistently forbidden by the moral codes of civilized peoples is that by their very nature they cannot be both habitual and enduring, because they tend to destroy the conditions which make them possible.

[ 42 ] Pope Benedict XVI cites Teilhard de Chardin in a vision of the cosmos as a 'living host' [ 43 ] embracing an understanding of ecology that includes humanity's relationship to others, that pollution affects not just the natural world but interpersonal relations as well. Cosmic harmony, justice and peace are closely interrelated: If you want to cultivate peace, protect creation.

[ 44 ] In The Quest for Cosmic Justice , Thomas Sowell writes that seeking utopia, while admirable, may have disastrous effects if done without strong consideration of the economic underpinnings that support contemporary society.

[ 45 ] John Rawls [ edit ] Main article: John Rawls Political philosopher John Rawls draws on the utilitarian insights of Bentham and Mill , the social contract ideas of John Locke , and the categorical imperative ideas of Kant . His first statement of principle was made in A Theory of Justice where he proposed that, "Each person possesses an inviolability founded on justice that even the welfare of society as a whole cannot override. For this reason justice denies that the loss of freedom for some is made right by a greater good shared by others." [ 46 ] A deontological proposition that echoes Kant in framing the moral good of justice in absolutist terms. His views are definitively restated in Political Liberalism where society is seen "as a fair system of co-operation over time, from one generation to the next".

[ 47 ] All societies have a basic structure of social, economic, and political institutions, both formal and informal. In testing how well these elements fit and work together, Rawls based a key test of legitimacy on the theories of social contract. To determine whether any particular system of collectively enforced social arrangements is legitimate, he argued that one must look for agreement by the people who are subject to it, but not necessarily to an objective notion of justice based on coherent ideological grounding. Not every citizen can be asked to participate in a poll to determine his or her consent to every proposal in which some degree of coercion is involved, so one has to assume that all citizens are reasonable. Rawls constructed an argument for a two-stage process to determine a citizen's hypothetical agreement: The citizen agrees to be represented by X for certain purposes, and, to that extent, X holds these powers as a trustee for the citizen.

X agrees that enforcement in a particular social context is legitimate. The citizen, therefore, is bound by this decision because it is the function of the trustee to represent the citizen in this way.

This applies to one person who represents a small group (e.g., the organiser of a social event setting a dress code) just as it does to national governments, which are ultimate trustees, holding representative powers for the benefit of all citizens within their territorial boundaries. Governments that fail to provide for welfare of their citizens according to the principles of justice are not legitimate. To emphasise the general principle that justice should rise from the people and not be dictated by the law-making powers of governments, Rawls asserted that, "There is ... a general presumption against imposing legal and other restrictions on conduct without sufficient reason. But this presumption creates no special priority for any particular liberty." [ 48 ] This is support for an unranked set of liberties that reasonable citizens in all states should respect and uphold — to some extent, the list proposed by Rawls matches the normative human rights that have international recognition and direct enforcement in some nation states where the citizens need encouragement to act in a way that fixes a greater degree of equality of outcome. According to Rawls, the basic liberties that every good society should guarantee are: Freedom of thought ; Liberty of conscience as it affects social relationships on the grounds of religion, philosophy, and morality; Political liberties (e.g., representative democratic institutions, freedom of speech and the press , and freedom of assembly ); Freedom of association ; Freedoms necessary for the liberty and integrity of the person (namely: freedom from slavery , freedom of movement and a reasonable degree of freedom to choose one's occupation); and Rights and liberties covered by the rule of law .

Thomas Pogge [ edit ] Thomas Pogge Thomas Pogge 's arguments pertain to a standard of social justice that creates human rights deficits . He assigns responsibility to those who actively cooperate in designing or imposing the social institution, that the order is foreseeable as harming the global poor and is reasonably avoidable.  Pogge argues that social institutions have a negative duty to not harm the poor.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Pogge speaks of "institutional cosmopolitanism" and assigns responsibility to institutional schemes [ 51 ] for deficits of human rights.  An example given is slavery and third parties.  A third party should not recognize or enforce slavery .  The institutional order should be held responsible only for deprivations of human rights that it establishes or authorizes.  The current institutional design, he says, systematically harms developing economies by enabling corporate tax evasion, [ 52 ] illicit financial flows, corruption, trafficking of people and weapons.

Joshua Cohen disputes his claims based on the fact that some poor countries have done well with the current institutional design.

[ 53 ] Elizabeth Kahn argues that some of these responsibilities [ vague ] should apply globally.

[ 54 ] United Nations [ edit ] The United Nations calls social justice "an underlying principle for peaceful and prosperous coexistence within and among nations.

[ 55 ] The United Nations' 2006 document Social Justice in an Open World: The Role of the United Nations , states that "Social justice may be broadly understood as the fair and compassionate distribution of the fruits of economic growth ..." [ 56 ] : 16 The term "social justice" was seen by the U.N. "as a substitute for the protection of human rights [and] first appeared in United Nations texts during the second half of the 1960s. At the initiative of the Soviet Union, and with the support of developing countries, the term was used in the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, adopted in 1969." [ 56 ] : 52 The same document reports, "From the comprehensive global perspective shaped by the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , neglect of the pursuit of social justice in all its dimensions translates into de facto acceptance of a future marred by violence, repression and chaos." [ 56 ] : 6 The report concludes, "Social justice is not possible without strong and coherent redistributive policies conceived and implemented by public agencies." [ 56 ] : 16 The same UN document offers a concise history: "[T]he notion of social justice is relatively new. None of history's great philosophers—not Plato or Aristotle, or Confucius or Averroes, or even Rousseau or Kant—saw the need to consider justice or the redress of injustices from a social perspective. The concept first surfaced in Western thought and political language in the wake of the industrial revolution and the parallel development of the socialist doctrine. It emerged as an expression of protest against what was perceived as the capitalist exploitation of labor and as a focal point for the development of measures to improve the human condition. It was born as a revolutionary slogan embodying the ideals of progress and fraternity. Following the revolutions that shook Europe in the mid-1800s, social justice became a rallying cry for progressive thinkers and political activists.... By the mid-twentieth century, the concept of social justice had become central to the ideologies and programs of virtually all the leftist and centrist political parties around the world ..." [ 56 ] : 11–12 Another key area of human rights and social justice is the United Nations's defense of children's rights worldwide. In 1989, the Convention on the Rights of the Child was adopted and available for signature, ratification and accession by General Assembly resolution 44/25.

[ 57 ] According to OHCHR , this convention entered into force on 2 September 1990. This convention upholds that all states have the obligation to "protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation, including sexual abuse." [ 57 ] Religious perspectives [ edit ] Abrahamic religions [ edit ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: Christian ethics and Christian democracy Evangelicalism [ edit ] Time magazine noted that younger Evangelicals also increasingly engage in social justice.

[ 58 ] John Stott traced the call for social justice back to the cross, "The cross is a revelation of God's justice as well as of his love. That is why the community of the cross should concern itself with social justice as well as with loving philanthropy." [ 59 ] Methodism [ edit ] From its founding, Methodism was a Christian social justice movement. Under John Wesley 's direction, Methodists became leaders in many social justice issues of the day, including the prison reform and abolition movements. Wesley himself was among the first to preach for slaves rights, attracting significant opposition.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Today, social justice plays a major role in the United Methodist Church and the Free Methodist Church .

[ 63 ] The Book of Discipline of the United Methodist Church says, "We hold governments responsible for the protection of the rights of the people to free and fair elections and to the freedoms of speech, religion, assembly, communications media, and petition for redress of grievances without fear of reprisal; to the right to privacy ; and to the guarantee of the rights to adequate food, clothing, shelter, education, and health care." [ 64 ] The United Methodist Church also teaches population control as part of its doctrine.

[ 65 ] Catholicism [ edit ] This section is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this section , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( May 2022 ) Main article: Catholic social teaching Catholic social teaching consists of those aspects of Roman Catholic doctrine which relate to matters dealing with the respect of the individual human life. A distinctive feature of Catholic social doctrine is its concern for the poorest and most vulnerable members of society. Two of the seven key areas [ 66 ] of "Catholic social teaching" are pertinent to social justice: Life and dignity of the human person: The foundational principle of all Catholic social teaching is the sanctity of all human life and the inherent dignity of every human person, from conception to natural death. Human life must be valued above all material possessions.

Preferential option for the poor and vulnerable : Catholics believe Jesus taught that on the Day of Judgement God will ask what each person did to help the poor and needy: "Amen, I say to you, whatever you did for one of these least brothers of mine, you did for me." [ 67 ] The Catholic Church believes that through words, prayers and deeds one must show solidarity with, and compassion for, the poor. The moral test of any society is "how it treats its most vulnerable members. The poor have the most urgent moral claim on the conscience of the nation. People are called to look at public policy decisions in terms of how they affect the poor." [ 68 ] Modern Catholic social teaching is often thought to have begun with the encyclicals of Pope Leo XIII.

[ 19 ] Pope Leo XIII , who studied under Taparelli, published in 1891 the encyclical Rerum novarum (On the Condition of the Working Classes; lit. "On new things"), rejecting both socialism and capitalism , while defending labor unions and private property. He stated that society should be based on cooperation and not class conflict and competition . In this document, Leo set out the Catholic Church's response to the social instability and labor conflict that had arisen in the wake of industrialization and had led to the rise of socialism. The Pope advocated that the role of the state was to promote social justice through the protection of rights, while the church must speak out on social issues to teach correct social principles and ensure class harmony.

The encyclical Quadragesimo anno (On Reconstruction of the Social Order, literally "in the fortieth year") of 1931 by Pope Pius XI , encourages a living wage , [ 69 ] subsidiarity , and advocates that social justice is a personal virtue as well as an attribute of the social order, saying that society can be just only if individuals and institutions are just.

Pope John Paul II added much to the corpus of the Catholic social teaching, penning three encyclicals which focus on issues such as economics, politics, geo-political situations, ownership of the means of production, private property and the " social mortgage ", and private property. The encyclicals Laborem exercens , Sollicitudo rei socialis , and Centesimus annus are just a small portion of his overall contribution to Catholic social justice. Pope John Paul II was a strong advocate of justice and human rights , and spoke forcefully for the poor. He addresses issues such as the problems that technology can present should it be misused, and admits a fear that the "progress" of the world is not true progress at all, if it should denigrate the value of the human person. He argued in Centesimus annus that private property, markets, and honest labor were the keys to alleviating the miseries of the poor and to enabling a life that can express the fullness of the human person.

Pope Benedict XVI 's encyclical Deus caritas est ("God is Love") of 2006 claims that justice is the defining concern of the state and the central concern of politics, and not of the church, which has charity as its central social concern. It said that the laity has the specific responsibility of pursuing social justice in civil society and that the church's active role in social justice should be to inform the debate, using reason and natural law, and also by providing moral and spiritual formation for those involved in politics.

The official Catholic doctrine on social justice can be found in the book Compendium of the Social Doctrine of the Church , published in 2004 and updated in 2006, by the Pontifical Council Iustitia et Pax .

The Catechism of the Catholic Church (§§ 1928–1948) contains more detail of the church's view of social justice.

[ 70 ] Islam [ edit ] In Muslim history, Islamic governance has often been associated with social justice.

[ additional citation(s) needed ] Establishment of social justice was one of the motivating factors of the Abbasid revolt against the Umayyads.

[ 71 ] The Shi'a believe that the return of the Mahdi will herald in "the messianic age of justice" and the Mahdi along with the Isa (Jesus) will end plunder, torture, oppression and discrimination.

[ 72 ] For the Muslim Brotherhood the implementation of social justice would require the rejection of consumerism and communism . The Brotherhood strongly affirmed the right to private property as well as differences in personal wealth due to factors such as hard work. However, the Brotherhood held Muslims had an obligation to assist those Muslims in need. It held that zakat (alms-giving) was not voluntary charity, but rather the poor had the right to assistance from the more fortunate.

[ 73 ] Most Islamic governments therefore enforce the zakat through taxes.

Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Tikkun olam In To Heal a Fractured World: The Ethics of Responsibility , Rabbi Jonathan Sacks states that social justice has a central place in Judaism . One of Judaism's most distinctive and challenging ideas is its ethics of responsibility reflected in the concepts of simcha ("gladness" or "joy"), tzedakah ("the religious obligation to perform charity and philanthropic acts"), chesed ("deeds of kindness"), and tikkun olam ("repairing the world").

[ 74 ] Eastern religions [ edit ] Hinduism [ edit ] The present-day Jāti hierarchy is undergoing changes for a variety of reasons including 'social justice', which is a politically popular stance in democratic India. Institutionalized affirmative action has promoted this. The disparity and wide inequalities in social behaviour of the jātis – exclusive, endogamous communities centred on traditional occupations – has led to various reform movements in Hinduism . While legally outlawed, the caste system remains strong in practice.

[ 75 ] Traditional Chinese religion [ edit ] Main article: Mandate of Heaven The Chinese concept of Tian Ming has occasionally been perceived [ by whom?

] as an expression of social justice.

[ 76 ] Through it, the deposition of unfair rulers is justified in that civil dissatisfaction and economical disasters is perceived as Heaven withdrawing its favor from the Emperor. A successful rebellion is considered definite proof that the Emperor is unfit to rule.

Social justice movements [ edit ] Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Social justice is also a concept that is used to describe the movement towards a socially just world, e.g., the Global Justice Movement . In this context, social justice is based on the concepts of human rights and equality, and can be defined as "the way in which human rights are manifested in the everyday lives of people at every level of society" .

[ 77 ] Several movements are working to achieve social justice in society. These movements are working toward the realization of a world where all members of a society, regardless of background or procedural justice, have basic human rights and equal access to the benefits of their society.

[ 78 ] Liberation theology [ edit ] Main article: Liberation theology Liberation theology [ 79 ] is a movement in Christian theology which conveys the teachings of Jesus Christ in terms of a liberation from unjust economic, political, or social conditions. It has been described by proponents as "an interpretation of Christian faith through the poor's suffering, their struggle and hope, and a critique of society and the Catholic faith and Christianity through the eyes of the poor", [ 80 ] and by detractors as Christianity perverted by Marxism and Communism .

[ 81 ] Although liberation theology has grown into an international and inter-denominational movement, it began as a movement within the Catholic Church in Latin America in the 1950s–1960s. It arose principally as a moral reaction to the poverty caused by social injustice in that region.

[ 82 ] It achieved prominence in the 1970s and 1980s. The term was coined by the Peruvian priest Gustavo Gutiérrez , who wrote one of the movement's most famous books, A Theology of Liberation (1971). According to Sarah Kleeb , "Marx would surely take issue", she writes, "with the appropriation of his works in a religious context...there is no way to reconcile Marx's views of religion with those of Gutierrez, they are simply incompatible. Despite this, in terms of their understanding of the necessity of a just and righteous world, and the nearly inevitable obstructions along such a path, the two have much in common; and, particularly in the first edition of [A Theology of Liberation], the use of Marxian theory is quite evident." [ 83 ] Other noted exponents are Leonardo Boff of Brazil, Carlos Mugica of Argentina, Jon Sobrino of El Salvador, and Juan Luis Segundo of Uruguay.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Health care [ edit ] Social justice has more recently made its way into the field of bioethics . Discussion involves topics such as affordable access to health care, especially for low-income households and families. The discussion also raises questions such as whether society should bear healthcare costs for low-income families, and whether the global marketplace is the best way to distribute healthcare.

Ruth Faden of the Johns Hopkins Berman Institute of Bioethics and Madison Powers of Georgetown University focus their analysis of social justice on which inequalities matter the most. They develop a social justice theory that answers some of these questions in concrete settings.

Social injustices occur when there is a preventable difference in health states among a population of people. These social injustices take the form of health inequities when negative health states such as malnourishment, and infectious diseases are more prevalent in impoverished nations.

[ 86 ] These negative health states can often be prevented by providing social and economic structures such as primary healthcare which ensures the general population has equal access to health care services regardless of income level, gender, education or any other stratifying factors. Integrating social justice with health inherently reflects the social determinants of health model without discounting the role of the bio-medical model.

[ 87 ] Health inequalities [ edit ] The sources of health inequalities are rooted in injustices associated with racism, sex discrimination, and social class. Richard Hofrichter and his colleagues examine the political implications of various perspectives used to explain health inequities and explore alternative strategies for eliminating them.

[ 88 ] Human rights education [ edit ] Main article: Human rights education The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action affirm that "Human rights education should include peace, democracy, development and social justice, as set forth in international and regional human rights instruments , to achieve common understanding and awareness to strengthen universal commitment to human rights." [ 89 ] Ecology and environment [ edit ] Main articles: Climate justice and environmental justice Social justice principles are embedded in the larger environmental movement . The third principle of the Earth Charter is social and economic justice, which is described as seeking to eradicate poverty as an ethical, social, and environmental imperative, ensure that economic activities and institutions at all levels promote human development in an equitable and sustainable manner, affirm gender equality and equity as prerequisites to sustainable development and ensure universal access to education, health care, and economic opportunity, and uphold the right of all, without discrimination, to a natural and social environment supportive of human dignity, bodily health, and spiritual well-being, with special attention to the rights of indigenous peoples and minorities.

The climate justice and environmental justice movements also incorporate social justice principles, ideas, and practices. Climate justice and environmental justice, as movements within the larger ecological and environmental movement, each incorporate social justice in a particular way. Climate justice includes concern for social justice pertaining to greenhouse gas emissions, [ 90 ] climate-induced environmental displacement, [ 91 ] as well as climate change mitigation and adaptation. Environmental justice includes concern for social justice pertaining to either environmental benefits [ 92 ] or environmental pollution [ 93 ] based on their equitable distribution across communities of color, communities of various socio and economic stratification, or any other barriers to justice.

Criticism [ edit ] This "criticism" or "controversy" section may compromise the article's neutrality .

Please help integrate negative information into other sections or remove undue focus on minor aspects through discussion on the talk page .

( August 2023 ) Michael Novak argues that social justice has seldom been adequately defined. He wrote: [W]hole books and treatises have been written about social justice without ever defining it. It is allowed to float in the air as if everyone will recognize an instance of it when it appears. This vagueness seems indispensable. The minute one begins to define social justice, one runs into embarrassing intellectual difficulties. It becomes, most often, a term of art whose operational meaning is, "We need a law against that." In other words, it becomes an instrument of ideological intimidation, for the purpose of gaining the power of legal coercion.

[ 94 ] Friedrich Hayek of the Austrian School of economics rejected the very idea of social justice as meaningless, self-contradictory, and ideological, believing that to realize any degree of social justice is unfeasible, and that the attempt to do so must destroy all liberty. He wrote: There can be no test by which we can discover what is 'socially unjust' because there is no subject by which such an injustice can be committed, and there are no rules of individual conduct the observance of which in the market order would secure to the individuals and groups the position which as such (as distinguished from the procedure by which it is determined) would appear just to us. [Social justice] does not belong to the category of error but to that of nonsense, like the term 'a moral stone'.

[ 95 ] Hayek argued that proponents of social justice often present it as a moral virtue but most of their descriptions pertain to impersonal states of affairs (e.g. income inequality or poverty), which are cited as "social injustice". Hayek argued that social justice is either a virtue or it is not. If it is, it can only be ascribed to the actions of individuals; however, most who use the term ascribe it to social systems, so social justice in fact describes a regulative principle of order; they are interested not in virtue but power.

[ 94 ] For Hayek, this notion of social justices presupposes that people are guided by specific external directions rather than internal, personal rules of just conduct. It further presupposes that one can never be held accountable for ones own behaviour, as this would be "blaming the victim". According to Hayek, the function of social justice is to blame someone else, often attributed to "the system" or those who are supposed, mythically, to control it. Thus, it is based on the appealing idea of "you suffer; your suffering is caused by powerful others; these oppressors must be destroyed." [ 94 ] Ben O'Neill of the University of New South Wales and the Mises Institute argues: [For advocates of social justice] the notion of "rights" is a mere term of entitlement, indicative of a claim for any possible desirable good, no matter how important or trivial, abstract or tangible, recent or ancient. It is merely an assertion of desire, and a declaration of intention to use the language of rights to acquire said desire.
In fact, since the program of social justice inevitably involves claims for government provision of goods, paid for through the efforts of others, the term actually refers to an intention to use force to acquire one's desires. Not to earn desirable goods by rational thought and action, production and voluntary exchange, but to go in there and forcibly take goods from those who can supply them!

[ 96 ] Psychologist Steven Pinker argues that social justice "sees society as a struggle for power, also zero-sum, among different sexes, sexual orientations, and races [and] also has a contempt for science".

[ 97 ] Media commentator Jordan Peterson argues that social justice promotes collectivism and sees individuals as "essentially a member of a group" and "not essentially an individual". He also argues that social justice "view[s] the world" as "a battleground between groups of different power".

[ 97 ] See also [ edit ] Activism – Efforts to make change in society toward a perceived greater good " Beyond Vietnam: A Time to Break Silence – 1967 speech delivered by Martin Luther King Jr." Child sex tourism – Tourism with the purpose to engage in child prostitution Choosing the Common Good – 2010 British Catholic document Counterculture of the 1960s – Anti-establishment cultural phenomenon Economic justice – Subcategory of welfare economics Environmental racism – Environmental injustice that occurs within a racialized context Essentially contested concept – Problem in philosophy Global justice – Issue in political philosophy Human trafficking – Trade of humans for exploitation Labour law – Laws that mediate the relationship between workers, employers, unions and governments and labour rights Left-wing politics – Political ideologies favoring social equality and egalitarianism Macro social work – Specific Approach to Social Work Resource justice Right to education – Human right Right to health – Human right towards individual health Right to housing – Economic, social and cultural right Right to social security – Means-oriented social benefit Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Sex trafficking – Trade of sexual slaves Social conscience – Sense of responsibility or concern for the problems of society Social justice art Social justice warrior – Pejorative term for a progressive person Social law – Unified concept of law Social work – Academic discipline and profession Solidarity – Unity of feeling or action on a common interest National Union for Social Justice (organization) World Day of Social Justice – International observance for social justice All pages with titles beginning with Social justice All pages with titles containing Social justice References [ edit ] ^ "social justice" .

Oxford reference . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ Abbott, Katherine (2014).

"Social Justice" .

Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research . Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

6115– 6119.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5_2772 .

ISBN 978-94-007-0753-5 .

^ Aristotle , The Politics (ca 350 BC) ^ Clark, Mary T. (2015).

"Augustine on Justice," a Chapter in Augustine and Social Justice . Lexington Books. pp.

3– 10.

ISBN 978-1-4985-0918-3 .

^ Banai, Ayelet; Ronzoni, Miriam; Schemmel, Christian (2011).

Social Justice, Global Dynamics: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives . Florence: Taylor and Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-81929-6 .

^ Kitching, G. N. (2001).

Seeking Social Justice Through Globalization Escaping a Nationalist Perspective . University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University Press. pp.

3– 10.

ISBN 978-0-271-02377-9 .

^ Hillman, Arye L. (2008).

"Globalization and Social Justice" .

The Singapore Economic Review .

53 (2): 173– 189.

doi : 10.1142/s0217590808002896 .

^ Lawrence, Cecile & Natalie Churn (2012).

Movements in Time Revolution, Social Justice, and Times of Change . Newcastle upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Pub. pp.

xi– xv.

ISBN 978-1-4438-4552-6 .

^ Agartan, Kaan (2014).

"Globalization and the Question of Social Justice" .

Sociology Compass .

8 (6): 903– 915.

doi : 10.1111/soc4.12162 .

^ El Khoury, Ann (2015).

Globalization Development and Social Justice: A propositional political approach . Florence: Taylor and Francis. pp.

1– 20.

ISBN 978-1-317-50480-1 .

^ John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (1971) 4, "the principles of social justice: they provide a way of assigning rights and duties in the basic institutions of society and they define the appropriate distribution of benefits and burdens of social co-operation." ^ Aiqing Zhang; Feifei Xia; Chengwei Li (2007).

"The Antecedents of Help Giving in Chinese Culture: Attribution, Judgment of Responsibility, Expectation Change and the Reaction of Affect" .

Social Behavior and Personality .

35 (1): 135– 142.

doi : 10.2224/sbp.2007.35.1.135 .

^ Smith, Justin E. H. (2015).

Nature, Human Nature, and Human Difference: Race in Early Modern Philosophy . Princeton University Press. p. 17.

ISBN 978-1-4008-6631-1 .

^ Trương, Thanh-Đạm (2013).

Migration, Gender and Social Justice: Perspectives on Human Insecurity . Springer. pp.

3– 26.

ISBN 978-3-642-28012-2 .

^ Teklu, Abebe Abay (2010).

"We Cannot Clap with One Hand: Global Socio–Political Differences in Social Support for People with Visual Impairment" .

International Journal of Ethiopian Studies .

5 (1): 93– 105.

^ J. Zajda, S. Majhanovich, V. Rust, Education and Social Justice , 2006, ISBN 1-4020-4721-5 ^ Clark, Mary T. (2015).

"Augustine on Justice," a Chapter in Augustine and Social Justice . Lexington Books. pp. 3–10.

ISBN 978-1-4985-0918-3 .

^ Paine, Thomas.

Agrarian Justice . Printed by R. Folwell, for Benjamin Franklin Bache.

^ a b c Behr, Thomas.

Social Justice and Subsidiarity: Luigi Taparelli and the Origins of Modern Catholic Social Thought (Washington DC: Catholic University of American Press, December 2019).

^ Luigi Taparelli, SJ, Saggio teoretico di dritto naturale appogiato sul fatto (Palermo: Antonio Muratori, 1840-43), Sections 341-364.

^ Behr, Thomas.

Social Justice and Subsidiarity: Luigi Taparelli and the Origins of Modern Catholic Social Thought (Washington DC: Catholic University of American Press, December 2019), pp. 149–154.

^ Rosmini-Serbati, The Constitution under Social Justice.

trans. A. Mingardi (Lanham: Lexington Books, 2007).

^ Pérez-Garzón, Carlos Andrés (14 January 2018). "Unveiling the Meaning of Social Justice in Colombia".

Mexican Law Review .

10 (2): 27–66.

ISSN 2448-5306 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2018. Retrieved 28 March 2018.

^ The Preamble of ILO Constitution ^ Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, Part II, D.

^ Plato , The Republic (ca 380BC) ^ "20th WCP: Plato's Concept of Justice: An Analysis" .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2016.

^ Nicomachean Ethics V.3 ^ Plato , Crito (ca 380 BC) ^ Murray, S. (2018).

Post-Christendom: Church and Mission in a Strange New World. Second Edition . After Christendom. Cascade Books. p. 106.

ISBN 978-1-5326-1797-3 . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ B Spinoza, On the Improvement of the Understanding (1677) para 13 ^ T Paine , Rights of Man (1792) 197 ^ a b c d Pérez-Garzón, Carlos Andrés (14 January 2018).

"Unveiling the Meaning of Social Justice in Colombia" .

Mexican Law Review .

10 (2): 27– 66.

ISSN 2448-5306 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2018 . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ Rousseau (1774).

Journal encyclopédique... [Ed. Pierre Rousseau] (in French). De l'Imprimerie du Journal.

^ L'Esprit des journaux, françois et étrangers (in French). Valade. 1784.

^ L'Episcopato ossia della Potesta di governar la chiesa. Dissertazione (in Italian). na. 1789.

^ JS Mill , Utilitarianism (1863) ^ "Divini Redemptoris (March 19, 1937) | PIUS XI" .

w2.vatican.va . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ "The Press: Crackdown on Coughlin" .

Time . 27 April 1942 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Moyn, Samuel (2014).

"The Secret History of Constitutional Dignity" .

Yale Human Rights and Development Law Journal .

17 (1).

ISSN 1548-2596 .

^ FA Hayek , Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973) vol II, ch 3 ^ Hunter Lewis (14 October 2009).

"Sustainability, The Complete Concept, Environment, Healthcare, and Economy" (PDF) . ChangeThis. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 January 2011 .

^ John Allen Jr. (28 July 2009).

"Ecology – The first stirring of an 'evolutionary leap' in late Jesuit's official standing?" .

National Catholic Reporter . Archived from the original on 24 August 2012.

^ Sandro Magister (11 January 2010).

"Benedict XVI to the Diplomats: Three Levers for Lifting Up the World" . chiesa, Rome.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ Sowell, Thomas (5 February 2002).

The quest for cosmic justice (1st Touchstone ed.). Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-684-86463-0 .

^ John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (2005 reissue), Chapter 1, "Justice as Fairness" – 1. The Role of Justice, pp. 3–4 ^ John Rawls, Political Liberalism 15 (Columbia University Press 2003) ^ John Rawls, Political Liberalism 291–92 (Columbia University Press 2003) ^ James, Nickel.

"Human Rights" .

stanford.edu . The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 10 February 2015 .

^ Pogge, Thomas Pogge.

"World Poverty and Human Rights" .

thomaspogge.com . Archived from the original on 19 September 2015.

^ North, James (23 September 2014).

"The Resource Privilege" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2015 .

^ Pogge, Thomas.

"Human Rights and Just Taxation – Global Financial Transparency" . Archived from the original on 10 February 2015.

^ Alison M. Jaggar, ed. (2010).

Thomas Pogge and His Critics . Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4258-1 .

^ Kahn, Elizabeth (June–December 2012). "Global Economic Justice: A Structural Approach".

Public Reason .

4 ( 1– 2): 48– 67.

^ "World Day of Social Justice, 20 February" .

www.un.org . Retrieved 8 November 2019 .

^ a b c d e "Social Justice in an Open World: The Role of the United Nations", The International Forum for Social Development, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Division for Social Policy and Development, ST/ESA/305" (PDF) . New York: United Nations. 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 August 2017.

^ a b "OHCHR | Convention on the Rights of the Child" .

www.ohchr.org . Retrieved 21 December 2020 .

^ Sullivan, Amy (1 June 2010).

"Young Evangelicals: Expanding Their Mission" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X . Archived from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .

^ Stott, John (29 November 2012).

The Cross of Christ . InterVarsity Press. p. 185.

ISBN 978-0-8308-6636-6 .

^ S. R. Valentine, John Bennet & the Origins of Methodism and the Evangelical revival in England, Scarecrow Press, Lanham, 1997.

^ Carey, Brycchan. "John Wesley (1703–1791)." The British Abolitionists. Brycchan Carey, 11 July 2008. 5 October 2009.

Brycchancarey.com Archived 29 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Wesley John, "Thoughts Upon Slavery," John Wesley: Holiness of Heart and Life. Charles Yrigoyen, 1996. 5 October 2009.

Gbgm-umc.org Archived 16 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Do Justice" . First Free Methodist Church . Retrieved 12 June 2021 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ The Book of Discipline of The United Methodist Church – 2012 ¶164 V, umc.org Archived 6 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Book of Discipline of The United Methodist Church – 2008 ¶ 162 K, umc.org Archived 6 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Seven Key Themes of Catholic Social Teaching" . Archived from the original on 8 June 2007 . Retrieved 29 March 2014 .

^ Matthew 25:40.

^ Option for the Poor, Major themes from Catholic Social Teaching Archived 16 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Office for Social Justice, Archdiocese of St. Paul and Minneapolis.

^ Popularised by John A. Ryan , although see Sidney Webb and Beatrice Webb , Industrial Democracy (1897) ^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church – Social justice" . Vatican.va.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2013 . Retrieved 29 March 2014 .

^ John L. Esposito (1998).

Islam and Politics . Syracuse University Press. p. 17.

^ John L. Esposito (1998).

Islam and Politics . Syracuse University Press. p. 205.

^ John L. Esposito (1998).

Islam and Politics . Syracuse University Press. pp.

147– 8.

^ Sacks, Jonathan (2005).

To Heal a Fractured World: The Ethics of Responsibility . New York: Schocken. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-8264-8622-6 .

^ Patil, Vijaykumar (26 January 2015).

"Caste system hindering the goal of social justice: Siddaramaiah" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 4 September 2015.

^ Lee Jen-der (2014), "Crime and Punishment: The Case of Liu Hui in the Wei Shu", Early Medieval China: A Sourcebook , New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 156–165, ISBN 978-0-231-15987-6 .

^ Just Comment – Volume 3 Number 1, 2000 ^ Capeheart, Loretta; Milovanovic, Dragan.

Social Justice: Theories, Issues, and Movements .

^ In the mass media, 'Liberation Theology' can sometimes be used loosely, to refer to a wide variety of activist Christian thought. This article uses the term in the narrow sense outlined here.

^ Berryman, Phillip , Liberation Theology: essential facts about the revolutionary movement in Latin America and beyond (1987) ^ "[David] Horowitz first describes liberation theology as 'a form of Marxised Christianity,' which has validity despite the awkward phrasing, but then he calls it a form of 'Marxist-Leninist ideology,' which is simply not true for most liberation theology ..." Robert Shaffer, " Acceptable Bounds of Academic Discourse Archived 4 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine ," Organization of American Historians Newsletter 35, November 2007. URL retrieved 12 July 2010.

^ Liberation Theology and Its Role in Latin America . Elisabeth Erin Williams. Monitor: Journal of International Studies. The College of William and Mary.

^ Sarah Kleeb, "Envisioning Emancipation: Karl Marx, Gustavo Gutierrez, and the Struggle of Liberation Theology "; Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Canadian Society for the Study of Religion (CSSR), Toronto, 2006. Retrieved 22 October 2012. Copyright by Sarah Lynn Kleeb 2015 ^ Richard P. McBrien, Catholicism (Harper Collins, 1994), chapter IV.

^ Gustavo Gutierrez, A Theology of Liberation , First (Spanish) edition published in Lima, Peru, 1971; first English edition published by Orbis Books (Maryknoll, New York), 1973.

^ Farmer, Paul E., Bruce Nizeye, Sara Stulac, and Salmaan Keshavjee. 2006. Structural Violence and Clinical Medicine. PLoS Medicine, 1686–1691 ^ Cueto, Marcos. 2004. The ORIGINS of Primary Health Care and SELECTIVE Primary Health Care. Am J Public Health 94 (11):1868 ^ Hofrichter, Richard, ed. (2003).

Health and social justice: Politics, ideology, and inequity in the distribution of disease . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

ISBN 978-0-7879-6733-8 .

^ Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action, Part II, paragraph 80 ^ EA Posner and CR Sunstein Global Warming and Social Justice ^ JS Mastaler Social Justice and Environmental Displacement ^ A Dahlberg, R Rohde, K Sandell (2010) National Parks and Environmental Justice: Comparing Access Rights and Ideological Legacies in Three Countries Archived 1 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine 8, no. 3 pp.209-224 ^ RD Bullard (2005) The Quest for Environmental Justice: Human Rights and the Politics of Pollution (Counterpoint) ISBN 978-1-57805-120-5 ^ a b c Novak, Michael. "Defining social justice." First things (2000): 11-12.

^ Hayek, F.A. (1982).

Law, Legislation and Liberty, Vol. 2 . Routledge. p. 78.

^ O'Neill, Ben (16 March 2011) The Injustice of Social Justice Archived 28 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Mises Institute ^ a b Robinson, Nathan J. (28 May 2018).

"In Defense Of Social Justice" .

Current Affairs . Retrieved 14 August 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Social justice .

Library resources about Social justice Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Articles [ edit ] C Pérez-Garzón, ' What is social justice? A new history of its meaning in the transnational legal discourse ' (2019) 43 Revista Derecho del Estado 67–106, originally in Spanish: ' ¿Qué es justicia social? Una nueva historia de su significado en el discurso jurídico transnacional ' LD Brandeis , 'The Living Law' (1915–1916) 10 Illinois Law Review 461 A Etzioni, ' The Fair Society, Uniting America: Restoring the Vital Center to American Democracy Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine ' in N Garfinkle and D Yankelovich (eds) (Yale University Press 2005) pp. 211–223 Otto von Gierke , The Social Role of Private Law (2016) translated and introduced by E McGaughey, originally in German Die soziale Aufgabe des Privatrechts M Novak, ' Defining Social Justice ' (2000) First Things B O'Neill, ' The Injustice of Social Justice Archived 28 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine ' ( Mises Institute ) R Pound , 'Social Justice and Legal Justice' (1912) 75 Central Law Journal 455 M Powers and R Faden, ' Inequalities in health, inequalities in health care: four generations of discussion about justice and cost-effectiveness analysis ' (2000) 10(2) Kennedy Inst Ethics Journal 109–127 M Powers and R Faden, 'Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care: An Ethical Analysis of When and How They Matter,' in Unequal Treatment: Confronting Racial and Ethnic Disparities in Health Care (National Academy of Sciences, Institute of Medicine, 2002) 722–38 United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 'Social Justice in an Open World: The Role of the United Nations' (2006) ST/ESA/305 Books [ edit ] AB Atkinson , Social Justice and Public Policy (1982) previews Gad Barzilai , Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal Identities (University of Michigan Press) analysis of justice for non-ruling communities TN Carver , Essays in Social Justice (1915) Chapter links.

C Quigley The Evolution of Civilizations: An Introduction to Historical Analysis (1961) 2nd edition 1979 P Corning, The Fair Society: The Science of Human Nature and the Pursuit of Social Justice (Chicago UP 2011) WL Droel What is Social Justice (ACTA Publications 2011) R Faden and M Powers, Social Justice: The Moral Foundations of Public Health and Health Policy OUP 2006 ISBN 978-0-19-518926-1 J Franklin (ed), Life to the Full: Rights and Social Justice in Australia (Connor Court 2007) LC Frederking (2013) Reconstructing Social Justice (Routledge) ISBN 978-1-138-19402-1 FA Hayek , Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973) vol II, ch 3 G Kitching , Seeking Social Justice through Globalization: Escaping a Nationalist Perspective (2003) JS Mill , Utilitarianism (1863) T Massaro, S.J.

Living Justice: Catholic Social Teaching in Action (Rowman & Littlefield 2012) John Rawls , A Theory of Justice (Harvard University Press 1971) John Rawls , Political Liberalism (Columbia University Press 1993) C Philomena, B Hoose and G Mannion (eds), Social Justice: Theological and Practical Explorations (2007) A Swift , Political Philosophy (3rd edn 2013) ch 1 Michael J. Thompson, The Limits of Liberalism: A Republican Theory of Social Justice (International Journal of Ethics: vol. 7, no. 3 (2011) v t e Social work and related concepts Concepts Primary Social work Secondary Anti-oppressive practice Crisis intervention Community practice Community organization Critical social work Financial social work Gerontology Group development Leadership Management New Public Management Policy analysis Program evaluation Performance measurement Psychometrics Psychosocial assessment Cognitive behavioral therapy Recreational therapy Health psychology Solution focused brief therapy Strength-based practice Systems thinking Social justice Social actions Social medicine Social learning (social pedagogy) Types of social work Social case worker Child protection Forensic social worker Medical social worker Psychiatric social worker Rehabilitation worker School social worker Social work in the military Social group worker Social planning Welfare worker Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) Youth services Qualifications Qualifications for professional social work Bachelor of Social Work (BA, BSc or BSW) degree Socionom (Scandinavia) Master of Social Work degree (MA, MSc or MSW) Doctor of Social Work degree (Ph.D or DSW) International Association of Schools of Social Work Council on Social Work Education Schools of social work Social workers by nationality American Argentine Austrian Australian Bangladeshi Belgian British Canadian Dutch French German Guyanese Hong Kong Indian Indonesian Israeli Japanese Nepalese New Zealand Norwegian Pakistani Polish Swedish Trinidad and Tobago Ugandan Professional associations International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) National Alliance of Professional Social Workers National Association of Social Workers (American) Australian Association of Social Workers British Association of Social Workers Institute of Medical Social Workers (British) Canadian Association of Social Workers Scottish Children's Reporter Administration Professional Social Workers' Association (PSWA) Biographies Jane Addams Amartya Sen Harry Hopkins Joyce Lishman v t e Types of justice In philosophy Commutative Distributive Divine Interactional Global Natural Organizational Procedural Victor's Recognition Areas Climate Criminal Economic Environmental Equality Fairness Gender Military Racial Reproductive Restorative Retributive Resource Social Spatial Speedy Trade Transformative Utilitarian Other Frontier Poetic v t e Social and environmental accountability Ethics and principles Aarhus Convention Climate justice Corporate accountability / behaviour / environmental responsibility / responsibility / social responsibility Dirty hands Environmental racism / in Russia / in the United States / in Western Europe / inequality in the UK / injustice in Europe Ethical banking Ethical code Extended producer responsibility Externality Harm Little Eichmanns Loss and damage Organizational ethics Organizational justice Pollution Principles for Responsible Investment Racism Social impact assessment Social justice Social responsibility Stakeholder theory Sullivan principles Transparency (behavioral social) UN Global Compact Social accounting Corporate crime Double bottom line Ethical positioning index Higg Index Impact assessment ( environmental equality social ) ISO 26000 ISO 45001 Genuine progress indicator Performance indicator SA 8000 OHSAS 18001 Social return on investment Whole-life cost Environmental accounting Carbon accounting Eco-Management and Audit Scheme Emission inventory Environmental full-cost accounting / Environmental conflict / impact assessment / management system / profit-and-loss account ISO 14000 ISO 14031 Life-cycle assessment Pollutant release and transfer register Sustainability accounting / measurement / metrics and indices / standards and certification / supply chain Toxics Release Inventory Triple bottom line Reporting Global Reporting Initiative GxP guidelines Sustainability reporting Auditing Community-based monitoring Environmental ( certification ) Fair trade ( certification ) ISO 19011 Related Bangladesh Accord Benefit corporation Child labour Community interest company Conflict of interest Disasters Disinvestment Eco-labeling Environmental degradation Environmental pricing reform Environmental, social, and corporate governance Ethical consumerism Euthenics Global justice movement Health impact assessment Market governance mechanism Product certification Public participation SDG Publishers Compact Social enterprise Socially responsible business Socially responsible investing Socially responsible marketing Stakeholder ( engagement ) Supply chain management Environment portal Category Commons Organizations Social justice at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐wdtbg
Cached time: 20250818153512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.379 seconds
Real time usage: 1.697 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12301/1000000
Revision size: 71066/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 357923/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9267/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 327207/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.766/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21808865/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1285.180      1 -total
 27.72%  356.302      1 Template:Reflist
 19.08%  245.239     27 Template:Annotated_link
 10.93%  140.499      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.46%  121.634     14 Template:Cite_web
  9.22%  118.503      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
  7.92%  101.758     21 Template:Cite_book
  4.44%   57.093      1 Template:Subject_bar
  4.16%   53.484      1 Template:Short_description
  3.79%   48.757      5 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:48990:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818153512 and revision id 1305197229. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_justice&oldid=1305197229 " Categories : Social justice Concepts in political philosophy Christian democracy Justice Progressivism Social inequality Social liberalism Social work Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from November 2020 Use American English from November 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from October 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2017 Articles needing cleanup from May 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from May 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from April 2018 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2018 Articles with excerpts Articles with criticism or controversy sections from August 2023 All articles with criticism or controversy sections Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social justice 53 languages Add topic

