Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Terminology 1.2 Movement 1.3 Equal Rights Amendment 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Equal rights 2.2 LGBT rights 3 Schools of thought Toggle Schools of thought subsection 3.1 Neoliberal feminism 3.2 Libertarian feminism 3.3 Western feminism 3.4 Equity feminism 4 Writers Toggle Writers subsection 4.1 Mary Wollstonecraft 4.2 Elizabeth Cady Stanton 4.3 John Stuart Mill 4.4 Betty Friedan 5 Notable liberal feminists 6 Organizations Toggle Organizations subsection 6.1 National Organization for Women 6.2 National Women's Political Caucus 6.3 Women's Equity Action League 6.4 Norwegian Association for Women's Rights 6.5 Other organizations 7 Symbolism 8 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 8.1 Gender roles 8.2 Racial attitudes 9 See also 10 Explanatory notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Liberal feminism 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски مازِرونی 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Main branch of feminism Not to be confused with Libertarian feminism or Individualist feminism .

Part of a series on Liberal feminism People Mary Wollstonecraft Judith Sargent Murray John Stuart Mill Harriet Taylor Mill Susan B. Anthony Elizabeth Cady Stanton Millicent Fawcett Gina Krog Hagbart Berner Fredrikke Marie Qvam Carrie Chapman Catt Margery Corbett Ashby Hanna Rydh Margarete Bonnevie Eva Kolstad Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan Betty Friedan Groups Seneca Falls Convention (1848) National Women's Rights Convention (1850) German Association of Female Citizens (1865) National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) National Woman Suffrage Association (1869) American Woman Suffrage Association (1869) Danish Women's Society (1871) Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (1884) Fredrika Bremer Association (1884) International Council of Women (1888) National Council of Women of the United States (1888) National American Woman Suffrage Association (1890) Naisasialiitto Unioni (1892) Bund Deutscher Frauenvereine (1894) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (1897) International Alliance of Women (1904) Icelandic Women's Rights Association (1907) Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (1915) League of Women Voters (1920) All India Women's Conference (1927) League of Women Voters of Japan (1946) Deutscher Frauenring (1949) German Women's Council (1951) Fawcett Society (1953) National Organization for Women (1966) National Women's Political Caucus (1971) National Women's Law Center (1972) UN Women (2010) Issues Anti-discrimination law Female education Feminist foreign policy Gender equality Gender pay gap and equal pay for equal work Glass ceiling LGBT+ rights Right to work Sexism Sex-positive feminism Violence against women Women in development Women's suffrage Variants Difference feminism Equality feminism Equity feminism Individualist feminism Liberal state feminism Social feminism Symbolism Sunflower v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Liberal feminism , also called mainstream feminism , [ a ] is a main branch of feminism defined by its focus on achieving gender equality through political and legal reform within the framework of liberal democracy and informed by a human rights perspective. It is often considered culturally progressive and economically center-right to center-left . As the oldest of the "Big Three" schools of feminist thought, [ 1 ] liberal feminism has its roots in 19th century first-wave feminism seeking recognition of women as equal citizens, focusing particularly on women's suffrage and access to education , the effort associated with 19th century liberalism and progressivism . Liberal feminism "works within the structure of mainstream society to integrate women into that structure." [ 2 ] Liberal feminism places great emphasis on the public world, especially laws, political institutions, education and working life, and considers the denial of equal legal and political rights as the main obstacle to equality. As such liberal feminists have worked to bring women into the political mainstream. Liberal feminism is inclusive and socially progressive, while broadly supporting existing institutions of power in liberal democratic societies, and is associated with centrism and reformism . Liberal feminism tends to be adopted by white middle-class women who do not disagree with the current social structure; [ 3 ] Zhang and Rios found that liberal feminism with its focus on equality is viewed as the dominant and "default" form of feminism.

[ 3 ] Liberal feminism actively supports men's involvement in feminism and both women and men have always been active participants in the movement; progressive men had an important role alongside women in the struggle for equal political rights since the movement was launched in the 19th century.

[ 4 ] Historically, liberal feminism largely grew out of and was often associated with social liberalism ; the modern liberal feminist tradition notably includes both social liberal and social democratic streams, as well as many often diverging schools of thought such as equality feminism , social feminism , care-ethical liberal feminism, equity feminism , difference feminism , conservative liberal feminism, and liberal socialist feminism.

[ 5 ] Some forms of modern liberal feminism have been described as neoliberal feminism [ 6 ] or "boardroom feminism".

[ 7 ] Liberal feminism is often closely associated with liberal internationalism . In many countries, particularly in the West but also in a number of secular states in the developing world, liberal feminism is associated with the concept of state feminism , and liberal feminism emphasizes constructive cooperation with the government and involvement in parliamentary and legislative processes to pursue reforms.

[ 4 ] Liberal feminism is also called "mainstream feminism", "reformist feminism", "egalitarian feminism", or historically "bourgeois feminism" (or bourgeois-liberal feminism), among other names.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] As one of the "Big Three" schools of feminist thought, [ 1 ] liberal feminism is often contrasted with socialist / Marxist feminism and radical feminism : unlike them, liberal feminism seeks gradual social progress and equality on the basis of liberal democracy rather than a revolution or radical reordering of society.

[ 1 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Liberal feminism and mainstream feminism are very broad terms, frequently taken to encompass all feminism that is not radical or revolutionary socialist/Marxist and that instead pursues equality through political, legal, and social reform within a liberal democratic framework. As such, liberal feminists may subscribe to a range of different feminist beliefs and political ideologies within the democratic spectrum from the centre-left to the centre-right .

Inherently pragmatic in orientation, liberal feminists have emphasized building far-reaching support for feminist causes among both women and men, and among the political centre, the government and legislatures. In the 21st century, liberal feminism has taken a turn toward an intersectional understanding of gender equality, [ 14 ] and modern liberal feminists support LGBT rights as a core feminist issue.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Liberal feminists typically support laws and regulations that promote gender equality and ban practices that are discriminatory towards women; mainstream liberal feminists, particularly those of a social democratic bent, often support social measures to reduce material inequality within a liberal democratic framework. While rooted in first-wave feminism and traditionally focused on political and legal reform, the broader liberal feminist tradition may include parts of subsequent waves of feminism, especially third-wave feminism and fourth-wave feminism . The sunflower and the color gold, taken to represent enlightenment, became widely used symbols of mainstream liberal feminism and women's suffrage from the 1860s, originally in the United States and later also in parts of Europe.

[ 17 ] Origins [ edit ] Terminology [ edit ] The specific term "liberal feminism" is fairly modern, but its political tradition is much older. " Feminism " became the dominant term in English for the struggle for women's rights in the late 20th century, around a century after the organized liberal women's rights movement came into existence, but most western feminist historians contend that all movements working to obtain women's rights should be considered feminist movements, even when they did not (or do not) apply the term to themselves.

[ 18 ] Historically, the bourgeois women's rights movement—the predecessor of modern liberal feminism—was mainly contrasted with the working-class or "proletarian" women's movements, which eventually developed into called socialist and Marxist feminism . Since the 1960s, both liberal feminism and the "proletarian" or socialist/Marxist women's movements are also contrasted with radical feminism . Liberal feminism is usually included as one of the two, three, or four main traditions in the history of feminism.

[ 19 ] [ 9 ] Many liberal feminists embraced the term "feminism" in the 1970s or 1980s. However, some initially expressed scepticism towards the term. For example, the liberal feminist Norwegian Association for Women's Rights expressed scepticism towards the term "feminism" as late as 1980 because it could foster "unnecessary antagonism towards men"; [ 20 ] however, they accepted the term some years later as it increasingly became the mainstream general term for the women's rights struggle in the western world.

[ 4 ] Movement [ edit ] Mary Wollstonecraft Liberal feminism ultimately has historical roots in classical liberalism and was often associated with social liberalism from the late 19th century. The goal for liberal feminists beginning in the late 18th century was to gain suffrage for women with the idea that this would allow them to gain individual liberty. They were concerned with gaining freedom through equality, diminishing men's cruelty to women, and gaining opportunities to become full persons.

[ 21 ] They believed that no government or custom should prohibit the due exercise of personal freedom. Early liberal feminists had to counter the assumption that only white men deserved to be full citizens. Pioneers such as Mary Wollstonecraft , Judith Sargent Murray , and Frances Wright advocated for women's full political inclusion.

[ 21 ] In 1920, after nearly 50 years of intense activism, women were finally granted the right to vote and the right to hold public office in the United States, and in much of the Western world within a few decades before or a few decades after this time.

Liberal feminism was largely quiet in the United States for four decades after winning the vote. In the 1960s during the civil rights movement, liberal feminists drew parallels between systemic race discrimination and sex discrimination.

[ 22 ] Groups such as the National Organization for Women , the National Women's Political Caucus , and the Women's Equity Action League were all created at that time to further women's rights. In the U.S., these groups have worked, thus far unsuccessfully, for the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment or "Constitutional Equity Amendment", in the hopes it will ensure that men and women are treated as equals under the law. Specific issues important to liberal feminists include but are not limited to reproductive rights and abortion access, sexual harassment, voting, education, fair compensation for work, affordable childcare, affordable health care, and bringing to light the frequency of sexual and domestic violence against women.

[ 23 ] Equal Rights Amendment [ edit ] Main article: Equal Rights Amendment A fair number of American liberal feminists believe that equality in pay, job opportunities, political structure, social security, and education for women especially needs to be guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution .

Three years after women won the right to vote, the Equal Right Amendment (ERA) was introduced in Congress by Senator Charles Curtis and Representative Daniel Read Anthony Jr.

, both Republicans . This amendment stated that civil rights cannot be denied on the basis of one's sex. It was authored by Alice Paul , head of the National Woman's Party , who led the suffrage campaign. Through the efforts of Alice Paul, the Amendment was introduced into each session of the United States Congress , but it was buried in committee in both Houses of Congress. In 1946, it was narrowly defeated by the full Senate , 38–35. In February 1970, twenty NOW leaders disrupted the hearings of the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Amendments, demanding the ERA be heard by the full Congress. In May of that year, the Senate Subcommittee began hearings on the ERA under Senator Birch Bayh . In June, the ERA finally left the House Judiciary Committee due to a discharge petition filed by Representative Martha Griffiths . In March 1972, the ERA was approved by the full Senate without changes, 84–8. Senator Sam Ervin and Representative Emanuel Celler succeeded in setting a time limit of seven years for ratification. The ERA then went to the individual states for approval but failed to win in enough of them (38) to become law. In 1978, Congress passed a disputed (less than supermajority ) three-year extension on the original seven-year ratification limit, but the ERA could not gain approval by the needed number of states.

[ 24 ] The state legislatures that were most hostile to the ERA were Utah, Florida, Illinois, North Carolina, and Oklahoma. The NOW holds that the single most obvious problem in passing the ERA was the gender and racial imbalance in the legislatures. More than 2/3 of the women and all of the African Americans in state legislatures voted for the ERA, but less than 50% of the white men in the targeted legislatures cast pro-ERA votes in 1982.

[ 25 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Equal rights [ edit ] Gina Krog , a Norwegian liberal feminist who became the leader of the first wave feminist movement in Norway and who founded the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights and the journal Nylænde According to Anthony Giddens , liberal feminist theory "believes gender inequality is produced by reduced access for women and girls to civil rights and allocation of social resources such as education and employment." [ 26 ] Catherine Rottenberg notes that the raison d'être of classic liberal feminism was "to pose an immanent critique of liberalism, revealing the gendered exclusions within liberal democracy’s proclamation of universal equality, particularly with respect to the law, institutional access, and the full incorporation of women into the public sphere." Rottenberg contrasts classic liberal feminism with modern neoliberal feminism which "seems perfectly in sync with the evolving neoliberal order." [ 6 ] At its core, liberal feminism believes in pragmatic "reforms against gender discrimination through the promotion of equal rights by engaging and formulating laws and policies that will ensure equality." [ 27 ] Liberal feminists argue that society holds the false belief that women are, by nature, less intellectually and physically capable than men; thus it tends to discriminate against women in the academy, the forum, and the marketplace. Liberal feminists believe that "female subordination is rooted in a set of customary and legal constraints that blocks women's entrance to and success in the so-called public world", and strive for gender equality via political and legal reform.

[ 22 ] [ 28 ] Cathrine Holst notes that "the bourgeois women's rights movement was liberal or liberal feminist. The bourgeois women's rights advocates fought for women’s civil liberties and rights: freedom of speech, freedom of movement, the right to vote, freedom of association, inheritance rights, property rights, and freedom of trade – and for women's access to education and working life. In short, women should have the same freedoms and rights as men." [ 29 ] Political liberalism gave feminism a familiar platform for convincing others that their reforms "could and should be incorporated into existing law".

[ 30 ] Liberal feminists argued that women, like men, be regarded as autonomous individuals, and likewise be accorded the rights of such.

[ 30 ] Inherently pragmatic , liberal feminists tend to focus on practical reforms of laws and policies in order to achieve equality ; liberal feminism has a more individualistic approach to justice than left-wing branches of feminism such as socialist or radical feminism.

[ 31 ] Susan Wendell argues that "liberal feminism is an historical tradition that grew out of liberalism, as can be seen very clearly in the work of such feminists as Mary Wollstonecraft and John Stuart Mill, but feminists who took principles from that tradition have developed analyses and goals that go far beyond those of 18th and 19th century liberal feminists, and many feminists who have goals and strategies identified as liberal feminist ... reject major components of liberalism" in a modern or party-political sense; she highlights "equality of opportunity" as a defining feature of liberal feminism.

[ 31 ] Helga Hernes notes that liberal feminism has often been critical of liberalist political positions and that liberal feminism and liberalism in general are not necessarily the same.

[ 32 ] Lucy E. Bailey notes that liberal feminism is characterized by "its focus on individual rights and reform through the state" and that it has "been instrumental in fueling women's rights movements in diverse contexts and remains a familiar and widespread form of feminist thought. Liberal feminism emerged as a distinct political tradition during the Enlightenment (...) Liberal feminist theory emphasizes women's individual rights to autonomy and proposes remedies for gender inequities through, variously, removing legal and social constraints or advancing conditions that support women's equality." [ 33 ] LGBT rights [ edit ] Main articles: LGBT rights and Feminist views on transgender topics Liberal feminist organizations are broadly inclusive and thus tend to support LGBT rights in the modern era. For example, the two largest American feminist organizations, the liberal feminist National Organization for Women (NOW) and the League of Women Voters (LWV) both regard LGBT rights as a core feminist issue and vehemently support trans rights and oppose transphobia .

[ 34 ] NOW president Terry O'Neill said the struggle against transphobia is a feminist issue.

[ 35 ] NOW has affirmed that "trans women are women, trans girls are girls." [ 36 ] In a further statement NOW said that "trans women are women. They deserve equal opportunity, health care, a safe community & workplace, and they deserve to play sports. They have a right to have their identity respected without conforming to perceived sex and gender identity standards. We stand with you." [ 37 ] Similarly, the traditionally dominant liberal feminist international non-governmental organization , the International Alliance of Women (IAW) and its affiliates are trans-inclusive; IAW's Icelandic affiliate, the Icelandic Women's Rights Association , has stated that "IWRA works for the rights of all women. Feminism without trans women is no feminism at all." [ 38 ] On Women's Rights Day in Iceland in 2020, the Icelandic Women's Rights Association organised an event together with Trans Ísland that saw several different feminist organisations in the country discuss strategies to stop anti-trans sentiment from increasing its influence in Iceland.

[ 39 ] Later that year, Trans Ísland was unanimously granted status as a member association of the Icelandic Women's Rights Association.

[ 40 ] In 2021 the International Alliance of Women and the Icelandic Women's Rights Association organized an event on how the women's movement could counter "anti-trans voices [that] are becoming ever louder and [that] are threatening feminist solidarity across borders." [ 41 ] The Danish Women's Society supports LGBTQA rights, and has stated that it takes homophobia and transphobia very seriously, and that "we support all initiatives that promote the rights of gay and transgender people." [ 42 ] The Norwegian Association for Women's Rights is trans-inclusive and supports legal protections against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] The Deutscher Frauenring is intersectional and opposes transphobia.

[ 45 ] In November 2020, on Trans Day of Remembrance, the National Women's Council of Ireland and Amnesty International Ireland co-signed a statement along with a number of LGBT+ and human rights groups condemning trans-exclusionary feminism. The letter called upon the media and politicians "to no longer provide legitimate representation for those that share bigoted beliefs, that are aligned with far-right ideologies and seek nothing but harm and division" and stated that "these fringe internet accounts stand against affirmative medical care of transgender people, and they stand against the right to self-identification of transgender people in this country. In summation, they stand against trans, women’s, and gay rights by aligning themselves with far-right tropes and stances." [ 46 ] UN Women works to promote gender equality and the rights of women and LGBTIQ+ people, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] and "urgently calls on communities and governments around the world to stand up for LGBTIQ+ rights." [ 49 ] The Association for Women's Rights in Development (AWID) supports LGBTIQ rights and opposes the anti-gender movement , and has described trans-exclusionary feminists as "trojan horses in human rights spaces" that seek to undermine human rights; AWID said that anti-trans activity is "alarming," that "the 'sex-based' rhetoric misuses concepts of sex and gender to push a deeply discriminatory agenda" and that "trans-exclusionary feminists (...) undermine progressions on gender and sexuality and protection of rights of marginalized groups." [ 50 ] To be clear, while there are debates, UN Women is said to be a liberal feminist organization.

[ 51 ] As evidence, although they seem to acknowledge intersectionality, [ 52 ] UN Women still evaluate gender equality in each country by looking at how integrated women are into hegemonic society, for example they measure how many women are in a position of CEO and politician.

[ 51 ] Schools of thought [ edit ] Liberal feminism as a broad school of thought and main tradition in feminism includes many different varieties, such as equality feminism , social feminism , equity feminism , and difference feminism .

State feminism is often linked to liberal feminism, particularly in Western countries. Some forms of modern liberal feminism have been described as neoliberal feminism.

[ 6 ] Neoliberal feminism [ edit ] Neoliberal feminism emerged in the 2010s. In The Rise of Neoliberal Feminism , Rottenberg defines neoliberalism as a “new form of selfhood, which encourages people as individual subjects responsible for their own well-being” as well as it ensures the individual right to their own autonomous decision making (p. 421).

[ 53 ] The author argues that neoliberal feminism emerged from neoliberalism being espoused by “increasingly high-powered women”, for example Anne-Marie Slaughter and Sheryl Sandberg (p. 418). Even though Sandberg states in Lean In that she “supports who want to eliminate external barriers” so that every woman can lean in, she argues that as the first step, women should lean in so as to reform society (p. 3).

[ 54 ] Therefore, women who are worried about the possibility of having a child at the cost of her career should not “lean back” but keep leaning in (p. 51). Sandberg does not seek reformation of social system, which she even calls “the rat race” (p. 51). Neoliberal feminists apparently realize the gender inequality. However, they value women who accept the responsibility for taking balance between work and family following the theory of neoliberalism, in which they do not accuse the state but take care of their own well-being. As a political reason for emergence of neoliberal feminism, Rottenberg asserts that by “responsiblizing” women, neoliberalism feminism is useful for diffusing social issues (i.e., sexism, racism, capitalism).

Libertarian feminism [ edit ] Individualist or libertarian feminism is sometimes grouped as one of many branches of feminism with historical roots in liberal feminism but tends to diverge significantly from mainstream liberal feminism on many issues. For example, "libertarian feminism does not require social measures to reduce material inequality; in fact, it opposes such measures ... in contrast, liberal feminism may support such requirements and egalitarian versions of feminism insist on them." [ 55 ] Libertarian feminists tend to focus more on sexual politics, a topic traditionally of less concern to liberal feminists. Mainstream liberal feminists, such as the National Organization for Women , tend to oppose prostitution , but are somewhat divided on prostitution politics, unlike both libertarian and radical feminists.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Western feminism [ edit ] Liberal feminist organizations such as the International Alliance of Women tend to be supportive of liberal democratic states' foreign and security policy, and maintained a clear pro- Western stance throughout the Cold War .

[ 59 ] From the second half of the 20th century women in development has increasingly become an important topic for liberal feminist organizations.

Hillary Clinton is often considered a liberal feminist, and has defined "feminist" in accordance with the liberal feminist definition as "someone who believes in equal rights." [ 60 ] Some articles do not clearly describe her as a liberal feminist, yet argue that Clinton's policy and her white privilege ignore many women, for instance women of color, low-income women, and immigrants [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] while NOW (2015) admire her as “a trailblazer for women with an impressive record of public service where she put women’s rights at the forefront”.

[ 64 ] Equity feminism [ edit ] Main article: Equity feminism Equity feminism is a form of liberal feminism discussed since the 1980s, [ 65 ] [ 66 ] specifically a kind of classically liberal or libertarian feminism, emphasizing equality under law, equal freedoms, and rights, rather than profound social transformations.

[ 67 ] The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy refers to Wendy McElroy , Joan Kennedy Taylor , Cathy Young , Rita Simon, Katie Roiphe , Diana Furchtgott-Roth , Christine Stolba, and Christina Hoff Sommers as equity feminists.

[ 67 ] Steven Pinker , an evolutionary psychologist , identifies himself as an equity feminist, which he defines as "a moral doctrine about equal treatment that makes no commitments regarding open empirical issues in psychology or biology".

[ 68 ] Barry Kuhle asserts that equity feminism is compatible with evolutionary psychology , in contrast to gender feminism .

[ 69 ] Writers [ edit ] Feminist writers associated with this theory include Mary Wollstonecraft , John Stuart Mill , Helen Taylor , Elizabeth Cady Stanton , and Gina Krog ; Second Wave feminists Betty Friedan , Gloria Steinem , Simone de Beauvoir ; and Third Wave feminist Rebecca Walker .

Mary Wollstonecraft [ edit ] Mary Wollstonecraft Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797) has been very influential in her writings as A Vindication of the Rights of Woman commented on society's view of women and encouraged women to use their voices in making decisions separate from decisions previously made for them. Wollstonecraft "denied that women are, by nature, more pleasure seeking and pleasure giving than men. She reasoned that if they were confined to the same cages that trap women, men would develop the same flawed characters. What Wollstonecraft most wanted for women was personhood." [ 22 ] She argued that patriarchal oppression is a form of slavery that could no longer be ignored [ citation needed ] . Wollstonecraft argued that the inequality between men and women existed due to the disparity between their educations. Along with Judith Sargent Murray and Frances Wright, Wollstonecraft was one of the first major advocates for women's full inclusion in politics.

Elizabeth Cady Stanton [ edit ] Elizabeth Cady Stanton Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902) was one of the most influential women in first wave feminism . An American social activist, she was instrumental in orchestrating the Seneca Falls Convention , the first women's rights convention, which was held in Seneca Falls, New York. Not only was the suffragist movement important to Stanton, she also was involved in women's parental and custody rights, divorce laws, birth control, employment and financial rights, among other issues.

[ 70 ] Her partner in this movement was the equally influential Susan B. Anthony .  Together, they fought for a linguistic shift in the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments to include "female".

[ 71 ] Additionally, in 1890 she founded the National American Woman Suffrage Association and presided as president until 1892.

[ 71 ] She produced many speeches, resolutions, letters, calls, and petitions that fed the first wave and kept the spirit alive.

[ 72 ] Furthermore, by gathering a large number of signatures, she aided the passage of the Married Women's Property Act of 1848 which considered women legally independent of their husbands and granted the property of their own. Together these women formed what was known as the NWSA (National Women Suffrage Association), which focused on working with legislatures and the courts to gain suffrage.

John Stuart Mill [ edit ] John Stuart Mill John Stuart Mill (20 May 1806 – 7 May 1873) believed that both sexes should have equal rights under the law and that "until conditions of equality exist, no one can possibly assess the natural differences between women and men, distorted as they have been. What is natural to the two sexes can only be found out by allowing both to develop and use their faculties freely." [ 73 ] Mill frequently spoke of this imbalance and wondered if women were able to feel the same "genuine unselfishness" that men did in providing for their families. This unselfishness Mill advocated is the one "that motivates people to take into account the good of society as well as the good of the individual person or small family unit".

[ 22 ] Similar to Mary Wollstonecraft, Mill compared sexual inequality to slavery, arguing that their husbands are often just as abusive as masters and that a human being controls nearly every aspect of life for another human being. In his book The Subjection of Women , Mill argues that three major parts of women's lives are hindering them: society and gender construction, education, and marriage.

[ 74 ] He also argues that sex inequality is greatly inhibiting the progress of humanity.

Betty Friedan [ edit ] Betty Friedan Betty Friedan (1921–2006) was a liberal feminist prominent in the 1960s.

[ 75 ] She was a co-founder and the first president of NOW , and contributed to the second wave feminism. Her book The Feminine Mystique , written in 1963, became a landmark bestseller and significantly influential by rebuking the fulfillment of middle-class women for domestic lives.

[ 76 ] In her book, Friedan reversed the discourse of American housewife as ideal and happy and pointed out dissatisfaction and loneliness which were faced by many American women in the 1950s and 1960s. She described these women's experience as a problem without name and called for financial independence of women for liberation. Many articles argue that Friedan was unaware of her white privilege and failed to realize intersectionality of women.

[ 75 ] [ 77 ] [ 76 ] For example, by stating that "only economic independence can free a woman to marry for love", Friedan attempted to encourage every woman not to "be afraid of flying" and seek their own lives outside of household.

[ 78 ] : 464, 476 She also argued the necessity of a social and political women's movement by raising the black civil rights movement as a model.

[ 78 ] However, she did not try to combine those movements together, nor was black women's experience considered in feminist context. Instead, she presumed the separation of issues of race and sex.

Notable liberal feminists [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( October 2020 ) 18th century Judith Sargent Murray Mary Wollstonecraft Frances Wright 19th century Susan B. Anthony Gina Krog John Stuart Mill Elizabeth Cady Stanton Harriet Taylor Harriet Tubman 20th century Margarete Bonnevie Karin M. Bruzelius Betty Friedan Eva Kolstad Martha Nussbaum Gloria Steinem Nadine Strossen [ 79 ] Rebecca Walker Naomi Wolf 21st century Hillary Clinton Kamala Harris Sheryl Sandberg Anne-Marie Slaughter Organizations [ edit ] National Organization for Women [ edit ] The National Organization for Women (NOW) is the largest liberal feminist organization in the United States. It supports the Equal Rights Amendment , reproductive rights including freer access to abortion, as well as lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender rights ( LGBT rights ), and economic justice . It opposes violence against women and racism.

Various other issues the National Organization for Women also deals with are: Affirmative action Disability rights EcoFeminism Family Opposing right-wing causes contrary to NOW's interests Global feminism Women's health Immigration Promotion of nominating judges with feminist viewpoints Legislation Legal recognition of same-sex marriages Media activism Mothers' economic rights Working for peace; opposition to conflicts such as the Iraq War Social Security Supreme Court Title IX/Education Welfare Workplace discrimination Women in the military Young feminist programs National Women's Political Caucus [ edit ] The National Women's Political Caucus (NWPC), founded in 1971, is the only national organization in the U.S. dedicated exclusively to increasing women's participation in all areas of political and public life as elected and appointed officials, as delegates to national party conventions, as judges in the state and federal courts, and as lobbyists, voters and campaign organizers.

[ 80 ] Founders of NWPC include such prominent women as Gloria Steinem , author, lecturer and founding editor of Ms. Magazine ; former Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm ; former Congresswoman Bella Abzug ; Dorothy Height , former president of the National Council of Negro Women ; Jill Ruckelshaus , former U.S. Civil Rights Commissioner; Ann Lewis , former Political Director of the Democratic National Committee ; Elly Peterson , former vice-chair of the Republican National Committee ; LaDonna Harris , Indian rights leader; Liz Carpenter , author, lecturer and former press secretary to Lady Bird Johnson ; and Eleanor Holmes Norton , Delegate to the U.S. House of Representatives and former chair of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission .

These women were spurred by Congress' failure to pass the Equal Rights Amendment in 1970. They believed legal, economic and social equity would come about only when women were equally represented among the nation's political decision-makers. Their faith that women's interests would best be served by women lawmakers has been confirmed time and time again, as women in Congress, state legislatures and city halls across the country have introduced, fought for and won legislation to eliminate sex discrimination and meet women's changing needs.

[ 80 ] Women's Equity Action League [ edit ] The Women's Equity Action League (WEAL) was a national membership organization, with state chapters and divisions, founded in 1968 and dedicated to improving the status and lives of women primarily through education, litigation, and legislation. It was a more conservative organization than NOW and was formed largely by former members of that organization who did not share the NOW's assertive stance on socio-sexual issues, particularly on abortion rights . WEAL spawned a sister organization, the Women's Equity Action League Fund, which was incorporated in 1972 "to help secure legal rights for women and to carry on educational and research projects on sex discrimination". The two organizations merged in 1981 following changes in the tax code.

[ 81 ] WEAL dissolved in 1989.

[ 82 ] The stated purposes of WEAL were: to promote greater economic progress on the part of American women; to press for full enforcement of existing anti-discriminatory laws on behalf of women; to seek correction of de facto discrimination against women; to gather and disseminate information and educational material; to investigate instances of, and seek solutions to, economic, educational, tax, and employment problems affecting women; to urge that girls be prepared to enter more advanced career fields; to seek reappraisal of federal, state, and local laws and practices limiting women's employment opportunities; to combat by all lawful means, job discrimination against women in the pay, promotional or advancement policies of governmental or private employers; to seek the cooperation and coordination of all American women, individually or as organizations *to attain these objectives, whether through legislation, litigation, or other means and by doing any and all things necessary or incident thereto.

Norwegian Association for Women's Rights [ edit ] Margarete Bonnevie , President (1936–1946) of the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (NKF), said that NKF would work for solutions that are in the best interest of all women and society, "be the captain who keeps a steady course" in the struggle for equality and "set out the main policy objectives and seek to get the government, parliament and local government bodies to implement the reforms that are required" [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Norway has had a tradition of government-supported liberal feminism since 1884, when the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (NKF) was founded with the support of the progressive establishment within the then-dominant governing Liberal Party (which received 63.4% of the votes in the election the following year). The association's founders included five Norwegian prime ministers, and several of its early leaders were married to prime ministers. Rooted in first-wave liberal feminism, it works "to promote gender equality and women's and girls' human rights within the framework of liberal democracy and through political and legal reform ".

[ 85 ] NKF members had key roles in developing the government apparatus and legislation related to gender equality in Norway since 1884; with the professionalization of gender equality advocacy from 1970s, the "Norwegian government adopted NKF's [equality] ideology as its own" [ 4 ] and adopted laws and established government institutions such as the Gender Equality Ombud based on NKF's proposals; the new government institutions to promote gender equality were also largely built and led by prominent NKF members such as Eva Kolstad , NKF's former president and the first Gender Equality Ombud. NKF's feminist tradition has often been described as Norway's state feminism . The term state feminism itself was coined by NKF member Helga Hernes .

[ 4 ] Although it grew out of 19th-century progressive liberalism, Norwegian liberal feminism is not limited to liberalism in a modern party-political sense, and NKF is broadly representative of the democratic political spectrum from the center-left to the center-right, including the social democratic Labour Party . Norwegian supreme court justice and former NKF President Karin Maria Bruzelius has described NKF's liberal feminism as "a realistic, sober, practical feminism".

[ 86 ] Other organizations [ edit ] Feminist Majority Foundation Ms.

Magazine EMILY's List Icelandic Women's Rights Association Symbolism [ edit ] Plate with the symbol and motto of the International Woman Suffrage Alliance , featuring a sun and the color gold, with the motto "Jus Suffragii" (the right to vote) and Lady Justice holding a balance in her right hand.

The sunflower (and sometimes by analogy the Sun ) and the color yellow/gold ( Or in heraldry), taken to represent enlightenment, became widely used symbols of the mainstream liberal women's rights movement and women's suffrage from the 1860s, originally in the United States and later also in parts of Europe. The suffragists and liberal feminists Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony encouraged the use of the sunflower by wearing sunflower pins when campaigning for the right to vote in 1867 in Kansas. Hence the colors yellow and white became the main colors of the international liberal (also called mainstream or bourgeois) suffrage movement around the turn of the century, notably used by the International Woman Suffrage Alliance . Historians Cheris Kramarae and Paula A. Treichler noted that Colors were important in the iconography of the suffrage movement. The use of the color gold began with Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony’s campaign in Kansas in 1867 and derived from the color of the sunflower, the Kansas state symbol. Suffragists used gold pins, ribbons, sashes, and yellow roses to symbolize their cause. In 1876, during the U.S. Centennial, women wore yellow ribbons and sang the song “The Yellow Ribbon.” In 1916, suffragists staged “The Golden Lane” at the national Democratic convention; to reach the convention hall, all delegates had to walk through a line of women stretching several blocks long, dressed in white with gold sashes, carrying yellow umbrellas, and accompanied by hundreds of yards of draped gold bunting. Gold also signified enlightenment, the professed goal of the mainstream U.S. suffrage movement.

— Cheris Kramarae & Paula A. Treichler [ 87 ] The sunflower and/or the color yellow/gold remain in use among the older liberal (bourgeois) feminist organizations such as the Norwegian Association for Women's Rights and the International Alliance of Women that were founded during the struggle for women's suffrage.

The color yellow is also widely used as a symbol of liberalism in general.

[ 88 ] Criticism [ edit ] Gender roles [ edit ] Critics of liberal feminism argue that its individualist assumptions make it difficult to see the ways in which underlying social structures and values disadvantage women. They argue that even if women are not dependent upon individual men, they are still dependent upon a patriarchal state. These critics believe that institutional changes, like the introduction of women's suffrage , are insufficient to emancipate women.

[ 89 ] According to Zhang and Rios, "liberal feminism tends to be adopted by 'mainstream' (i.e., middle-class) women who do not disagree with the current social structure." They found that liberal feminist beliefs were viewed as the dominant and "default" form of feminism.

[ 3 ] One of the more prevalent critiques of liberal feminism is that it, as a study, allows too much of its focus to fall on a "metamorphosis" of women into men, and in doing so, it disregards the significance of the traditional role of women.

[ 22 ] One of the leading scholars who have critiqued liberal feminism is radical feminist Catherine A. MacKinnon , an American lawyer, writer, and social activist. Specializing in issues regarding sex equality, she has been intimately involved in cases regarding the definition of sexual harassment and sex discrimination.

[ 12 ] She, among other radical feminist scholars, views liberalism and feminism as incompatible, because liberalism offers women a "piece of the pie as currently and poisonously baked".

[ 90 ] Racial attitudes [ edit ] bell hooks ' main criticism of the philosophies of liberal feminism is that they focus too much on an equality with men in their own class.

[ 91 ] She maintains that the "cultural basis of group oppression" is the biggest challenge, in that liberal feminists tend to ignore it.

[ 91 ] Another important critique of liberal feminism posits the existence of a "white woman's burden" or white savior complex. The phrase "white woman's burden" derives from " The White Man's Burden ". Critics such as Black feminists and postcolonial feminists assert that mainstream liberal feminism reflects only the values of middle-class, heterosexual, white women and fails to appreciate the position of women of different races, cultures, or classes.

[ 92 ] With this, white liberal feminists reflect the issues that underlie the white savior complex. They do not understand women that are outside the dominant society but try to "save" or "help" them by pushing them to assimilate into their ideals of feminism. According to such critics, liberal feminism fails to recognize the power dynamics that are in play with women of color and transnational women which involve multiple sources of oppression .

See also [ edit ] Choice feminism Joint Organization of Nordic Women's Rights Associations Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ Liberal feminism as the oldest of the "Big Three" schools of feminist thought, defined by its focus on achieving gender equality through political and legal reform, is also called "mainstream feminism", "reformist feminism", "egalitarian feminism" or (particularly in historical contexts) "bourgeois feminism" or "bourgeois-liberal feminism". The term "mainstream feminism" refers to the fact that this branch of feminism works within the structure of mainstream society to integrate women into that structure.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Maynard, Mary (1995).

"Beyond the 'big three': the development of feminist theory into the 1990s" .

Women's History Review .

4 (3): 259– 281.

doi : 10.1080/09612029500200089 .

^ West, Rebecca.

"Kinds of Feminism" . University of Alabama in Huntsville.

^ a b c Zhang, Y.; Rios, K. (2021). "Understanding Perceptions of Radical and Liberal Feminists: The Nuanced Roles of Warmth and Competence".

Sex Roles .

86 ( 3– 4): 143– 158.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-021-01257-y .

S2CID 243479502 .

^ a b c d e Elisabeth Lønnå: Stolthet og kvinnekamp: Norsk kvinnesaksforenings historie fra 1913 , Gyldendal Norsk Forlag , 1996, p. 273, passim, ISBN 8205244952 ^ Baehr, Amy R (2017).

"A Capacious Account of Liberal Feminism" .

Feminist Philosophy Quarterly .

3 .

doi : 10.5206/fpq/2016.3.4 .

S2CID 149339590 .

^ a b c Rottenberg, Catherine (2014).

"The Rise of Neoliberal Feminism" .

Cultural Studies .

28 (3): 418– 437.

doi : 10.1080/09502386.2013.857361 .

S2CID 144882102 .

^ "The Corporate Mystique" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 11 March 2022 .

^ Lindsey, Linda L. (2015).

Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective . Routledge. p. 17.

ISBN 9781317348085 .

^ a b c Voet, Rian (1998). "Categorizations of feminism".

Feminism and Citizenship . SAGE. p. 25.

ISBN 1446228045 .

^ Murphy, Meghan (April 11, 2014).

"The divide isn't between 'sex negative' and 'sex positive' feminists — it's between liberal and radical feminism" .

Feminist Current . Retrieved December 24, 2017 .

^ Appignanesi, Richard; Garratt, Ghris (1995).

Postmodernism for beginners . Trumpington: Icon. pp.

100–101 .

ISBN 9781874166214 .

^ a b MacKinnon, Catharine A.

(2013). "Sexuality". In Kolmar, Wendy K.; Barkowski, Frances (eds.).

Feminist theory: a reader (4th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 9780073512358 .

^ Gail Dines (29 June 2011).

Gail Dines on radical feminism (Video). Wheeler Centre, Sydney Writers' Festival, Melbourne via YouTube . Retrieved 24 December 2017 .

^ Tong, Rosemarie (2018).

Feminist Thought: A More Comprehensive Introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 9780429974878 .

In recent years liberal feminism has taken a turn toward intersectionality ^ "Why Transphobia Is a Feminist Issue" .

National Organization for Women . 8 September 2014 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Core Issues" .

National Organization for Women . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

^ Cheris Kramarae & Paula A. Treichler (eds.), Amazons, Bluestockings and Crones: A Feminist Dictionary , Pandora Press, 1992 ^ Walters, Margaret (2005).

Feminism: A very short introduction . Oxford University. pp. 1–176. ISBN 978-0-19-280510-2.

^ Artwińska, Anna (2020).

Gender, Generations, and Communism in Central and Eastern Europe and Beyond . Routledge.

^ "Adresseavisen" . 8 March 1980 . Retrieved 27 July 2021 .

^ a b Marilley, Suzanne M. (1996).

"The feminism of equal rights" .

Woman suffrage and the origins of liberal feminism in the United States, 1820-1920 . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp.

1– 10.

ISBN 9780674954656 .

^ a b c d e Tong, Rosemarie (1992).

"Liberal feminism" .

Feminist thought: a comprehensive introduction . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415078740 .

^ hooks, bell. "Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center" Cambridge, MA: South End Press 1984 ^ https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42979.pdf [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Chronology of the Equal Rights Amendment, 1923-1996" . Archived from the original on 2007-08-07 . Retrieved 2007-07-31 .

^ Anthony Giddens (2001).

Sociology (p. 692). Polity Press.

^ Ledwaba S, Nkomo TS. An Exploration of Motivations for Women Mine Workers to Work Underground. SAGE Open. July 2021. doi:10.1177/21582440211032157 ^ Wolff, Kristina (2007). "Liberal Feminism".

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology .

doi : 10.1002/9781405165518.wbeosl040 .

ISBN 9781405124331 .

^ Holst, Cathrine (2017).

Hva er feminisme . Oslo: Universitetsforlaget . p. 42.

ISBN 9788215029832 .

^ a b Musgrave, L. Ryan (2003-11-01). "Liberal Feminism, from Law to Art: The Impact of Feminist Jurisprudence on Feminist Aesthetics".

Hypatia .

18 (4): 214– 235.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.582.4459 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.2003.tb01419.x .

ISSN 1527-2001 .

S2CID 22580016 .

^ a b Wendell, Susan (June 1987). "A (Qualified) Defense of Liberal Feminism".

Hypatia .

2 (2): 65– 93.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1987.tb01066.x .

ISSN 0887-5367 .

S2CID 143213609 .

^ Hernes, Helga (2011). "Cathrine Holst: Hva er feminisme (review)".

Sosiologisk Tidsskrift .

19 (1): 109– 111.

doi : 10.18261/ISSN1504-2928-2011-01-13 .

^ Bailey, Lucy E. (2016).

"Feminism, Liberal" .

The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and Sexuality Studies . pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1002/9781118663219.wbegss738 .

ISBN 9781405196949 .

^ "LWVUS Joins Lawsuit to Protect Transgender Women in Sports" . LWV. 21 December 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Why Transphobia Is a Feminist Issue" . NOW. 8 September 2014 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "NOW Celebrates International Transgender Day of Visibility" . NOW. 31 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Trans women are women" .

National Organization for Women . Archived from the original on 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .

^ "IWRA works for the rights of ALL women. Feminism without trans women is no feminism at all" . Icelandic Women's Rights Association. Archived from the original on 2022-02-26 . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ "Trans People and Feminist Solidarity" . 6 November 2020.

^ "Trans Ísland hluti af Kvenréttindafélaginu" . 30 April 2021.

^ "Transfeminism and the Women's Movement" .

Icelandic Women's Rights Association . 15 March 2021 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Køn, sex og seksualitet" [Gender, sex and sexuality] (in Danish). Dansk Kvindesamfund. Archived from the original on 2022-03-18 . Retrieved 2022-03-18 .

^ "Norwegian Association for Women's Rights" . Archived from the original on 15 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ Karin M. Bruzelius (12 November 2018).

"Høring – utredning om det strafferettslige diskrimineringsvernet" . Norwegian Association for Women's Rights. Archived from the original on 11 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Intersektionalität" .

Deutscher Frauenring . Retrieved 26 November 2021 .

^ "Irish LGBTQ+ community stand in #IrishSolidariT against transphobia on Trans Day of Remembrance" . GCN. 20 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Promoting and Protecting the Rights of Lesbians, Bisexual Women, Transgender, and Intersex Persons" . UN Women . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "UN Women hosts first high-level event on gender diversity and non-binary identities at UN headquarters" . UN Women. 18 July 2019 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "UN Women statement for the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia, Interphobia and Transphobia, 2020" .

UN Women . 17 May 2020 . Retrieved 29 November 2021 .

^ "Trojan horses in human rights spaces: anti-rights discourses, tactics and their convergences with trans-exclusionary feminists" .

Association for Women's Rights in Development . Retrieved 29 November 2021 .

^ a b Arat, Z, F, K. (2015). "Feminisms, Women's Rights, and the UN: Would achieving gender equality empower women?".

The American Political Science Review .

109 (4): 674– 689.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055415000386 .

S2CID 147529851 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Intersectional feminism: what it means and why it matters right now" .

UN Women . 1 July 2020.

^ Rottenberg, C (2014).

"The rise of neoliberal feminism" .

Cultural Studies .

28 (3): 418– 437.

doi : 10.1080/09502386.2013.857361 .

S2CID 144882102 .

^ Sandberg, S (2013).

Lean In . Alfred A. Knopf.

^ Mahowald, Mary Briody (1999).

Genes, Women, Equality . Oxford University Press. p. 145.

^ "A War Over Sex Work is Raging Inside The Nation's Biggest Feminist Group" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved 25 March 2022 .

^ Beran, K (2012). "Revisiting the prostitution debate: uniting liberal and radical feminism in pursuit of policy reform".

Minnesota Journal of Law & Inequality .

30 (1): 19– 54.

^ McGlynn, C; Ward, I (2014).

"Would John Stuart Mill have regulated pornography?" (PDF) .

Journal of Law and Society .

41 (4): 500– 522.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6478.2014.00683.x .

S2CID 145808585 .

^ Francisca de Haan , Rosa Manus (1881–1942) , p. 17, BRILL, 2016, ISBN 9789004333185 ^ "The Feminisms of Hillary Clinton and Carly Fiorina" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 24 October 2021 .

^ Sierra, D. C.; Young, K (2015).

"Hillary Clinton and Corporate Feminism" .

Against the Current .

^ Filipovic, J (2016).

"What's with Hillary's woman problem?" .

Politico Magazine .

^ Nair, Y (2016). "Rights make might: the dystopian undertow of Hillary Clinton's elite feminism".

The Baffler .

33 : 36– 48.

^ "NOW is a Proud Supporter of Women for Hillary" .

National Organization for Women . September 4, 2015.

^ Black, Naomi (1989).

Social feminism . Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801422614 .

^ Halfmann, Jost (1989).

"Social change and political mobilization in West Germany" . In Katzenstein, Peter (ed.).

Industry and politics in West Germany: toward the Third Republic . Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press. p. 79.

ISBN 9780801495953 .

Quote: Equity-feminism differs from equality-feminism in the depth and scope of its strategic goals. A feminist revolution would pursue three goals, according to Herrad Schenk: Citing : Schenk, Herrad (1980).

Die feministische Herausforderung: 150 Jahre Frauenbewegung in Deutschland . München: Beck.

ISBN 9783406060137 .

English translation: ...the abolition of the gender-specific division of work in the family, the dissolution of the psychic foundations of different gender roles, and the feminization of the societal system of norms and values.

^ a b "Liberal Feminism" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 18 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 February 2016 .

(Revised 30 September 2013.) ^ Pinker, Steven (2002).

"Gender" .

The blank slate: the modern denial of human nature . New York: Viking. p. 341.

ISBN 9780142003343 .

^ Kuhle, Barry X. (January 2012).

"Evolutionary psychology is compatible with equity feminism, but not with gender feminism: A reply to Eagly and Wood" .

Evolutionary Psychology .

10 (1): 39– 43.

doi : 10.1177/147470491201000104 .

PMC 10480852 .

PMID 22833845 .

See also : Eagly, Alice H.; Wood, Wendy (May 2011). "Feminism and the evolution of sex differences and similarities".

Sex Roles .

64 ( 9– 10): 758– 767.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-011-9949-9 .

S2CID 144177655 .

^ Baker, Jean H. (2005).

Sisters: the lives of America's suffragists . New York: Hill and Wang.

ISBN 9780809095285 .

^ a b Evans, Sara M. (1997).

Born for liberty: a history of women in America . New York, New York: Free Press Paperbacks.

ISBN 9780684834986 .

^ Stanton, Elizabeth Cady (1994).

"Address to the New York State Legislature, 1854" . In Schneir, Miriam (ed.).

Feminism: the essential historical writings . New York: Vintage Books. p. 110.

ISBN 9780679753810 .

^ Mill, John Stuart (2013) [1869].

The Subjection of Women (A Feminist Literature Classic) . Cork: e-artnow Editions.

ISBN 9788074843150 .

^ Brink, David (9 October 2007).

"Mill's Moral and Political Philosophy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University.

^ a b Tong, R (2009).

Feminist Thought . Westview Press.

^ a b "The Powerful, Complicated Legacy of Betty Friedan's 'The Feminine Mystique' " .

Smithsonian Magazine . February 4, 2021.

^ Hardman, M. J. (2013). "On the 50th anniversary of the publication of The Feminine Mystique by Betty Friedan".

Women and Language .

36 (1).

^ a b Friedan, Betty (1963).

The Feminine Mystique . Norton & Company.

^ Interview with Nadine Strossen , Wikinews , Retrieved 12 June 2020 ^ a b "History | National Women's Political Caucus" . Archived from the original on 2013-10-29 . Retrieved 2014-12-14 .

^ "Women's Equity Action League. Records of the Women's Equity Action League, 1966-1979: A Finding Aid" .

oasis.lib.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 2017-09-10 . Retrieved 2011-12-06 .

^ Kraft, Katherine Gray; Stickney, Zephorene L.

"Women's Equity Action League. Records of the Women's Equity Action League, 1966-1979: A Finding Aid" .

Oasis .

Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study , Harvard University. Archived from the original on 10 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 October 2020 .

^ "Morgenbladet" . 25 March 1946.

^ "Dagbladet" . 25 March 1946.

^ "About us" .

Norwegian Association for Women's Rights . Retrieved 2020-10-24 .

^ "Hvem vi er" . Norwegian Association for Women's Rights . Retrieved 2020-10-28 .

^ Cheris Kramarae & Paula A. Treichler (eds.), Amazons, Bluestockings, and Crones: A Feminist Dictionary, Pandora Press, 1992 ^ Adams, Sean; Morioka, Noreen; Stone, Terry Lee (2006).

Color Design Workbook: A Real World Guide to Using Color in Graphic Design . Gloucester, Mass.: Rockport Publishers. pp. 86. ISBN 159253192X. OCLC 60393965.

^ Bryson, Valerie (1999).

Feminist debates: issues of theory and political practice . New York: New York University Press. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 9780814713488 .

^ Morgan, Robin (1996).

"Light bulbs, radishes and the politics of the 21st century" . In Bell, Diane; Klein, Renate (eds.).

Radically speaking: feminism reclaimed . Chicago: Spinifex Press. pp.

5– 8.

ISBN 9781742193649 .

^ a b "bell hooks' "Feminist Theory: From Margin To Center": Chapter 2" .

Loftier Musings . 2012-06-18 . Retrieved 2018-12-04 .

^ Mills, Sara (1998).

"Postcolonial feminist theory" . In Jackson, Stevi ; Jones, Jackie (eds.).

Contemporary feminist theories . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. pp.

98– 112.

ISBN 9780748606894 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lucy E. Bailey. " Feminism, Liberal ." The Wiley Blackwell Encyclopedia of Gender and Sexuality Studies , 2016.

Code, Lorraine.

Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories . Taylor and Francis Group. 2014.

Dundes, Lauren.

"Concerned, Meet Terrified: Intersectional Feminism and the Women's March" , Women's Studies International Forum , July 2018.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2018.04.008 .

Johnson, Pauline.

"Normative tensions of Contemporary Feminism" [ dead link ] , Thesis Eleven Journal , May, 2010.

Kensinger, Loretta (1997). "(In)Quest of Liberal Feminism".

Hypatia .

12 (4): 178– 197.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1997.tb00303.x .

JSTOR 3810738 .

S2CID 145229991 .

McCloskey, Deirdre N. (2000). "Free-Market Feminism 101".

Eastern Economic Journal .

26 (3): 363– 365.

JSTOR 40326003 .

External links [ edit ] Feminism/Liberal Feminism at Wikibooks v t e Liberal feminism Issues Gender equality Women's suffrage Female education Right to work Violence against women Anti-discrimination law Sexism Gender pay gap and equal pay for equal work Glass ceiling Women in development Feminist foreign policy LGBT+ rights Variants Liberal state feminism Equality feminism Social feminism Equity feminism Difference feminism Individualist feminism Groups Present German Association of Female Citizens (1865) Danish Women's Society (1871) Norwegian Association for Women's Rights (1884) Fredrika Bremer Association (1884) International Council of Women (1888) National Council of Women of the United States (1888) Naisasialiitto Unioni (1892) International Alliance of Women (1904) Icelandic Women's Rights Association (1907) Women's International League for Peace and Freedom (1915) League of Women Voters (1920) All India Women's Conference (1927) League of Women Voters of Japan (1946) Deutscher Frauenring (1949) All Pakistan Women's Association (1949) German Women's Council (1951) Fawcett Society (1953) National Organization for Women (1966) National Women's Political Caucus (1971) UN Women (2010) Former Seneca Falls Convention (1848) National Women's Rights Convention (1850) National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) London National Society for Women's Suffrage (1867) National Woman Suffrage Association (1869) American Woman Suffrage Association (1869) National American Woman Suffrage Association (1890) Bund Deutscher Frauenvereine (1894) National Union of Women's Suffrage Societies (1897) People Mary Wollstonecraft Judith Sargent Murray John Stuart Mill Harriet Taylor Mill Susan B. Anthony Elizabeth Cady Stanton Millicent Fawcett Na Hye-sok Gina Krog Hagbart Berner Fredrikke Marie Qvam Carrie Chapman Catt Margery Corbett Ashby Hanna Rydh Margarete Bonnevie Eva Kolstad Ra'ana Liaquat Ali Khan Betty Friedan Hillary Clinton Symbolism Sunflower v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberal_feminism&oldid=1301477241 " Categories : Liberal feminism Feminism and history Feminist movements and ideologies Feminist theory Liberalism Hidden categories: All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles to be expanded from October 2020 All articles to be expanded All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberal feminism 41 languages Add topic

