Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Academic training and university positions 1.2 Research 1.3 Death 2 Bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles W. Misner 20 languages العربية تۆرکجه Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Charles Misner ) American physicist (1932–2023) Charles W. Misner Born ( 1932-06-13 ) June 13, 1932 Jackson, Michigan , U.S.

Died July 24, 2023 (2023-07-24) (aged 91) Alma mater University of Notre Dame Princeton University Known for Gravitation Mixmaster universe Misner space ADM formalism Wormhole Awards Guggenheim Fellowship [ 1 ] Heineman Prize (1994) Albert Einstein Medal Scientific career Fields General relativity Institutions Princeton University University of Maryland Thesis Outline of Feynman Quantization of General Relativity; Derivation of Field Equations; Vanishing of the Hamiltonian (1957) Doctoral advisor John Wheeler Arnold Ross Doctoral students Carl H. Brans Richard A. Isaacson James A. Isenberg Richard Matzner Vincent Moncrief C. V. Vishveshwara Signature Charles William Misner ( / ˈ m ɪ s n ər / ; June 13, 1932 – July 24, 2023) was an American physicist and one of the authors of Gravitation . His specialties included general relativity and cosmology .  His work has also provided early foundations for studies of quantum gravity and numerical relativity .

Biography [ edit ] Academic training and university positions [ edit ] Misner received his B.S.

degree from the University of Notre Dame in 1952.  He then moved to Princeton University , where he earned an M.A.

in 1954 and completed his Ph.D.

in 1957.  His dissertation, Outline of Feynman Quantization of General Relativity; Derivation of Field Equations; Vanishing of the Hamiltonian , was completed under John Wheeler .

Prior to completing his Ph.D., Misner joined the faculty of the Princeton Physics Department with the rank of Instructor (1956–1959), and was subsequently promoted to assistant professor (1959–1963).  In 1963 he moved to the University of Maryland, College Park as an associate professor and achieved full professor status there in 1966.
Since 2000, Misner has been Professor Emeritus of Physics, and he continued to be a member of the Gravitation Theory Group in the Maryland Center for Fundamental Physics .  During his career, Misner advised 22 Ph.D. students primarily at Princeton and at the University of Maryland.

Misner held visiting positions at the Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics (also known as the Albert Einstein Institute); the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of California, Santa Barbara ; the Pontifical Academy of Cracow (Poland); the Institute for Physical Problems in Moscow (during the time of the Soviet Union ); the California Institute of Technology , the University of Oxford , and the University of Cambridge .

Research [ edit ] Most of Misner's research fell into the area of general relativity , which describes the gravitational interactions of very massive bodies.  He contributed to the early understanding of cosmology - he was one of the first to point out the horizon problem , the role of topology in general relativity, quantum gravity , and numerical relativity .  In the areas of cosmology and topology he first studied the mixmaster universe , which he devised in an attempt to better understand the dynamics of the early universe, and developed a solution to the Einstein field equation that is now known as Misner space .  Together with Richard Arnowitt and Stanley Deser he published a Hamiltonian formulation of the Einstein equation that split Einstein's unified spacetime back into separated space and time.  This set of equations, known as the ADM formalism , plays a role in some attempts to unify quantum mechanics with general relativity.  It is also the mathematical starting-point for most techniques for numerically solving Einstein's equations.

In 2015, the Albert Einstein Society presented the Albert Einstein Medal to Deser and Misner for their work; Arnowitt had died the previous year.

[ 2 ] Death [ edit ] Charles W. Misner died on July 24, 2023, at the age of 91.

[ 3 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Misner, Charles W.; Kip S. Thorne; John Archibald Wheeler (September 1973).

Gravitation . San Francisco: W. H. Freeman .

ISBN 0-7167-0344-0 .

Misner, Charles W.; Patrick A. Cooney (1991).

Spreadsheet Physics . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley .

ISBN 0-201-16410-8 .

Misner, Charles W.; Putnam, Peter (November 15, 1959).

"Active Gravitational Mass" .

Physical Review .

116 (4): 1045– 1046.

doi : 10.1103/PhysRev.116.1045 .

ISSN 0031-899X . Retrieved June 20, 2025 .

References [ edit ] ^ Charles W. Misner, John Simon Guggenheim Foundation ^ "South Bristol Physicist Reflects on 50-Year Career" . The Lincoln County News. 24 August 2016 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ Charles W. Misner, 1932–2023 External links [ edit ] https://www.physics.umd.edu/grt/people/charles.html https://www.physics.umd.edu/~misner/cwmstud.pdf Charles W. Misner papers , at the University of Maryland libraries v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_W._Misner&oldid=1297147556 " Categories : Articles with faulty authority control information 1932 births 2023 deaths People from Jackson, Michigan 21st-century American physicists American relativity theorists Princeton University alumni University of Notre Dame alumni University of Maryland, College Park faculty Fellows of the American Physical Society Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Albert Einstein Medal recipients Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biography with signature Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 11:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles W. Misner 20 languages Add topic

