Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Indian temples Toggle Indian temples subsection 1.1 Hindu temple 1.2 Buddhist temples 1.3 Jain temples 1.4 Sikh temples 2 Mesopotamian temples 3 Egyptian temples 4 Greco-Roman temples 5 European polytheistic temples 6 Zoroastrian temples 7 Chinese temples 8 Indonesian temples 9 Mesoamerican temples 10 Jewish synagogues and temples 11 Christian temples Toggle Christian temples subsection 11.1 Orthodox Christianity 11.2 Catholicism 11.3 Protestantism 11.4 Latter Day Saint movement 11.4.1 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 11.4.2 Other Latter Day Saint denominations 11.5 Esoteric Christianity 12 Masonic temples 13 Others 14 See also 15 References 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Temple 98 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Structure reserved for religious or spiritual activities "Temples" redirects here. For the region of the forehead, see Temple (anatomy) . For other uses, see Temple (disambiguation) .

The 12th-century Angkor Wat temple complex in Cambodia is the largest religious structure in the world [ 1 ] and is dedicated to the Hindu deity Vishnu .

Borobudur temple, the largest Buddhist temple in the world, located in Central Java , Indonesia .

The Erechtheion in Athens , Greece , is associated with some of the most ancient and holy relics of the Athenians, such as the Palladion , a xoanon of Athena Polias Ram Mandir at Ayodhya , Uttar Pradesh , India , dedicated to Hindu deity Rama . The temple was opened on 22 January 2024.

A temple (from the Latin templum ) is a place of worship , a building used for spiritual rituals and activities such as prayer and sacrifice .  By convention, the specially built places of worship of some religions are commonly called "temples" in English, while those of other religions are not, even though they fulfill very similar functions.

The religions for which the terms are used include the great majority of ancient religions that are now extinct, such as the Ancient Egyptian religion and the Ancient Greek religion . Among religions still active: Hinduism (whose temples are called mandir or kovil ), Buddhism (whose temples are called vihara ), Sikhism (whose temples are called gurudwara ), Jainism (whose temples are sometimes called derasar ), Zoroastrianism (whose temples are sometimes called agiary ), the Baháʼí Faith (which are often simply referred to as Baháʼí House of Worship ), Taoism (which are sometimes called daoguan ), Shinto (which are often called jinja ), Confucianism (which are sometimes called the Temple of Confucius ).

Religions whose places of worship are generally not called "temples" in English include Christianity , which has churches , Islam with mosques , and Judaism with synagogues (although some of these use "temple" as a name).

The form and function of temples are thus very variable, though they are often considered by believers to be, in some sense, the "house" of one or more deities .  Typically, offerings of some sort are made to the deity, and other rituals are enacted, and a special group of clergy maintain and operate the temple.  The degree to which the whole population of believers can access the building varies significantly; often parts, or even the whole main building, can only be accessed by the clergy.  Temples typically have a main building and a larger precinct , which may contain many other buildings or may be a dome-shaped structure, much like an igloo.

The word comes from Ancient Rome , where a templum constituted a sacred precinct as defined by a priest, or augur .

[ 2 ] It has the same root as the word "template", a plan in preparation for the building that was marked out on the ground by the augur.

Indian temples [ edit ] Hindu temple [ edit ] Main article: Hindu temple See also: List of Hindu temples Hindu temples are known by many different names, varying on region and language, including Alayam, [ 3 ] Mandir , Mandira , Ambalam , Gudi , Kavu , Koil , Kovil , Déul , Raul , Devasthana , Devalaya , Devayatan , Devakula , Devagiriha , Degul , Deva Mandiraya , and Devalayam . Hindu temple architecture is mainly divided into the Dravidian style of the south and the Nagara style of the north, with other regional styles.

The basic elements of the Hindu temple remain the same across all periods and styles. The most essential feature is the inner sanctuary, the garbhagriha or womb-chamber, where the primary murti or cult image of a deity is housed in a simple bare cell. Around this chamber there are often other structures and buildings, in the largest cases covering several acres. On the exterior, the garbhagriha is crowned by a tower-like shikhara , also called the vimana in the south. The shrine building may include an ambulatory for parikrama ( circumambulation ), one or more mandapas or congregation halls, and sometimes an antarala antechamber and porch between garbhagriha and mandapa.

A Hindu temple is a symbolic house, the seat and dwelling of Hindu gods .

[ 4 ] It is a structure designed to bring human beings and gods together according to Hindu faith . Inside its garbhagriha innermost sanctum, a Hindu temple contains a murti or Hindu god's image. Hindu temples are large and magnificent with a rich history. There is evidence of the use of sacred ground as far back as the Bronze Age and later during the Indus Valley civilization .

[ 5 ] Outside of the Indian subcontinent ( India , Bangladesh and Nepal ), Hindu temples have been built in various countries around the world . Either following the historic diffusion of Hinduism across Asia (e.g. ancient stone temples of Cambodia and Indonesia ), or following the migration of the Indian Hindus' diaspora , to Western Europe (esp.

Great Britain ), North America (the United States and Canada ), as well as Australia, Malaysia and Singapore, Mauritius and South Africa .

The Golden temple of Mahalakshmi, Vellore, Tamil Nadu, India Famous Guruvayur Temple , a Traditional Hindu Temple in Kerala, India.

A view of the Maa Naina Devi Temple, Mallital, Nainital , Uttarakhand, India Akshardham Temple , a Hindu temple in New Delhi , India built in 2005.

Dakshineswar Kali Temple , a Hindu temple in Greater Kolkata , West Bengal , India Buddhist temples [ edit ] Main article: Buddhist temple Mahabodhi temple, Bihar, India Buddhist temples include the structures called stupa , wat and pagoda in different regions and languages. A Buddhist temple might contain a meditation hall hosting Buddharupa , or the image of Buddha , as the object of concentration and veneration during a meditation. The stupa domed structures are also used in a circumambulation ritual called Pradakshina .

Temples in Buddhism represent the pure land or pure environment of a Buddha . Traditional Buddhist temples are designed to inspire inner and outer peace.

[ 6 ] Three types of structures are associated with the religious architecture of early Buddhism : monasteries ( viharas ), places to venerate relics ( stupas ), and shrines or prayer halls ( chaityas , also called chaitya grihas ), which later came to be called temples in some places. The pagoda is an evolution of the Indian stupas.

The initial function of a stupa was the veneration and safe-guarding of the relics of Gautama Buddha . The earliest archaeologically known example of a stupa is the relic stupa located in Vaishali , Bihar in India.

In accordance with changes in religious practice, stupas were gradually incorporated into chaitya-grihas (prayer halls). These are exemplified by the complexes of the Ajanta Caves and the Ellora Caves ( Maharashtra ). The Mahabodhi Temple at Bodh Gaya in Bihar is another well-known example.

As Buddhism spread, Buddhist architecture diverged in style, reflecting the similar trends in Buddhist art. Building form was also influenced to some extent by the different forms of Buddhism in the northern countries, practising Mahayana Buddhism in the main and in the south where Theravada Buddhism prevailed.

Jain temples [ edit ] Main article: Jain temple See also: List of Jain temples Ranakpur Jain temple , Rajasthan , India .

A Jain temple, called a Derasar , is the place of worship for Jains , the followers of Jainism .

[ 7 ] Some famous Jain temples are Shikharji , Palitana temples , Ranakpur Jain temple , Shravan Belgola , Dilwara Temples and Lal Mandir . Jain temples are built with various architectural designs. Jain temples in North India are completely different from the Jain temples in South India, which in turn are quite different from Jain temples in West India. Additionally, a manastambha (literally 'column of honor') is a pillar that is often constructed in front of Jain temples.

Sikh temples [ edit ] Main article: Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib in Amritsar , India A Sikh temple is called a gurdwara, literally the "doorway to the Guru". Its most essential element is the presence of the Guru, Guru Granth Sahib . The gurdwara has an entrance from all sides, signifying that they are open to all without any distinction whatsoever. The gurdwara has a Darbar Sahib where the Guru Granth Sahib is seen and a Langar where people can eat free food.

[ 8 ] A gurdwara may also have a library, nursery, and classroom.

[ 9 ] Mesopotamian temples [ edit ] Ziggurat of Ur , Iraq The temple-building tradition of Mesopotamia derived from the cults of gods and deities in the Mesopotamian religion . It spanned several civilizations; from Sumerian , Akkadian , Assyrian , and Babylonian . The most common temple architecture of Mesopotamia is the structure of sun-baked bricks called a ziggurat , having the form of a terraced step pyramid with a flat upper terrace where the shrine or temple stood.

Egyptian temples [ edit ] Main article: Egyptian temple Temple of Philae , Egypt Ancient Egyptian temples were meant as places for the deities to reside on earth. Indeed, the term the Egyptians most commonly used to describe the temple building, ḥwt-nṯr , means 'mansion (or enclosure) of a god'.

[ 10 ] A god's presence in the temple linked the human and divine realms and allowed humans to interact with the god through ritual. These rituals, it was believed, sustained the god and allowed it to continue to play its proper role in nature. They were, therefore, a key part of the maintenance of maat , the ideal order of nature and of human society in Egyptian belief.

[ 11 ] Maintaining maat was the entire purpose of Egyptian religion , [ 12 ] and thus it was the purpose of a temple as well.

[ 13 ] Ancient Egyptian temples were also of economic significance to Egyptian society. The temples stored and redistributed grain and came to own large portions of the nation's arable land (some estimate as much as 33% by the New Kingdom period).

[ 14 ] In addition, many of these Egyptian temples utilized the Tripartite Floor Plan in order to draw visitors to the center room.

In The Temple in Man , a work by R. A. Schwaller de Lubicz , the author explores the idea that Egyptian temples, particularly the Temple of Luxor , are metaphysical representations of the human body. Schwaller de Lubicz suggests that these temples reflect the cosmic and spiritual order through their proportions and design. The author argues that the ancient Egyptians embedded knowledge of sacred geometry and spiritual awakening into their architecture, and that the human body itself is a temple that mirrors the harmony of the universe. The work connects the metaphysical symbolism of the temples to esoteric concepts, showing how the architecture reflects human anatomy and cosmic laws.

[ 15 ] Greco-Roman temples [ edit ] Main articles: Greek temple and Roman temple The Parthenon on the Acropolis of Athens Greek and Roman temples were originally built out of wood and mud bricks, but as the empires expanded, the temples grew to monumental size, made out of materials such as stone and marble on raised platforms. While the color has long since faded, The columns would have been painted in white, blue, red, and black. Above the columns would have been a sculpted or painted depiction of a myth or battle, with freestanding sculptures in the pediment triangles. The roofs were tiled and had sculptures of mythical animals or deities on the tops or corners. Greek temples also had several standard floor plans with very distinct column placement.

[ 16 ] Located in the front of the temple were altars intended for sacrifices or offerings.

Ouranic altars were usually square, lined with a metal pan for burnt offerings, and a flat top which was necessary for the ouranic gods to receive offerings.

Chthonic altars, called bothros , were pits dug into the earth for liquid libations of animal sacrifices, milk, honey, and wine. The building which housed the cult statue or agalma in its cella was located in the center of the temple in Greek architecture, while in Rome, the cella was in the back.

[ 16 ] Greek temple architecture had a profound influence on ancient architectural traditions.

Greco-Roman temples were built facing eastward, utilizing the rising sun in morning rituals. The location each temple was built also depended on many factors such as environment, myth, function, and divine experience. Most were built on sites associated with myths or a place a god had been believed to have performed a feat, or founded a town or city. Many Roman temples had close associations with important events in Roman history, such as military victories. Temples in cities were often dedicated to the founding deity of the city, but also served as civic and social centers. The Temple of Saturn even held the state treasury and treasury offices in its basement.

[ 16 ] European polytheistic temples [ edit ] See also: List of modern pagan temples Temple of Garni , Armenia The Romans usually referred to a holy place of a pagan religion as fanum ; in some cases this referred to a sacred grove, in others to a temple. Medieval Latin writers also sometimes used the word templum , previously reserved for temples of the ancient Roman religion. In some cases it is hard to determine whether a temple was a building or an outdoor shrine. For temple buildings of the Germanic peoples , the Old Norse term hof is often used.

Zoroastrian temples [ edit ] Main article: Fire temple The Yazd Atash Behram A Zoroastrian temple may also be called a Dar-e-mehr and an Atashkadeh . A fire temple in Zoroastrianism is the place of worship for Zoroastrians. Zoroastrians revere fire in any form, and their temples contains an eternal flame , with Atash Behram (Fire of Victory) as the highest grade of all, as it combines 16 different types of fire gathered in elaborate rituals.

In the Zoroastrian religion, fire ( Atar ), together with clean water ( Aban ), are agents of ritual purity. Clean, white "ash for the purification ceremonies is regarded as the basis of ritual life," which, "are essentially the rites proper to the tending of a domestic fire, for the temple fire is that of the hearth fire raised to a new solemnity".

[ This quote needs a citation ] Chinese temples [ edit ] Main article: Chinese temple architecture See also: Joss paper , Air pollution , and Particulates Temple of Heaven , Beijing Chinese temples refer to temples in accordance with Chinese culture , which serve as a house of worship for Chinese faiths, namely Confucianism , Taoism , Buddhism and Chinese folk religion . Chinese temples were born from the age-old religion and tradition of Chinese people since the ancient era of imperial China , thus they are usually built in typical classical Chinese architecture .

Other than the base constructed from an elevated platform of earth and stones, most parts of Chinese temples are made of timber carpentry, with parts of brick masonry and glazed ceramics for roofs and tile decorations. Typical Chinese temples have curved overhanging eaves and complicated carpentry of stacked roof construction. Chinese temples are known for their vivid colour and rich decorations. Their roofs are often decorated with mythical beasts, such as Chinese dragons and qilins , and sometimes also Chinese deities. Chinese temples can be found throughout Mainland China and Taiwan , and also where Chinese expatriate communities have settled abroad; thus Chinese temples can be found in Chinatowns worldwide.

Indonesian temples [ edit ] Main articles: Candi of Indonesia and Balinese temple Sojiwan temple, an example of typical 9th-century Javanese temple architecture.

Candi is an Indonesian term to refer to ancient temples. Before the rise of Islam, between the 5th to 15th centuries, Dharmic faiths (Hinduism and Buddhism) were the majority in the Indonesian archipelago, especially in Java and Sumatra . As a result, numerous Hindu temples, locally known as candi , were constructed and dominated the landscape of Java. The candi architecture follows the typical Indonesian architectural traditions based on Vastu Shastra . The temple layout, especially in the Central Java period, incorporated mandala temple plan arrangements and also the typical high towering spires of Hindu temples. The candi was designed to mimic Meru , the holy mountain and the abode of the gods. In contemporary Indonesian Buddhist perspective, candi refers to a shrine, either ancient or new. Several contemporary viharas in Indonesia, for example, contain an actual-size replica or reconstruction of famous Buddhist temples, such as the replica of Pawon [ 17 ] and Plaosan 's perwara (small) temples.

According to local beliefs, the Java valley had thousands of Hindu temples that co-existed with Buddhist temples, most of which were buried in the massive eruption of Mount Merapi in 1006 CE.

Mesoamerican temples [ edit ] Main article: Mesoamerican pyramids Temple of Kukulcan in Chichen Itza located on top of Kukulcan pyramid.

Temples of the Mesoamerican civilization usually took the shape of stepped pyramids with temples or shrines on top of the massive structure. They are more akin to the ziggurats of Mesopotamia than to Egyptian ones. A single or several flight(s) of steep steps from the base lead to the temple that stood on the plateau on top of the pyramid. The stone temple might be a square or a rounded structure with a door opening leading to a cella or inner sanctum. The plateau on top of the pyramid in front of the temple is where the ritualistic sacrifice took place.

Some classic Mesoamerican pyramids are adorned with stories about the feathered serpent Quetzalcoatl or Mesoamerican creation myths , written in the form of hieroglyphs on the rises of the steps of the pyramids, on the walls, and on the sculptures contained within.

[ 18 ] Notable example include Aztec Acatitlan and Mayan Chichen Itza , Uxmal and Tikal .

Jewish synagogues and temples [ edit ] In Judaism , the ancient Hebrew texts refer to a "sanctuary", "palace" or "hall" for each of the two ancient temples in Jerusalem , called in the Tanakh Beit YHWH , which translates literally as ' YHWH 's House'.  In English "temple" is the normal term for them.

The Temple Mount in Jerusalem is the site where the First Temple of Solomon and the Second Temple were built. At the center of the structure was the Holy of Holies where only the High Priest could enter. The Temple Mount is now the site of the Islamic edifice, the Dome of the Rock ( c.

690 CE ).

The Greek word synagogue came into use to describe Jewish (and Samaritan ) places of worship during Hellenistic times and it, along with the Yiddish term shul , and the original Hebrew term Beit Knesset ('House of meeting') are the terms in most universal usage.

Since the 18th century, Jews in Western and Central Europe began to apply the name temple , borrowed from the French where it was used to denote all non-Catholic prayer houses, to synagogues. The term became strongly associated with Reform institutions, in some of which both congregants and outsiders associated it with the elimination of the prayers for the restoration of the Jerusalem Temple, though this was not the original meaning—traditional synagogues named themselves "temple" over a century before the advent of Reform, and many continued to do so after.

[ 19 ] In American parlance, temple is often synonymous with synagogue , but especially non-Orthodox ones.

The term kenesa , from the Aramaic for 'assembly', is used to describe the places of worship of Karaite Jews .

Example of such temple is the Sofia Synagogue , Bulgaria the largest synagogue in Southeastern Europe and third-largest in Europe .

[ 20 ] A model of Herod's Temple adjacent to the Shrine of the Book exhibit at the Israel Museum , Jerusalem.

The Kenesa in Vilnius , Lithuania .

Christian temples [ edit ] Orthodox Christianity [ edit ] Cathedral of Christ the Saviour in Moscow , Russia .

The word temple is used frequently in the tradition of Eastern Christianity ; particularly the Eastern Orthodox Church , where the principal words used for houses of worship are temple and church . The use of the word temple comes from the need to distinguish a building of the church vs. the church seen as the Body of Christ. In the Russian language (similar to other Slavic languages ), while the general-purpose word for 'church' is tserkov , the term khram ( Храм ), 'temple', is used to refer to the church building as a temple of God ( Khram Bozhy ). The words church and temple , in this case are interchangeable; however, the term church ( Ancient Greek : ἐκκλησία ) is far more common. The term temple ( Ancient Greek : ναός ) is also commonly applied to larger churches. Some famous churches which are referred to as temples include the Hagia Sophia , Saint Basil's Cathedral , Alexander Nevsky Cathedral, Sofia , the Cathedral of Christ the Saviour and the Temple of Saint Sava in Belgrade , Serbia .

Catholicism [ edit ] Basilique du Sacré-Coeur in Paris The word temple has traditionally been rarely used in the English-speaking Western Christian tradition . In Irish , some pre-schism churches use the word teampall . The usual word for church in the Hungarian language is templom , also deriving from the same Latin root.

Spanish distinguishes between the temple being the physical building for religious activity, and the church being both the physical building for religious activity and also the congregation of religious followers.

[ 21 ] The principal words typically used to distinguish houses of worship in Western Christian architecture are abbey , basilica , cathedral , chapel and church . The Catholic Church has used the word temple in reference of a place of worship on rare occasions. An example is the Roman Catholic Sagrada Familia Temple in Barcelona, Spain and the Roman Catholic Basilique du Sacré-Cœur Temple in Paris, France. Another example is the Temple or Our Lady of the Pillar, a church in Guadalajara , Mexico .

Protestantism [ edit ] Some Protestant churches use this term; above the main entrance of the Lutheran Gustav Vasa church in Stockholm, Sweden , is a cartouche in Latin which reads "this temple (...) was constructed by king Oscar II." Beginning in the late 18th century, following the Enlightenment , some Protestant denominations in France and elsewhere began to use the word temple to distinguish these spaces from Catholic churches.

Evangelical and other Protestant churches make use of a wide variety of terms to designate their worship spaces, such as church, tabernacle or temple. Additionally, some breakaway Catholic churches such as the Mariavite Church in Poland have chosen to also designate their central church building as a temple, as in the case of the Temple of Mercy and Charity in Płock .

Latter Day Saint movement [ edit ] Main article: Temple (Latter Day Saints) Kirtland Temple in Kirtland, Ohio According to Latter Day Saints , in 1832, Joseph Smith received a revelation to restore the practice of temple worship , in a "house of the Lord". The Kirtland Temple was the first temple of the Latter-day Saint movement and the only one completed in Smith's lifetime, although the Nauvoo Temple was partially complete at the time of his death . The schisms stemming from a succession crisis have led to differing views about the role and use of temples between various groups with competing succession claims.

The Book of Mormon , which Latter Day Saints believe is a companion book of scripture with the Bible, refers to temple building in the ancient Americas by a group of people called the Nephites . Though Book of Mormon authors are not explicit about the practices in these Nephite temples, they were patterned "after the manner of the temple of Solomon" ( [ 22 ] ) and served as gathering places for significant religious and political events (e.g. Mosiah 1–6; 3rd Nephi 11–26).

[ 23 ] The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [ edit ] See also: Temple (LDS Church) and List of temples of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints LDS temple in Salt Lake City, Utah The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a prolific builder of temples. The LDS Church has 382 temples in various phases, which includes 208 dedicated temples (201 operating, 7 undergoing renovations [ 24 ] ), 5 with dedications scheduled , 52 under construction , 4 with groundbreaking ceremonies scheduled , [ 25 ] and 113 others announced (not yet under construction).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Latter-day Saint temples are reserved for performing and undertaking only the most holy and sacred of covenants and special of ordinances . They are distinct from meeting houses and chapels where weekly worship services are held. The temples are built and kept under strict sacredness and are not to be defiled.  Thus, strict rules apply for entrance, including church membership and regular attendance. During the open-house period after its construction and before its dedication, the temple is open to the public for tours.

[ 28 ] Other Latter Day Saint denominations [ edit ] Various sects in the Latter Day Saint movement founded by Joseph Smith have temples.

[ 29 ] The Church of Christ (Wightite) , a Latter Day Saint denomination formed by Lyman Wight following the death of Joseph Smith , built the first Mormon temple west of the Mississippi in Zodiac, Texas .

[ 30 ] about three miles from Fredericksburg .

In 1990 or earlier, a temple in Ozumba , Mexico , was built by the Apostolic United Brethren .

[ 31 ] On April 17, 1994, the Independence Temple in Independence, Missouri , was opened by the Community of Christ by then-church Prophet-President Wallace B. Smith . The Community of Christ also owned the original Kirtland Temple , dedicated in 1836 by the Church of the Latter Day Saints (later renamed the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints), in Kirtland, Ohio . On March 5, 2024, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints announced it had purchased the temple.

[ 32 ] In 2005 [ 33 ] construction on the YFZ Ranch Temple by the Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints Church began.  It is located just outside Eldorado in Schleicher County , Texas .

[ 34 ] However, as of April 2014, the State of Texas took physical and legal possession of the property.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] as it was used to "commit or facilitate certain criminal conduct".

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] A pyramid-shaped temple near Modena, Utah , was built by the Righteous Branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints .

[ 31 ] Esoteric Christianity [ edit ] Mount Ecclesia Esoteric Christian Temple of the Rosicrucian Fellowship with its round 12-sided building architecture set on top of a mesa and facing east, the rising Sun. This modern-day temple is ornamented with alchemical and astrological symbols.

Mount Ecclesia 's Temple Masonic temples [ edit ] A typical Masonic Lodge Freemasonry is a fraternal organization with its origins in the eighteenth century whose membership is held together by a shared set of moral and metaphysical ideals based on short role play narratives concerning the construction of King Solomon's Temple. Freemasons meet as a Lodge. Lodges meet in a Masonic Temple (in reference to King Solomon's Temple), Masonic Center or a Masonic Hall, such as Freemasons' Hall, London . Some confusion exists as Masons usually refer to a Lodge meeting as being in Lodge .

Others [ edit ] The Temple of Neptune at the Monrepos Park in Vyborg, Russia Göbekli Tepe , located in southern Turkey , was built between the 8th and 10th millennium BCE. Its circular compounds on top of a tell are composed by massive T-shaped stone pillars decorated with abstract, enigmatic pictograms and animal reliefs .

Temples of Sheikh, ancient temples in Sheikh, Somalia Temple of Yeha, the oldest standing structure in Yeha , Ethiopia ; built around 700 BCE In the Star Wars films, the Jedi Temple is located on Coruscant .

Wolmyeongdong Natural Temple , located in South Korea , was developed beginning in 1990 and continues to this day.

Pashupatinath is one of the most famous temples [ 37 ] of Hindu religion, which is located at Kathmandu , Nepal .

Convention sometimes allows the use of temple in some of the following cases: Baháʼí Faith temple ( Mashriqu'l-Adhkárs or 'Houses of Worship').

Shrines of the traditional Chinese Ethnic Shenism are called miao , or ancestral hall in English.

Joss house is an obsolete American term for such kind of places of worship.

Confucian temple or Temple of Confucius .

Mankhim , the temple of the ethnic group the Rai , located at Aritar , Sikkim .

Shintoist jinja are normally called shrines in English in order to distinguish them from Buddhist temples ( -tera , -dera ).

Taoist temples and monasteries are called guan or daoguan ( 道观 , literally 'place of contemplation of the Tao') in Chinese, guan being the shortened version of daoguan .

See also [ edit ] Balinese temple candi of Indonesia Chinese pagoda Chinese temple Dravidian architecture Romano-Celtic temple Jangam list of temples of Tamil Nadu mandi (Mandaeism) mosque National Temple of Divine Providence place of worship Temple of Reason References [ edit ] ^ "Largest religious structure" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 20 May 2025 .

^ Latin Dictionary and Grammar Aid . University of Notre Dame. 26 May 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2009 .

^ ALAYAM : The Hindu Temple;An Epitome of Hindu Culture; G.Venkataramana Reddy;  Published by Adhyaksha; Sri Ramakrishna Math; ISBN 978-81-7823-542-4 ; Page 1 ^ Kramrisch, Stella (1946).

The Hindu Temple . Motilal Banarsidass. pp. 135, context: 40–43, 110– 114, 129–139 with footnotes.

ISBN 978-81-208-0223-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) , Quote: "The [Hindu] temple is the seat and dwelling of God, according to the majority of the [Indian] names" (p. 135); "The temple as Vimana, proportionately measured throughout, is the house and body of God" (p. 133).

^ "Hinduism - Early Hinduism (2nd century bce–4th century ce) | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-01-20 .

^ "New York Buddhist Temple for World Peace" . Kadampanewyork.org. 1997-08-01. Archived from the original on 2012-06-11 . Retrieved 2012-06-20 .

^ Babb, Lawrence, A (1996).

Absent lord: ascetics and kings in a Jain ritual culture . Published University of California Press . p.

66 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "The Gurdwara" .

bbc.co.uk . BBC . Retrieved 18 March 2013 .

^ "Gurdwara Requirements" .

worldgurudwaras.com . Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 18 March 2013 .

^ Spencer 1984, p. 22, 44; Snape 1996, p. 9 ^ Dunand and Zivie-Coche 2005, pp. 89–91 ^ Assmann 2001, p. 4 ^ Shafer, Byron E., "Temples, Priests, and Rituals: An Overview", in Shafer 1997, pp. 1–2 ^ André Dollinger. The Ancient Egyptian Economy. pp. 5 [1] Retrieved June 19, 2012 ^ Schwaller de Lubicz, R. A. (1957).

Il tempio nell'uomo .

^ a b c Denova, Rebecca I. (2018).

Greek and Roman religions . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-78785-765-0 .

OCLC 1243160502 .

^ "Replika Candi Pawon" .

Vihāra Jakarta Dhammacakka Jaya .

^ Koontz, Rex (2013).

Mexico: From the Olmecs to the Aztecs . New York, New York: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 9780500290767 .

^ Michael A. Meyer, Response to Modernity: A History of the Reform Movement in Judaism , Wayne State University Press, 1995. p. 42.

^ 100-годишнина на синагогата в София , dnes.bg, September 6, 2009 ^ Baldayac, Rafael.

"Iglesia y templo: diferencia" .

La Informacion . Retrieved 23 January 2018 .

^ "The Second Book of Nephi Chapter 5 - 5:16" . Lds.org. 2012-02-21 . Retrieved 2012-06-20 .

^ "Temples" . Achoiceland.com. 2010-10-01 . Retrieved 2012-06-20 .

^ Hill, Victoria (January 23, 2023).

"Plans announced to rebuild, relocate Anchorage Alaska Temple" .

KUTV . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

(The Anchorage Alaska Temple is being relocated and resized. While the new temple is under construction, the existing temple is open and will be decommissioned and demolished after the new one is dedicated).

^ Taylor, Scott (July 28, 2024).

"A mid-year look at temple milestones for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" .

Church News . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

^ (Additionally, the church has 1 historic site temple ).

"Sacred Sites and Historic Documents Transfer to Church of Jesus Christ" .

newsroom.churchofjesuschrist.org . March 5, 2024 . Retrieved July 6, 2024 .

^ "List of Temples" . Archived from the original on 2002-02-14.

^ "Frequently Asked Questions" . Archived from the original on 2002-02-14.

^ Utah Attorney General's Office and Arizona Attorney General's Office.

The Primer, Helping Victims of Domestic Violence and Child Abuse in Polygamous Communities Archived 2013-01-27 at the Wayback Machine . Updated June 2006. Page 23.

^ Johnson, Melvin C. (2006).

Polygamy on the Pedernales:Lyman Wight's Mormon Villages in Antebellum Texas, 1845-1858 . Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press. p. 125 . Retrieved 6 February 2015 .

^ a b Andrea Moore-Emmett. God's Brothel. Pince-Nez Press: June 1, 2004.

ISBN 1-930074-13-1 ^ "Church purchases Kirtland Temple, other historic buildings and artifacts from Community of Christ" .

Church News . 2024-03-06 . Retrieved 2024-05-04 .

^ "Jeffs dedicates FLDS temple site at YFZ Ranch" .

The Eldorado Success . January 11, 2005. Archived from the original on March 7, 2005 . Retrieved April 6, 2008 .

^ "FLDS temple appears complete" .

Ben Winslow (AP). 31 January 2006. Archived from the original on May 3, 2012.

^ a b "Texas Seizes Polygamist Warren Jeffs' Ranch" . NBC News. Associated Press. April 17, 2014 . Retrieved April 18, 2014 .

^ a b Carlisle, Nate (April 17, 2014).

"Texas takes possession of polygamous ranch" .

The Salt Lake Tribune . Retrieved April 17, 2014 .

^ "9 Amazing Nepali Temple You Should Visit Before You Die" .

Prasant Bhatt . 2018-04-13. Archived from the original on 2018-04-14 . Retrieved 2018-04-13 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hani, Jean, Le symbolisme du temple chrétien , G. Trédaniel (editor); [2. éd.] edition (1978), 207 pp., ISBN 2-85707-030-6 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Temple .

Wikiquote has quotations related to temple .

Look up temple in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Definition of 'temple' at the Online Etymology Dictionary Comparison between Egyptian and Greek temples Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐f72pc
Cached time: 20250818025715
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.727 seconds
Real time usage: 0.921 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3296/1000000
Revision size: 43027/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70729/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2023/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129134/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.457/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14301063/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  729.945      1 -total
 35.55%  259.493      1 Template:Reflist
 18.61%  135.879     13 Template:Cite_web
 18.04%  131.679     19 Template:Lang
 12.15%   88.679      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.19%   59.788      1 Template:Short_description
  5.45%   39.803      3 Template:Sister_project
  5.43%   39.620      7 Template:Cite_book
  5.19%   37.900      3 Template:Side_box
  5.18%   37.827      1 Template:Commons Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48134:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818025715 and revision id 1301322104. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Temple&oldid=1301322104 " Categories : Temples Building types Types of monuments and memorials Sacral architecture Religious buildings and structures Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Egyptian-language text Articles with unsourced quotes Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Temple 98 languages Add topic

