Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Comparison with controlled trials 2 Types 3 Application 4 Examples 5 Variations Toggle Variations subsection 5.1 Current and historical cohorts 5.2 Nested case-control study 5.3 Household panel survey 5.4 Cohort analysis in business 5.5 AI for cohort study 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cohort study 27 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of longitudinal study For analysis of cohorts in community health and business data sets, see Cohort analysis . For other uses, see Cohort (disambiguation) .

A cohort study is a particular form of longitudinal study that samples a cohort (a group of people who share a defining characteristic, typically those who experienced a common event in a selected period, such as birth or graduation), performing a cross-section at intervals through time. It is a type of panel study where the individuals in the panel share a common characteristic.

Cohort studies represent one of the fundamental designs of epidemiology which are used in research in the fields of medicine , pharmacy , nursing , psychology , social science , and in any field reliant on 'difficult to reach' answers that are based on evidence ( statistics ). In medicine for instance, while clinical trials are used primarily for assessing the safety of newly developed pharmaceuticals before they are approved for sale, epidemiological analysis on how risk factors affect the incidence of diseases is often used to identify the causes of diseases in the first place, and to help provide pre-clinical justification for the plausibility of protective factors (treatments).

Comparison with controlled trials [ edit ] Cohort studies differ from clinical trials in that no intervention, treatment, or exposure is administered to participants in a cohort design; and no control group is defined. Rather, cohort studies are largely about the life histories of segments of populations and the individual people who constitute these segments.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Exposures or protective factors are identified as preexisting characteristics of participants. The study is controlled by including other common characteristics of the cohort in the statistical analysis. Both exposure/treatment and control variables are measured at baseline. Participants are then followed over time to observe the incidence rate of the disease or outcome in question. Regression analysis can then be used to evaluate the extent to which the exposure or treatment variable contributes to the incidence of the disease, while accounting for other variables that may be at play.

[ citation needed ] Double-blind randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are generally considered superior methodology in the hierarchy of evidence in treatment, because they allow for the most control over other variables that could affect the outcome, and the randomization and blinding processes reduce bias in the study design. This minimizes the chance that results will be influenced by confounding variables, particularly ones that are unknown. However, educated hypotheses based on prior research and background knowledge are used to select variables to be included in the regression model for cohort studies, and statistical methods can be used to identify and account for potential confounders from these variables. Bias can also be mitigated in a cohort study when selecting participants for the cohort.

RCTs may not be suitable in all cases; such as when the outcome is a negative health effect and the exposure is hypothesized to be a risk factor for the outcome. Ethical standards, and morality, would prevent the use of risk factors in RCTs. The natural or incidental exposure to these risk factors (e.g. time spent in the sun), or self-administered exposure (e.g. smoking), can be measured without subjecting participants to risk factors outside of their individual lifestyles, habits, and choices.

Types [ edit ] Cohort studies can be retrospective (looking back in time, thus using existing data such as medical records or claims database) or prospective (requiring the collection of new data).

[ 3 ] Retrospective cohort studies restrict the investigators' ability to reduce confounding and bias because collected information is restricted to data that already exists. There are advantages to this design, however, as retrospective studies are much cheaper and faster because the data has already been collected and stored.

A cohort is a group of people who share a common characteristic or experience within a defined period (e.g., are currently living, are exposed to a drug or vaccine or pollutant, or undergo a certain medical procedure). Thus a group of people who were born on a day or in a particular period, say 1948, form a birth cohort. The comparison group may be the general population from which the cohort is drawn, or it may be another cohort of persons thought to have had little or no exposure to the substance under investigation, but otherwise similar. Alternatively, subgroups within the cohort may be compared with each other.

Application [ edit ] In medicine, a cohort study is often undertaken to obtain evidence to try to refute the existence of a suspected association between cause and effect; failure to refute a hypothesis often strengthens confidence in it. Crucially, the cohort is identified before the appearance of the disease under investigation. The study groups follow a group of people who do not have the disease for a period of time and see who develops the disease (new incidence). The cohort cannot therefore be defined as a group of people who already have the disease. Prospective (longitudinal) cohort studies between exposure and disease strongly aid in studying causal associations, though distinguishing true causality usually requires further corroboration from further experimental trials.

The advantage of prospective cohort study data is that it can help determine risk factors for contracting a new disease because it is a longitudinal observation of the individual through time, and the collection of data at regular intervals, so recall error is reduced. However, cohort studies are expensive to conduct, are sensitive to attrition and take a long follow-up time to generate useful data. Nevertheless, the results that are obtained from long-term cohort studies are of substantially superior quality to those obtained from retrospective/cross-sectional studies. Prospective cohort studies are considered to yield the most reliable results in observational epidemiology. They enable a wide range of exposure-disease associations to be studied.

Some cohort studies track groups of children from their birth, and record a wide range of information (exposures) about them. The value of a cohort study depends on the researchers' capacity to stay in touch with all members of the cohort. Some studies have continued for decades.

In a cohort study, the population under investigation consists of individuals who are at risk of developing a specific disease or health outcome.

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards .

No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this section if you can.

( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of an epidemiological question that can be answered using a cohort study is whether exposure to X (say, smoking) associates with outcome Y (say, lung cancer). For example, in 1951, the British Doctors Study was started. Using a cohort which included both smokers (the exposed group) and non-smokers (the unexposed group). The study continued through 2001. By 1956, the study provided convincing proof of the association between smoking and the incidence of lung cancer. In a cohort study, the groups are matched in terms of many other variables such as economic status and other health status so that the variable being assessed, the independent variable (in this case, smoking) can be isolated as the cause of the dependent variable (in this case, lung cancer). In this example, a statistically significant increase in the incidence of lung cancer in the smoking group as compared to the non-smoking group is evidence in favor of the hypothesis. However, rare outcomes, such as lung cancer, are generally not studied with the use of a cohort study, but are rather studied with the use of a case-control study.

In the Arts, Cohort Succession can explain most change in literature, art, intellectualism, political opinions, and phonology.

[ 5 ] Shorter term studies are commonly used in medical research as a form of clinical trial , or means to test a particular hypothesis of clinical importance. Such studies typically follow two groups of patients for a period of time and compare an endpoint or outcome measure between the two groups.

Randomized controlled trials , or RCTs, are a superior methodology in the hierarchy of evidence, because they limit the potential for bias by randomly assigning one patient pool to an intervention and another patient pool to non-intervention (or placebo). This minimizes the chance that the incidence of confounding variables will differ between the two groups. Nevertheless, it is sometimes not practical or ethical to perform RCTs to answer a clinical question. To take our example, if we already had reasonable evidence that smoking causes lung cancer then persuading a pool of non-smokers to take up smoking in order to test this hypothesis would generally be considered unethical.

Two examples of cohort studies that have been going on for more than 50 years are the Framingham Heart Study and the National Child Development Study (NCDS), the most widely researched of the British birth cohort studies . Key findings of NCDS and a detailed profile of the study appear in the International Journal of Epidemiology .

[ 6 ] The Dunedin Multidisciplinary Health and Development Study has been studying the thousand people born in Dunedin , New Zealand, in 1972–1973. The subjects are interviewed regularly, with Phase (age) 52 starting in 2024.

The largest cohort study in women is the Nurses' Health Study . Starting in 1976, it is tracking over 120,000 nurses and has been analyzed for many different conditions and outcomes.

The largest cohort study in Africa is the Birth to Twenty Study, which began in 1990 and tracks a cohort of over 3,000 children born in the weeks following Nelson Mandela 's release from prison.

Other famous examples are the Grant Study tracking a number of Harvard graduates from ca. 1950.77, the Whitehall Study tracking 10,308 British civil servants, and the Caerphilly Heart Disease Study , which since 1979 has studied a representative sample of 2,512 men, drawn from the Welsh town of Caerphilly.

[ 7 ] The ASPREE-XT study is designed to determine whether there are long-lasting effects of an average of four–five years of treatment with daily low-dose aspirin, with outcome measures including cancer mortality.

[ 8 ] As of September 2018, there were 16,703 ASPREE-XT participants in Australia.

[ 9 ] It has been proposed that the existing ASPREE-XT study could provide a platform for a future multigenerational research study.

[ 10 ] Variations [ edit ] Comparison of timelines of case-control and cohort studies. "OR" stands for "odds ratio" and "RR" stands for " relative risk ".

The diagram indicates the starting point and direction of cohort and case-control studies.
In case-control studies the analysis proceeds from documented disease and investigations are made to arrive at the possible causes of the disease. In cohort studies the assessment starts with the putative cause of disease, and observations are made of the occurrence of disease relative to the hypothesized causal agent .

[ 11 ] Current and historical cohorts [ edit ] Main article: Retrospective cohort study A current cohort study represents a true prospective study where the data concerning exposure are assembled prior to the occurrence of the fact to be studied, for instance a disease. An example of a current cohort study is the Oxford Family Planning Association Study in the United Kingdom, which aimed to provide a balanced view of the beneficial and harmful effects of different methods of contraception. This study has provided a large amount of information on the efficacy and safety of contraceptive methods, and in particular oral contraceptives (OCs), diaphragms and intrauterine device (IUDs).

[ 12 ] In a historical cohort study the data concerning exposure and occurrence of a disease, births, a political attitude or any other categorical variable are collected after the events have taken place, and the subjects (those exposed and unexposed to the agent under study) are assembled from existing records or health care registers.

A " prospective cohort " defines the groups before the study is done, while historical studies, which are sometimes referred to as " retrospective cohort ", define the grouping after the data is collected. Examples of a retrospective cohort are Long-Term Mortality after Gastric Bypass Surgery [ 13 ] and The Lothian Birth Cohort Studies .

[ 14 ] Although historical studies are sometimes referred to as retrospective study, it a misnomer as the methodological principles of historical cohort studies and prospective studies are the same.

[ 11 ] Nested case-control study [ edit ] Main article: Nested case-control study A nested case-control study is a case control nested inside of a cohort study. The procedure begins like a normal cohort study, however, as participants develop the outcome of interest they are selected as cases. Once the cases are identified, controls are selected and matched to each case. The process for selecting and matching cases is identical to a normal case control study. An example of a nested case-control study is Inflammatory markers and the risk of coronary heart disease in men and women , which was a case control analyses extracted from the Framingham Heart Study cohort.

[ 15 ] Nested case-controls have the advantage of reducing the number of participants that require details follow up or diagnostic testing to assess outcome or exposure status. However, this will also reduce the power of the study, when compared to larger cohort the study population is drawn from.

Household panel survey [ edit ] Panel surveys are another important sub-type of longitudinal study . They differ from cohort studies by starting with representative cross-sectional samples, rather than cohorts defined by an event. Household panels draw representative samples of households and survey them, following all individuals through time on a usual annual basis. Examples include the US Panel Study of Income Dynamics (since 1968), the German Socio-Economic Panel (since 1984), the British Household Panel Survey (since 1991) and (since 2009) its successor Understanding Society: the UK Household Longitudinal Study , the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia Survey (since 2001) and the European Community Household Panel (1994–2001).

Cohort analysis in business [ edit ] For an example in business analysis, see cohort analysis .

AI for cohort study [ edit ] Conventionally, cohort studies require manual definitions of the common characteristics, which are time-consuming and labor-intensive, demanding extensive domain expertise. To address these limitations, researchers [ 16 ] have increasingly explored the integration of AI technologies (e.g., CohortNet.

[ 17 ] COOL [ 18 ] ) to automate the identification of cohorts with their definitions. For example, in healthcare, we can identify patients with a certain combination of feature conditions as a specific cohort, typically resulting in a similar outcome or end-point. Once the cohort is identified, we further learn the commonalities among the associated patients and obtain meaningful cohort representations. These AI-derived cohorts not only enhance the ability to evaluate new patients but also hold significant potential to accelerate medical research and discovery.

See also [ edit ] Cohort (statistics) Community of position Panel analysis Panel data References [ edit ] ^ "Cohort Studies" . Web Center for Social Research Methods. Archived from the original on 9 September 2011.

^ Porta, Miquel, ed. (2008).

A Dictionary of Epidemiology (5th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

^ "FAQ: What is a cohort study?" . California Department of Public Health, Environmental Health Investigations Branch. 2 June 2001. Archived from the original on 26 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2010 .

^ Blumenthal, Ursula J.; Fleisher, Jay M.; Esrey, Steve A.; Peasey, Anne (2001).

"Chapter 7: Epidemiology: a tool for the assessment of risk" (PDF) . In Fewtrell, Lorna; Bartram, Jamie (eds.).

Water Quality: Guidelines, Standards, and Health : Assessment of Risk and Risk Management for Water-related Infectious Disease . IWA Publishing. pp.

143– 144.

^ Underwood, Ted; Kiley, Kevin; Shang, Wenyi; Vaisey, Stephen (2022).

"Cohort Succession Explains Most Change in Literary Culture" .

Sociological Science .

9 : 184– 205.

doi : 10.15195/v9.a8 . Retrieved 11 May 2022 .

^ Power C, Elliott J (2006).

"Cohort profile: 1958 British Cohort Study" .

International Journal of Epidemiology .

35 (1): 34– 41.

doi : 10.1093/ije/dyi183 .

PMID 16155052 .

^ "Caerphilly and Speedwell collaborative heart disease studies. The Caerphilly and Speedwell Collaborative Group" .

Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health .

38 (3): 259– 262. 1984.

doi : 10.1136/jech.38.3.259 .

PMC 1052363 .

PMID 6332166 .

.

^ "ASPREE Australia | ABOUT ASPREE-XT - ASPREE Australia" . 21 July 2019. Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 21 July 2019 .

^ "Daily low-dose aspirin found to have no effect on healthy life span in older people" .

National Institutes of Health News Releases . 16 September 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2021 .

^ Nunn, Jack S.; Sulovski, Merrin; Tiller, Jane; Holloway, Bruce; Ayton, Darshini; Lacaze, Paul (3 May 2021).

"Involving elderly research participants in the co-design of a future multi-generational cohort study" .

Research Involvement and Engagement .

7 (1): 23.

doi : 10.1186/s40900-021-00271-4 .

ISSN 2056-7529 .

PMC 8094476 .

PMID 33941290 .

^ a b Meirik, O.

"Cohort and Case-Control Studies" . In Campana, Aldo (ed.).

Reproductive Health . Geneva Foundation for Medical Education and Research.

^ Vessey, M. P.; Lawless, M. (1984). "The Oxford-Family Planning Association contraceptive study".

Clinics in Obstetrics and Gynaecology .

11 (3): 743– 757.

doi : 10.1016/S0306-3356(21)00625-7 .

ISSN 0306-3356 .

PMID 6509857 .

^ Adams TD, Gress RE, Smith SC, et al. (2007).

"Long-term mortality after gastric bypass surgery" (PDF) .

N. Engl. J. Med .

357 (8): 753– 61.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa066603 .

PMID 17715409 .

S2CID 8710295 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2019.

^ "The Lothian Birth Cohort Studies" . University of Edinburgh. Archived from the original on 22 October 2009 . Retrieved 8 May 2011 .

^ Pai, JK; Pischon, T; Ma, J; et al. (2004).

"Inflammatory markers and the risk of coronary heart disease in men and women" .

N. Engl. J. Med .

351 (25): 2599– 2610.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMoa040967 .

PMID 15602020 .

S2CID 16142059 .

^ Cai, Qingpeng; Zheng, Kaiping; Jagadish, H. V.; Ooi, Beng Chin; Yip, James (2024). "CohortNet: Empowering Cohort Discovery for Interpretable Healthcare Analytics".

Proc. VLDB Endow .

17 (10): 22487– 2500.

arXiv : 2406.14015 .

doi : 10.14778/3675034.3675041 .

.

^ "GitHub - CohortNet" .

GitHub . Retrieved 30 January 2024 .

^ "Introduction to COOL" . Retrieved 21 June 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Prospective cohorts Retrospective cohorts Birth cohort study timelines (ESDS Longitudinal) Centre for Longitudinal Studies v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject v t e Clinical research and experimental design Overview Clinical trial Trial protocols Adaptive clinical trial Academic clinical trials Clinical study design Evidence-based medicine Real world evidence Patient and public involvement Controlled study ( EBM I to II-1 ) Randomized controlled trial Scientific experiment Blind experiment Open-label trial Adaptive clinical trial Platform trial Observational study ( EBM II-2 to II-3 ) Cross-sectional study vs.

Longitudinal study , Ecological study Cohort study Retrospective Prospective Case–control study ( Nested case–control study ) Case series Case study Case report Measures Occurrence Incidence , Cumulative incidence , Prevalence , Point prevalence , Period prevalence Association Risk difference , Number needed to treat , Number needed to harm , Risk ratio , Relative risk reduction , Odds ratio , Hazard ratio Population impact Attributable fraction among the exposed , Attributable fraction for the population , Preventable fraction among the unexposed , Preventable fraction for the population Other Clinical endpoint , Virulence , Infectivity , Mortality rate , Morbidity , Case fatality rate , Specificity and sensitivity , Likelihood-ratios , Pre- and post-test probability Trial/test types In vitro In vivo Animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates First-in-man study Multicenter trial Seeding trial Vaccine trial Analysis of clinical trials Risk–benefit ratio Systematic review Replication Meta-analysis Intention-to-treat analysis Interpretation of results Selection bias Survivorship bias Correlation does not imply causation Null result Sex as a biological variable Category Glossary List of topics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐frb2h
Cached time: 20250812015253
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.565 seconds
Real time usage: 0.683 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2869/1000000
Revision size: 24205/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 216178/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3515/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 89394/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.332/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6203371/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  558.369      1 -total
 35.34%  197.346      1 Template:Reflist
 28.31%  158.084      1 Template:Statistics
 27.75%  154.922      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.57%   98.107      7 Template:Cite_web
 11.43%   63.823      1 Template:Short_description
 10.82%   60.398     13 Template:Navbox
 10.51%   58.672      8 Template:Cite_journal
  7.56%   42.239     17 Template:Main_other
  6.93%   38.686      1 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:397271:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015253 and revision id 1288339106. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cohort_study&oldid=1288339106 " Categories : Epidemiology Cohort studies Cohort study methods Research Nursing research Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles needing cleanup from July 2011 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles without a reason field from July 2011 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from July 2011 This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cohort study 27 languages Add topic

