Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fifteenth-century Italian dance 2 Gallery 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources 4 External links Toggle External links subsection 4.1 Modern performance Toggle the table of contents Renaissance dance 11 languages العربية Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Nederlands Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of dance Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Renaissance dances belong to the broad group of historical dances , specifically those during the Renaissance period.  During that period, there was a distinction between country dances and court dances. Court dances required the dancers to be trained and were often for display and entertainment, whereas country dances could be attempted by anyone. At Court, the formal entertainment would often be followed by many hours of country dances which all present could join in. Dances described as country dances such as Chiarantana or Chiaranzana remained popular over a long period – over two centuries in the case of this dance. A Renaissance dance can be likened to a ball.

Knowledge of court dances has survived better than that of country dances as they were collected by dancing masters in manuscripts and later in printed books. The earliest surviving manuscripts that provide detailed dance instructions are from 15th century Italy. The earliest printed dance manuals come from late 16th century France and Italy. The earliest dance descriptions in England come from the Gresley manuscript, c.

1500, found in the Derbyshire Record Office, D77 B0x 38 pp 51–79. These have been recently published as "Cherwell Thy Wyne (Show your joy): Dances of fifteenth-century England from the Gresley manuscript".

[ 1 ] The first printed English source appeared in 1651, the first edition of Playford .

The dances in these manuals are extremely varied in nature. They range from slow, stately "processional" dances ( bassadance , pavane , almain ) to fast, lively dances ( galliard , coranto , canario ).  The former, in which the dancers' feet were not raised high off the floor were styled the dance basse while energetic dances with leaps and lifts were called the haute dance .

[ 2 ] Queen Elizabeth I enjoyed galliards, and la spagnoletta was a court favourite.

[ 3 ] Some were choreographed, others were improvised on the spot.  One dance for couples, a form of the galliard called volta , involved a rather intimate hold between the man and woman, with the woman being lifted into the air while the couple made a 3 ⁄ 4 turn.  Other dances, such as branles or bransles, were danced by many people in a circle or line.

Fifteenth-century Italian dance [ edit ] Our knowledge of 15th-century Italian dances comes mainly from the surviving works of three Italian dance masters: Domenico da Piacenza , Antonio Cornazzano and Guglielmo Ebreo da Pesaro . Their work deals with similar steps and dances, though some evolution can be seen. The main types of dances described are bassa danza and balletto . These are the earliest European dances to be well-documented, as we have a reasonable knowledge of the choreographies, steps and music used.

Gallery [ edit ] Dance at Herod's Court , an engraving by Israhel van Meckenem , c. 1490 Ambrosius Benson , Elegant couples dancing in a landscape , before 1550 French painting of the volta , from Penshurst Place , Kent, often wrongly assumed to be of Elizabeth I References [ edit ] ^ Ann and Paul Kent DHDS,2013 ISBN 978-0-9540988-1-0 ^ Liza Picard (2005).

Elizabeth's London . Macmillan. p. 215.

ISBN 978-0-312-32566-4 .

^ Moore, Lillian. (1965).

Images of the dance : historical treasures of the Dance Collection 1581–1861 . New York Public Library.

OCLC 466091730 .

Sources [ edit ] Ebreo, Guglielmo (1993).

On the practice or art of dancing (orig. pub. 1463) edited by Barbara Sparti . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-816574-9 .

Caroso, Fabritio (1986).

Courtly Dance of the Renaissance – a new translation and edition of Nobilta di Dame (orig. pub. 1600) edited by Julia Sutton . New York: Dover Publications Inc.

ISBN 0-486-28619-3 .

A William Smith (1995).

Fifteenth-century dance and music: the complete transcribed Italian treatises and collections in the tradition of Domenico da Piacenza (vol 1) . Stuyvesant, NY: Pendragon Press.

ISBN 0-945193-25-4 .

A William Smith (1995).

Fifteenth-century dance and music: the complete transcribed Italian treatises and collections in the tradition of Domenico da Piacenza (vol 2) . Stuyvesant, NY: Pendragon Press.

ISBN 0-945193-57-2 .

Date Van Winkler Keller; Genevieve Shimer (1990).

The Playford Ball 103 Early English Country Dances As Interpreted by Cecil Sharp and his Followers . A Cappella Books and the Country Dance and Song Society.

ISBN 1-55652-091-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance dance .

www.earlydancecircle.co.uk The Renaissance Dance Homepage Society for Creative Anachronism (SCA) Renaissance Dance Homepage Renaissance Dance Events listed at the Calendar of Early-Dance Official website Modern performance [ edit ] Many groups exist that recreate historical music and dance from the Renaissance period The Early Dance Circle is an umbrella group for early dance in the UK Renaissance Footnotes, a UK dance group recreating dances of the renaissance v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_dance&oldid=1303086847 " Categories : Renaissance dance History of dance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance dance 11 languages Add topic

