Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Theology 3 Historiography Toggle Historiography subsection 3.1 Principle of criticism 3.2 Principle of analogy 3.3 Principle of correlation 4 Politics 5 Reception 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernst Troeltsch 28 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Svenska తెలుగు Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German theologian, writer, philosopher and politician (1865–1923) Ernst Troeltsch Born 17 February 1865 Haunstetten , Kingdom of Bavaria Died 1 February 1923 Berlin , Free State of Prussia , Weimar Germany Education Alma mater University of Erlangen University of Göttingen Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Neo-Kantianism ( Baden school ) History of religions school Liberal Christianity Classical liberalism Institutions University of Göttingen University of Göttingen University of Bonn University of Heidelberg University of Berlin Notable students Gertrud von Le Fort Friedrich Gogarten Main interests Theology philosophy of history Notable ideas Three principles of historiography (principle of criticism, principle of analogy, principle of correlation) Ernst Peter Wilhelm Troeltsch ( / t r ɛ l tʃ / ; [ 1 ] German: [tʁœltʃ] ; 17 February 1865 – 1 February 1923) was a German liberal Protestant theologian , a writer on the philosophy of religion and the philosophy of history , and a classical liberal politician. He was a member of the history of religions school . His work was a synthesis of a number of strands, drawing on Albrecht Ritschl , Max Weber 's conception of sociology , and the Baden school of neo-Kantianism .

Life [ edit ] Troeltsch was born on 17 February 1865 into a Lutheran family to a doctor and went to a Catholic school in a predominantly Catholic area. He then attended university, at the University of Erlangen and then at the University of Göttingen . During his university years, he experienced difficulties in his student fraternity as a result of his homosexuality .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His ordination in 1889 was followed in 1891 by a post teaching theology at Göttingen. In 1892, he moved on to teach at the University of Bonn . In 1894, he moved on again to Heidelberg University . Finally, in 1915, he transferred to teach at what is now the University of Berlin , where he took the title of professor of philosophy and civilization.

[ 4 ] Troeltsch died on 1 February 1923. The church historian Adolf von Harnack spoke at his funeral.

[ 5 ] Theology [ edit ] Throughout Troeltsch's life, he wrote frequently of his belief that changes in society posed a threat to Christian religion and that "the disenchantment of the world" as described by sociologist Max Weber was underway. At an academic conference that took place in 1896, after a paper on the doctrine of Logos , Troeltsch responded by saying, "Gentlemen, everything is tottering!" [ 6 ] Troeltsch also agreed with Weber's Protestant work ethic , restating it in his Protestantism and Progress . He viewed the creation of capitalism as having been the result of the specific Protestant sects named by Weber, rather than as a result of Protestantism as a whole. However, his analysis of Protestanitsm was more optimistic than Weber's in its focus on religious personal conviction as a source for individualism and spiritual mysticism as a source for subjectivism. Troeltsch interpreted non-Calvinist Protestantism as having had a positive effect on the development of the press, modern education systems, and politics.

[ 7 ] His study, The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches (1912) , is about the history of Christian social precepts -- as they pertain to culture, economics, and institutions -- in the history of Western Civilization. Troeltsch's distinction between churches and sects as social types, for instance, set the course for further theological study.

[ 8 ] Troeltsch sought to explain the decline of religion in the modern era by studying the historical evolution of religion in society. He described European civilization as having three periods: ancient , medieval , and modern . Instead of claiming that modernity starts with the rise of Protestantism , Troeltsch argued that early Protestantism should be understood as a continuation of the medieval period. Therefore, the modern period starts later in his account: in the seventeenth century. The Renaissance in Italy and the scientific revolution planted the seeds for the arrival of the modern period. Protestantism delayed, rather than heralded, modernity. The reform movement around Luther, Troeltsch argued, was "in the first place, simply a modification of Catholicism, in which the Catholic formulation of the problems was retained, while a different answer was given to them." [ 9 ] Troeltsch saw the distinction between early and late (or "neo-") Protestantism as "the presupposition for any historical understanding of Protestantism." [ 10 ] Historiography [ edit ] Part of a series on Lutheranism Background Christianity Start of the Reformation Reformation Protestantism Doctrine and theology Bible Old Testament New Testament Creeds Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Book of Concord Augsburg Confession Apology of the Augsburg Confession Luther's Small / Large Catechism Smalcald Articles Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope Formula of Concord Distinctive theological concepts Theology of Martin Luther Justification Law and Gospel Sola gratia Sola scriptura Christology Sanctification Two kingdoms catholicity Two states of the Church Priesthood of all believers Divine Providence Marian theology Theology of the Cross Sacramental Union Other relevant topics Homosexuality Sacraments and worship Baptism Eucharist Confession Confirmation Matrimony Anointing of the Sick Holy Orders Divine Service Matins Vespers Liturgical calendar Calendar of saints Lutheran hymn Lutheran hymnwriters Normative principle Lutheran art Organization Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference Global Confessional & Missional Lutheran Forum International Lutheran Council Lutheran World Federation Denominations Lutheranism by region Movements History of Lutheranism Crypto-Lutherans Gnesio-Lutherans Lutheran orthodoxy Pietists Radical Pietism Haugeans Laestadians Finnish Awakening Old Lutherans Neo-Lutherans High church Lutherans Confessional Lutheranism Key figures Missionaries John Campanius Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Hans Egede Johann Heinrich Callenberg Johann Phillip Fabricius Paul Henkel John Christian Frederick Heyer Karl Graul Martti Rautanen Wilhelm Sihler F. C. D. Wyneken Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Lars Olsen Skrefsrud Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Onesimos Nesib Paul Olaf Bodding Johann Flierl Christian Keyser Jens Christensen Bible Translators Martin Luther Casiodoro de Reina Kjell Magne Yri Onesimos Nesib Aster Ganno Kristian Osvald Viderø Jákup Dahl Bartholomäus Ziegenbalg Johann Phillip Fabricius William Tyndale John Rogers George Constantine Jozef Roháček Johannes Avetaranian Guðbrandur Þorláksson Ludvig Olsen Fossum Hans Egede / Paul Egede Otto Fabricius Nils Vibe Stockfleth Olaus Petri / Laurentius Petri Martti Rautanen Primož Trubar Jurij Dalmatin Ludwig Ingwer Nommensen Sebastian Krelj Mikael Agricola Norwegian Bible Society Swedish Bible Society Samuel Ludwik Zasadius Stanislovas Rapolionis Laurentius Andreae Hans Tausen Olaf M. Norlie Jonas Bretkūnas Hans Paludan Smith Schreuder Antonio Brucioli Mikołaj Jakubica Matthias Bel Johann Ernst Glück William F. Beck Theologians Martin Luther / Katharina von Bora Philip Melanchthon Johannes Bugenhagen Johannes Brenz Justus Jonas Hans Tausen Laurentius Petri Olaus Petri Mikael Agricola Matthias Flacius Martin Chemnitz Johann Gerhard Abraham Calovius Johannes Andreas Quenstedt Johann Wilhelm Baier Philipp Spener David Hollaz August Hermann Francke Henry Muhlenberg Lars Levi Laestadius Charles Porterfield Krauth C. F. W. Walther Søren Kierkegaard Albrecht Ritschl Wilhelm Herrmann F. W. Stellhorn Rudolf Otto Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Bultmann Paul Tillich Hermann Sasse Dietrich Bonhoeffer Wolfhart Pannenberg Robert Jenson v t e Troeltsch developed three principles pertaining to critical historiography . Each of the principles served as a philosophical retort for preconceived notions. Troeltsch's principles (criticism, analogy, correlation) were used to account for historians' biases.

[ 11 ] Principle of criticism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Troeltsch's claim in the principle concludes that absolutes within history cannot exist. Troeltsch surmised that judgments about the past must be varied. As such, the absolute truth of historical reality could not exist, but he claimed historical situation could be examined as more or less likely to have happened. For Troeltsch, finite and non-revisable historical claims are questionable.

Principle of analogy [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Historians often think in analogies, which leads them to make anachronistic claims about the past. Troeltsch argued that the probability of analogies cannot usually be validated. He presented human nature as being fairly constant throughout time.

Principle of correlation [ edit ] In regard to historical events, Troeltsch determined that humanity's historical life is interdependent upon each individual. Since the cumulative actions of individuals create historical events, there is a causal nature to all events that create an effect. Any radical event, the historian should assume, affected the historical nexus immediately surrounding that event. Troeltsch determines that in historical explanation, it is important to include antecedents and consequences of events in an effort to maintain historical events in their conditioned time and space.

[ 12 ] Politics [ edit ] Troeltsch was politically a classical liberal and served as a member of the Parliament of the Grand Duchy of Baden . In 1918, he joined the German Democratic Party (DDP). He strongly supported Germany's role in World War I : "Yesterday we took up arms. Listen to the ethos that resounds in the splendour of heroism: To your weapons, to your weapons!" [ 13 ] Reception [ edit ] In the immediate aftermath of Troeltsch's death, his work neglected as part of a wider rejection of liberal thought with the rise of neo-orthodoxy in Protestant theology, especially with the prominence of Karl Barth in the German-speaking world. From 1960 onwards, however, Troeltsch's thought has enjoyed a revival. Several books on Troeltsch's theological and sociological work have been published since 2000.

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ Porter, Andrew P. (2001).

By the Waters of Naturalism: Theology Perplexed among the Sciences . Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock. p. 57.

ISBN 1-57910-770-2 .

^ Radkau, Joachim (2009).

Max Weber: A Biography . Translated by Camiller, Patrick. Cambridge, United Kingdom: Polity. p. 578.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4147-8 .

OCLC 232365644 .

^ Graf, Friedrich Wilhelm (1982). "Polymorphes Gedächtnis: Zur Einführung in die Troeltsch-Nekrologie". In Graf, Friedrich Wilhelm; Nees, Christian (eds.).

Ernst Troeltsch in Nachrufen . Troeltsch-Studien (in German). Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus. pp.

167– 168.

ISBN 978-3-579-00168-5 .

^ Michael Walsh, ed. (2001).

Dictionary of Christian Biography . Continuum. p.

1108 .

ISBN 0826452639 .

^ Mikuteit, Johannes (1 January 2004).

"Review of "Ernst Troeltsch in Nachrufen" " .

H-Soz-u-Kult . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ Robert J. Rubanowice (1982).

Crisis in consciousness: The Thought of Ernst Troeltsch . Tallahassee: University Presses of Florida. p.

9 .

ISBN 0813007216 .

^ Whimster, Sam (July 2005 – January 2006). "R.H. Tawney, Ernst Troeltsch and Max Weber on Puritanism and Capitalism".

Max Weber Studies .

5– 6 ( 2– 1): 307– 311.

doi : 10.1353/max.2006.a808955 .

ISSN 1470-8078 .

JSTOR 24581969 .

S2CID 147882750 .

Project MUSE 808955 .

^ Schweiker, William (9 August 2007).

Ernst Troeltsch's The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199227228.003.0025 .

^ Quoted in Rubanowice, p. 21, from Protestantism and Progress (translated by W. Montgomery, 1958), p. 59. Original title: Die Bedeutung des Protestantismus für die Entstehung de modernen Welt .

^ Quoted in Toshimasa Yasukata (1986).

Ernst Troeltsch: Systematic Theologian of Radical Historicality . Atlanta, Georgia: Scholars Press. p. 51.

ISBN 1555400698 .

^ Harvey, Van Austin (1966).

The Historian and The Believer: The Morality of Historical Knowledge and Christian Faith . New York: Macmillan Company. pp.

13– 15.

^ Troeltsch, Ernst.

Gesammelte Schriften II . pp.

729– 753.

^ Emma Wallis (9 April 2014).

"Ernst Troeltsch and the power of the pen" . DW.de.

Archived from the original on 13 April 2014 . Retrieved 15 April 2014 .

^ Garrett E. Paul.

"Why Troeltsch? Why today? Theology for the 21st Century" . Religion-Online.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

Sources [ edit ] Chapman, Mark.

Ernst Troeltsch and Liberal Theology: Religion and Cultural Synthesis in Wilhelmine Germany (Oxford University Press 2002) Gerrish, B. A. (1975).

Jesus, Myth, and History: Troeltsch's Stand in the "Christ-Myth" Debate .

The Journal of Religion 55 (1): 13–35.

Pauck, Wilhelm.

Harnack and Troeltsch: Two historical theologians (Wipf and Stock Publishers, 2015) Nix, Jr., Echol, Ernst Troeltsch and Comparative Theology (Peter Lang Publishing; 2010) 247 pages; a study of Troeltsch and the contemporary American philosopher and theologian Robert Neville (b. 1939).

Norton, Robert E.

The Crucible of German Democracy. Ernst Troeltsch and the First World War (Mohr Siebeck 2021).

Troesltch, Ernst, "Historiography" in James Hastings (ed.), Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1914), VI, 716–723.

Troeltsch, Ernst, "Protestantism and Progress," (Transaction Publishers, 2013) with an Introduction - "Protestantism and Progress, Redux," by Howard G. Schneiderman.

External links [ edit ] Ernst Troeltsch-Gesamtausgabe Troeltsch-Studien. Neue Folge Bill Fraatz.

"Ernst Troeltsch (1865-1923)" .

Boston Collaborative Encyclopedia of Western Theology .

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jxnfh
Cached time: 20250817090058
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.808 seconds
Real time usage: 1.005 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4169/1000000
Revision size: 14277/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 249984/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7212/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 222239/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.559/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16147502/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  816.495      1 -total
 20.66%  168.673      7 Template:Navbox
 18.54%  151.354      1 Template:Reflist
 18.11%  147.874      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.40%  117.554      1 Template:Liberalism
 13.16%  107.458      4 Template:Excerpt
 12.83%  104.716      9 Template:Cite_book
 11.13%   90.861      1 Template:IPA
  8.88%   72.530      1 Template:Lutheranism
  8.65%   70.633      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1180251:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817090058 and revision id 1294887928. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernst_Troeltsch&oldid=1294887928 " Categories : 1865 births 1923 deaths Writers from Augsburg People from the Kingdom of Bavaria German Lutheran theologians Kantian philosophers Sociologists of religion 19th-century German Protestant theologians German Democratic Party politicians University of Augsburg alumni University of Erlangen–Nuremberg alumni Humboldt University of Berlin alumni University of Göttingen alumni Academic staff of the University of Göttingen Academic staff of the University of Bonn Academic staff of Heidelberg University Burials at the Invalids' Cemetery History of religions school LGBTQ theologians 19th-century German LGBTQ people 20th-century German LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lutherans LGBTQ philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2019 Use Oxford spelling from February 2019 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 11:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernst Troeltsch 28 languages Add topic

