Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Jyotirmimamsa 1 language हिन्दी Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical treatise (c. 1504) by Nilakantha Somayaji This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Jyotirmimamsa" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a review .

Please help rewrite it in a neutral , encyclopedic style. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in Astronomy, History of Science or India . The specific problem is: Clarification is needed on the impact of this work.

WikiProject Astronomy , WikiProject History of Science or WikiProject India may be able to help recruit an expert.

( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In astronomy , Jyotirmimamsa (analysis of astronomy) [ 1 ] is a treatise on the methodology of astronomical studies authored by Nilakantha Somayaji (1444–1544) in around 1504 CE. Nilakantha somayaji was an important astronomer - mathematician of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics and was the author of the much celebrated astronomical work titled Tantrasamgraha . This book stresses the necessity and importance of astronomical observations to obtain correct parameters for computations and to develop more and more accurate theories. It even discounts the role of revealed wisdom and divine intuitions in studying astronomical phenomena. Jyotirmimamsa is sometimes cited as proof to establish that modern methodologies of scientific investigations were known to ancient and medieval Indians.

[ 2 ] Neelkantha Somayaji insisted that computational results should tally with that of observations and astronomical parameters and constants should be revised periodically. To come to more precise conclusions, Neelkantha Somayaji have discussions with the astronomer and mathematicians of other schools.

The nature of the astronomical and mathematical work, the divine intuition, the experimental details of the science, corrections to the planetary parameters, reasons for the corrections for the planetary revolutions, Vedic authority for inference in astronomy, relative accuracy of different systems, and correction through eclipses , true motion, position, etc., of planets are some of the topics discussed in Jyotirmimamsa.

[ 3 ] Synopsis [ edit ] The following is an outline of the various topics discussed in Jyotirmimamsa.

[ 3 ] The necessity of revising the astronomical constants at regular intervals for correcting the parameters connected with astronomy The meaning of devatha prasada , which is manifested in the intuition of the astronomers, as a prerequisite for obtaining the accurate values and the correct approach in the astronomy The experimental determinations of the astronomical constants and the tools used for these determinations The need and the importance of conducting experiments in astronomical studies Significance of the astronomical books and the base of collecting data from those books Application of corrections, called bija correction , for the astronomical figures The corrections known as the Bhatta correction Justification of the changes made by the astronomer Lallacharya in his book Sishyaddhi vruddhi tantra Reasons for difference in the mean planets though the revolutions are identical Vedic authority for inference as a means to derive the number of planetary revolutions Different systems of astronomy The numbers of planetary revolutions enunciated by Sripati and Brahmagupta The numbers of revolutions of planets, apogees and nodes, number of days, in a Kalpa (in astronomy, a period of 14×72×4320000 years) Zero points of the planets at the commencement of Kali Yuga , corrections to planetary revolutions Relative accuracy of the different astronomical systems Mean planets according to the Sunrise system of Aryabhatiya , mean planets, Moon's apogee and Moon's node according to Siddhantasekhara Application of the values in the astronomical calculations, astronomical corrections given on the bases of the eclipses Eclipses observed by Parameswaracharya Method of corrections given by other astronomers Demonstration of the validity of those corrections through eclipses, precision of equinoxes, calculation and the correction, correction of the periphery of the manda epicycle, discussion on the precision of the equinoxes, corrections due to the precession of the equinoxes Sine table for praanakalaantara , sine table for the ascensional differences Derivation of the 36 Rsines Graphic proof for the relation of the sides and hypotenuse Reason for the reduction of the minutes of arc of the planetary orbital to the visible celestial sphere See also [ edit ] Indian astronomy Indian mathematics Indian mathematicians History of mathematics References [ edit ] ^ Somayaji, Nilakantha (1977).

Sarma, K.V.

(ed.).

Jyotirmimamsa [ Investigations on astronomical theories ] (1st ed.). Hoshiarpur: Vishveshvaranand Vishva Bandhu Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies, Panjab University.

^ Roddam Narasimha (2009). "The Chequered Histories of Epistemology of Science". In Bharati Ray (ed.).

Different types of history . project of History of Science, Philosophy, and Culture in Indian Civilisation. Vol. XIV Part 4. Delhi: Centre for Studies in Civilisation. pp.

96– 97.

^ a b Gopalakrishnan, N. (2004).

Baharatheeya Vijnana / Saastra Dhaara [ Handbbok of Ancient Indian Scientific Books ] (PDF) . Heritage Publication Series. Vol. 78. Thiruvanannthapuram, India: Indian Institute of Scientific Heritage. pp.

18– 20 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

[ permanent dead link ] v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians (Complete list) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ Citrabhānu Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi Devācārya Govinda Bhattathiri Govindasvāmin Haridatta Jyeṣṭhadeva Kochukrishnan Asan Madhava of Sangamagrama Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji Nīlakaṇṭha II Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam Putumana Somayāji Śankara Vāriyar Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ Udayadivākara Vararuci I Vidyamadhava Treatises Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) Candrachayaganita Dasādhyāyi Drigganita Dṛkkaraṇa Gaṇitayuktayah Golavada Golasara Grahacāraṇinibandhana Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha Jyotirmimamsa Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha Kanakkusāraṃ Karaṇapaddhati Kriyakramakari Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) Madhyamanayanaprakara Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya Pañcabodha Sadratnamālā Sidhhantadarpana Spuṭanirṇaya Tantrasamgraha Venvaroha Yuktibhāṣā Concepts/Topics Chandravakyas Drigganita system Kaṭapayādi system Madhava's correction terms Madhava series Madhava's sine table Parahita system Places associated with members of the school Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) Tirunavaya (Haridatta) v t e Scientific Research in Kerala Pre 19th Century Achyuta Pisharati Candravakyas Citrabhanu Damodara Ganita-yukti-bhasa Govinda Bhattathiri Haridatta Jyā, koti-jyā and utkrama-jyā Jyeṣṭhadeva Jyotirmimamsa Karanapaddhati Katapayadi system Kriyakramakari Madhava of Sangamagrama Madhava series Madhava's sine table Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Nilakantha Somayaji Parameshvara Sadratnamala Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Tantrasamgraha Organizations C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram Centre for Development Studies Centre for Earth Science Studies Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Kerala) Centre for Rural Management Centre of Science and Technology for Rural Development Cyberpark Kerala Mathematical Association Kerala Science and Technology Museum Kerala Science Congress Kerala Soil Museum Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment Krishi Vigyan Kendra Kannur Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Regional Agricultural Research Station, Pattambi Rice Research Station, Moncombu Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre Institutions Agricultural Research Station, Anakkayam Agricultural Research Station, Mannuthy Agronomic Research Station, Chalakudy Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre Aromatic and Medicinal Plants Research Station, Odakkali Banana Research Station, Kannara Cashew Research Station, Madakkathara Central Institute of Fisheries Technology Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute Central Tuber Crops Research Institute Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology College of Horticulture Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre Institute of Handloom and Textile Technology Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Indian Institute of Spices Research Jubilee Mission Medical College and Research Institute Kerala Forest Research Institute Kerala School of Mathematics, Kozhikode Mar Athanasios College for Advanced Studies, Tiruvalla National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology National Institute of Speech and Hearing National Research Institute for Panchakarma Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology Srinivasa Ramanujan Institute of Basic Sciences St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute Vadakke Madham Brahmaswam Vedic Research Centre Scientists Ajit Varki C. V. Subramanian Dileep George E. C. George Sudarshan G. Madhavan Nair George Varghese K. R. Ramanathan K. Radhakrishnan M. G. K. Menon Matthew Pothen Thekaekara P. N. Vinayachandran Pisharoth Rama Pisharoty Pulickel Ajayan R. S. Krishnan Sainudeen Pattazhy T. A. Venkitasubramanian Thanu Padmanabhan Thomas Zacharia Vainu Bappu Varghese Mathai Vinod Scaria Assorted articles A Passage to Infinity FORV Sagar Sampada Swatantra 2014 Techno-lodge Technology Business Incubator TBI-NITC A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy Templates Category WikiProject India portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐8nts9
Cached time: 20250812145041
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.363 seconds
Real time usage: 0.484 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1483/1000000
Revision size: 6001/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95225/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17478/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 37635/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.229/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5740897/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  416.126      1 -total
 29.41%  122.366      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 26.17%  108.889      1 Template:Reflist
 23.45%   97.586      2 Template:Navbox
 20.46%   85.131      3 Template:Cite_book
 18.66%   77.657      1 Template:Kerala_School
 15.29%   63.645      1 Template:Short_description
 13.85%   57.627      4 Template:Ambox
 11.74%   48.860      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  9.60%   39.945      1 Template:Expert_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26113571:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812145041 and revision id 1262902902. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jyotirmimamsa&oldid=1262902902 " Categories : Hindu astronomy History of mathematics Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Indian astronomy texts Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use Indian English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles needing additional references from July 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2019 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing context from July 2019 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup Articles needing expert attention from July 2019 All articles needing expert attention Astronomy articles needing expert attention History of Science articles needing expert attention India articles needing expert attention Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 13 December 2024, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jyotirmimamsa 1 language Add topic

