Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Opus Majus 8 languages Dansk Español Euskara Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1267 treatise by Roger Bacon Opus maius , 1750 edition First page of a 1750 edition of Opus majus The Opus Majus ( Latin for "Greater Work") is the most important work of Roger Bacon . It was written in Medieval Latin , at the request of Pope Clement IV , to explain the work that Bacon had undertaken. The 878-page treatise ranges over all aspects of natural science, from grammar and logic to mathematics, physics, and philosophy. Bacon sent his work to the Pope in 1267.

[ 1 ] It was followed later the same year by a smaller second work, his Opus Minus , which was intended as an abstract or summary of the longer work, followed shortly by a third work, Opus Tertium , as a preliminary introduction to the other two.

Contents [ edit ] The Opus Majus is divided into seven parts: Part one considers the obstacles to real wisdom and truth, classifying the causes of error ( offendicula ) into four categories: following a weak or unreliable authority, custom, the ignorance of others, and concealing one's own ignorance by pretended knowledge.

Part two considers the relationship between philosophy and theology , concluding that theology (and particularly Holy Scripture ) is the foundation of all sciences.

Part three contains a study of Biblical languages : Latin , Greek , Hebrew , and Arabic , as a knowledge of language and grammar is necessary to understand revealed wisdom.

Part four contains a study of Mathematics : As part of the study, he vividly drew out the flaws in the Julian Calendar , proposing to drop a day every 125 years from 325 CE ( Council of Nicaea ).  He also noted the shifting of the Equinoxes to the Solstices .

[ 2 ] Part five contains a study of Optics : The study of optics in part five seems to draw on the works of the Arab writers Kindi and Alhazen , including a discussion of the physiology of eyesight , the anatomy of the eye and the brain , and considers light , distance, position, and size, direct vision, reflected vision, and refraction , mirrors and lenses .

Part six, De scientia experimentalis , a study of Experimental Science : It includes a review of alchemy , the creation of gunpowder and of the positions and sizes of the celestial bodies , and anticipates later inventions , such as microscopes , telescopes , spectacles , flying machines , hydraulics and steam ships . The occult overtones of this section reflect Bacon's interest in magic , which he also wrote about in De secretis operibus artis et naturae, et de nullitate magiae . It was a major influence on John Dee 's theory of Archemastrie .

[ 3 ] Part seven considers moral philosophy and ethics .

An incomplete version of Bacon's Opus Majus was published by William Bowyer in London in 1733.  It was edited by Samuel Jebb from a manuscript at Trinity College, Cambridge which omitted the seventh part.

As a recent paper emphasizes, this major work cannot be usefully read exclusively in the context of the history of science and philosophy while forgetting to consider Bacon's religious commitment to the Franciscan Order .  " His Opus maius was a plea for reform addressed to the supreme spiritual head of the Christian faith , written against a background of apocalyptic expectation and informed by the driving concerns of the friars. It was designed to improve training for missionaries and to provide new skills to be employed in the defence of the Christian world against the enmity of non-Christians and of the Antichrist ".

[ 4 ] Bacon's optic studies, from Opus Majus Notes [ edit ] ^ Opus Majus in year 1267 was accompanied by a letter of dedication to the Pope.

^ David Ewing Duncan, The Calendar , 2011, pp. 3–5.

^ Clulee, Nicholas H.; Vickers, Brian (1984). "At the crossroads of magic and science: John Dee's Archemastrie". In Vickers, Brian (ed.).

Occult and scientific mentalities in the Renaissance . p. 59.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511572999.003 .

ISBN 9780511572999 .

^ (p. 692) Power, Amanda. (2006). "A Mirror for Every Age: The Reputation of Roger Bacon".

The English Historical Review .

121 (492): 657– 692.

doi : 10.1093/ehr/cel102 .

References [ edit ] A History of Western Philosophy Vol. II by Ralph McInerny from the Jacques Maritain Center, University of Notre Dame Roger Bacon from the Catholic Encyclopedia Fr. Rogeri Bacon Opera quaedam hactenus Inedita , Vol. 1 at Google Books.  Contains the Opus Tertium , Opus Minus , and Compendium Philosophiae .

External links [ edit ] 1750 edition of Opus majus Opus Majus , Volume I in the Internet Archive – original text in Latin (omitting Part IV), ed. by John Henry Bridges, 1897.

Opus Majus , Volume I in the Internet Archive – original text in Latin (including Part IV ), ed. by John Henry Bridges, 1900.

Opus Majus , Volume II in the Internet Archive – original text in Latin, ed. by John Henry Bridges, 1897.

Opus Majus , Volume I at Google Books – English trans. by Robert Belle Burke, 1928.

Opus Majus , Volume II in the Internet Archive – English trans. by Robert Belle Burke, 1962.

Authority control databases Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opus_Majus&oldid=1217883772 " Categories : Works by Roger Bacon 1267 books British literature 13th-century books in Latin Medieval philosophical literature Hidden categories: Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 April 2024, at 12:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opus Majus 8 languages Add topic

