Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Operations 2 Training 3 Weaponry 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fuerzas Especiales 4 languages Español Français 日本語 Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Special forces unit of the Mexican Navy Special Operations Forces Fuerzas Especiales FES insignia Active 2001 - present Country United Mexican States Allegiance Mexico Branch Mexican Navy Type Naval special operations forces Part of Unidad de Operaciones Especiales (UNOPES) of the Mexican Marines Motto(s) Fuerza, Espíritu, Sabiduría (lit. Strength, Spirit, Wisdom) Military unit The Fuerzas Especiales ( Special Forces ), commonly known as FES is a special operations group of the Mexican Naval Infantry Corps (the 'Mexican Marines') under the Mexican Navy , established in 2001. Within the Naval Infantry Corps the FES falls under the Mexican Navy Special Operations Unit (UNOPES) which additionally includes various Naval Infantry Corps commando and airborne units.

FES personnel are capable of carrying out non-conventional warfare in the air, sea and land, using all means of infiltration available to develop the most variable operational incursions with the use of military diving techniques, parachuting , vertical descent , urban combat , sniping and use of explosives . The units are well organized, trained and equipped to operate independently in maritime, lake, riverine or terrestrial scenarios.

Operations [ edit ] The FES has played a major active role in the war against international cartels by undertaking direct action missions, intelligence gathering, reconnaissance operations,  weapons and facility seizures, kill or capture missions with support from U.S. government agencies such as the DEA.

Some of their most known operations are as follows: Operation Cuerno III. The raid and elimination of the leader of the Beltran Leyva Cartel, Arturo Beltran Leyva, in Cuernavaca, Morelos in December 2009.

Elimination of Gulf Cartel leader Antonio Cárdenas Guillén aka "Tony Tormenta" in Matamoros, Mexico, 2010. 3 marines KIA during the firefight with his close protection circle of gunmen known as “Los Escorpiones”. Heavy fire, grenades and road blockades were implemented by the cartel gunmen that day.

[ 1 ] In 2012 during a successful operation Zetas cartel regional boss Iván Velázquez Caballero aka ''El Talibán'' was captured in San Luis Potosi.

[ 2 ] In 2013 special operations personnel with support from the US government was able to track down with a drone & capture Zetas cartel top boss, Miguel Ángel Treviño , aka Z-40, in Nuevo Laredo [ 3 ] On February 22, 2014, El Chapo Guzman was captured in Mazatlán, Mexico, by FES teams.

[ 4 ] Operation Black Swan . During a joint US-Mexico operation, Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán , was captured in Los Mochis, Sinaloa in 2016. Guzman Loera had escaped from prison in 2015.

[ 5 ] Operation Barcina. With close air support from a naval helicopter with a mounted M134 Minigun the regional boss of the Beltran Leyva Cartel , Juan Francisco Patrón aka “El H2”, was eliminated in 2017 during a raid by FES teams.

[ 6 ] In July 2022, they carried out the successful "Operación Leyenda II" in which they captured the pioneer drug lord Rafael Caro Quintero .

[ 7 ] Training [ edit ] In order to become part of the Special Forces the contestant must pass a basic special forces course. The course has a duration of 1571 hours that is divided in 6 phases: Introduction to Special Forces (4 weeks) Parachuting (5 weeks) Commando and stress tests (6 weeks) Mountain operations (4 weeks) Intervention/CQB (5 weeks) Diving and combat diving courses (16 weeks) After passing the basic special forces course the operator continues to receive the additional training in the following areas: Counter-terrorism Combat medicine VIP close protection Drone surveillance Sniper course VBSS operations HALO/HAHO parachuting Military intelligence Special Reconnaissance Search and rescue Hazardous materials handling Human rights awareness EOD Some of the main training centers and subcenters where courses are given: Centro de Entrenamiento Avanzado in Valle de Bravo, Mexico Centro de Capacitación y Adiestramiento Especializado de Infantería de Marina (CENCAEIM) in Champotón, Mexico Escuela de Búsqueda, Rescate y Buceo in Acapulco, Mexico Additional training is also given to FES operators in the United States.

[ 8 ] Weaponry [ edit ] SIG-516 GEN-12 SIG MPX COPPERHEAD SIG MCX Virtus M4 Carbine FN P90 H&K UMP PSG-1 M249 Squad Automatic Weapon Glock 17 SIG Sauer P226 MK25 M203 grenade launcher M60E6 SIG Sauer P320 Compact Milkor MGL SIG Sauer P365 9mm Pistol [ 9 ] M72 LAW See also [ edit ] Mexican Special Forces Canada - Joint Task Force 2 United Kingdom - Special Boat Service United States - Navy SEALs - NSWDG Marine Raider Regiment List of military special forces units References [ edit ] ^ " "Marina siguió seis meses a Tony Tormenta" " .

^ "Captura la Marina a El Talibán presunto líder de Los Zetas" . 27 September 2012.

^ "Captura de El Z-40, con apoyo de un dron de EU, dicen funcionarios" . 19 July 2013.

^ " 'El Chapo' Guzman: How the world's most wanted drug lord was finally busted" .

CNN . 24 February 2014.

^ "Inside the Dramatic Raid That Took Down 'El Chapo' " .

ABC News .

^ " "Operación Barcina". El ataque al corazón del Cártel de los Beltrán Leyva" .

^ "Mexico detains drug lord wanted by US as 14 killed in Black Hawk helicopter crash" .

CNN . 16 July 2022.

^ "4 INFORME DE LABORES 2021-22" (PDF) .

^ "La Marina de México compra armamento por 26 millones de dólares" .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fuerzas_Especiales&oldid=1292434326 " Categories : Special forces of Mexico Military units and formations established in 2001 Naval special forces units and formations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 22:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fuerzas Especiales 4 languages Add topic

