Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Early work on convention 3 Counterfactuals and modal realism Toggle Counterfactuals and modal realism subsection 3.1 Realism about possible worlds 3.2 Criticisms 3.3 Influence 4 Later life and death 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Books 5.2 Selected papers 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents David Lewis (philosopher) 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1941–2001) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "David Lewis" philosopher – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) David Lewis Lewis in 1962, while at Swarthmore College Born David Kellogg Lewis September 28, 1941 Oberlin , Ohio , U.S.

Died October 14, 2001 (aged 60) Princeton , New Jersey , U.S.

Other names Bruce Le Catt [ 1 ] Spouse Stephanie Lewis (m. 1965–2001) Education Education Swarthmore College ( BA ) St Anne's College, Oxford Harvard University ( PhD ) Doctoral advisor Willard Van Orman Quine Other advisors Donald Cary Williams [ 8 ] Iris Murdoch [ 9 ] Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Nominalism [ 2 ] Perdurantism [ 3 ] Institutions Princeton University Doctoral students Robert Brandom Peter Railton J. David Velleman Main interests Logic · Language · Metaphysics Epistemology · Ethics Notable ideas Possible worlds · Modal realism · Counterfactuals · Counterpart theory · Principal principle · Humean supervenience · Lewis signaling game · The endurantism – perdurantism distinction Descriptive-causal theory of reference [ 4 ] · De se Qualitative vs quantitative parsimony [ 5 ] Ramsey–Lewis method Gunk [ 6 ] Ontological innocence [ 7 ] Centered world David Kellogg Lewis (September 28, 1941– October 14, 2001) was an American philosopher. Lewis taught briefly at UCLA and then at Princeton University from 1970 until his death. He is closely associated with Australia , whose philosophical community he visited almost annually for more than 30 years.

Lewis made significant contributions in philosophy of mind , philosophy of probability , epistemology , philosophical logic , aesthetics , philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of time and philosophy of science . In most of these fields he is considered among the most important figures of recent decades. Lewis is most famous for his work in metaphysics , philosophy of language and semantics , in which his books On the Plurality of Worlds (1986) and Counterfactuals (1973) are considered classics. His works on the logic and semantics of counterfactual conditionals are broadly used by philosophers and linguists along with a competing account from Robert Stalnaker ; together the Stalnaker–Lewis theory of counterfactuals has become perhaps the most pervasive and influential account of its type in the philosophical and linguistic literature. His metaphysics incorporated seminal contributions to quantified modal logic , the development of counterpart theory , counterfactual causation , and the position called "Humean supervenience ". Most comprehensively in On the Plurality of Worlds , Lewis defended modal realism : the view that possible worlds exist as concrete entities, and that our world is one among many equally real possible ones. However he notes that our world is actualized.

Early life and education [ edit ] Lewis was born in Oberlin, Ohio , to John D. Lewis, a professor of government at Oberlin College , and Ruth Ewart Kellogg Lewis, a medieval historian . He was the grandson of the Presbyterian minister Edwin Henry Kellogg and the great-grandson of the Presbyterian missionary and Hindi expert Samuel H. Kellogg .

[ 10 ] Lewis attended Oberlin High School , where he attended college lectures in chemistry . He went on to Swarthmore College and spent a year at Oxford University (1959–60), where he was tutored by Iris Murdoch and attended lectures by Gilbert Ryle , H. P. Grice , P. F. Strawson , and J. L. Austin . His year at Oxford played an important role in his decision to study philosophy. Lewis received his Ph.D. from Harvard University in 1967, where he studied under W. V. O. Quine , whose views he would later dispute. It was there he took a seminar with the Australian philosopher J. J. C. Smart . Smart recalled, "I taught David Lewis, or rather, he taught me." [ 11 ] Lewis joined the philosophy department at the University of California, Los Angeles , in 1966. In 1970, he moved to Princeton University , where he spent the remainder of his career.

Early work on convention [ edit ] Lewis's first monograph was Convention: A Philosophical Study (1969), which is based on his doctoral dissertation and uses concepts of game theory to analyze the nature of social conventions. It won the American Philosophical Association 's first Franklin Matchette Prize for the best book published in philosophy by a philosopher under 40. Lewis claimed that social conventions, such as the convention in most states that one drives on the right (not on the left), the convention that the original caller will re-call if a phone conversation is interrupted, etc., are solutions to so-called "'co-ordination problems'". Co-ordination problems were at the time of Lewis's book an under-discussed kind of game-theoretical problem; most game-theoretical discussion had centered on problems where the participants are in conflict, such as the prisoner's dilemma .

Co-ordination problems are problematic, for, though the participants have common interests, there are several solutions. Sometimes one of the solutions is "salient", a concept invented by the game-theorist and economist Thomas Schelling (by whom Lewis was much inspired). For example, a co-ordination problem that has the form of a meeting may have a salient solution if there is only one possible spot to meet in town. But in most cases, we must rely on what Lewis calls "precedent" for a salient solution. If both participants know that a particular co-ordination problem, say "which side should we drive on?", has been solved in the same way numerous times before, both know that both know this, both know that both know that both know this, etc. (this particular state Lewis calls common knowledge , and it has since been a frequent topic of discussion among philosophers and game theorists), then they will easily solve the problem. That they have solved the problem successfully will be seen by even more people, and thus the convention will spread in the society. A convention is thus a behavioral regularity that sustains itself because it serves the interests of everyone involved. Another important feature of a convention is that a convention could be entirely different: one could just as well drive on the left; it is more or less arbitrary that one drives on the right in the US, for example.

Lewis's main goal in the book, however, was not simply to provide an account of convention but rather to investigate the "platitude that language is ruled by convention" ( Convention , p. 1.) The book's last two chapters ( Signalling Systems and Conventions of Language ; cf. also "Languages and Language", 1975) make the case that a population's use of a language consists of conventions of truthfulness and trust among its members. Lewis recasts in this framework notions such as truth and analyticity, claiming that they are better understood as relations between sentences and a language rather than as properties of sentences.

Counterfactuals and modal realism [ edit ] Lewis went on to publish Counterfactuals (1973), which gives a modal analysis of the truth conditions of counterfactual conditionals in possible world semantics and the governing logic for such statements. According to Lewis, the counterfactual "If kangaroos had no tails they would topple over" is true if in all worlds most similar to the actual world where the antecedent "if kangaroos had no tails" is true, the consequent that kangaroos in fact topple over is also true. Lewis introduced the now standard "would" conditional operator ◻→ to capture these conditionals' logic. A sentence of the form A ◻→ C is true on Lewis's account for the same reasons given above. If there is a world maximally similar to ours where kangaroos lack tails but do not topple over, the counterfactual is false. The notion of similarity plays a crucial role in the analysis of the conditional. Intuitively, given the importance in our world of tails to kangaroos remaining upright, in the most similar worlds to ours where they have no tails they presumably topple over more frequently and so the counterfactual comes out true. This treatment of counterfactuals is closely related to an independently discovered account of conditionals by Robert Stalnaker , and so this kind of analysis is called Stalnaker-Lewis theory . The crucial areas of dispute between Stalnaker's account and Lewis's are whether these conditionals quantify over constant or variable domains (strict analysis vs. variable-domain analysis) and whether the Limit assumption should be included in the accompanying logic. Linguist Angelika Kratzer has developed a competing theory for counterfactual or subjunctive conditionals, "premise semantics", which aims to give a better heuristic for determining the truth of such statements in light of their often vague and context-sensitive meanings. Kratzer's premise semantics does not diverge from Lewis's for counterfactuals but aims to spread the analysis between context and similarity to give more accurate and concrete predictions for counterfactual truth conditions.

[ 12 ] Realism about possible worlds [ edit ] What made Lewis's views about counterfactuals controversial is that whereas Stalnaker treated possible worlds as imaginary entities, "made up" for the sake of theoretical convenience, Lewis adopted a position his formal account of counterfactuals did not commit him to, namely modal realism . On Lewis's formulation, when we speak of a world where I made the shot that in this world I missed, we are speaking of a world just as real as this one, and although we say that in that world I made the shot, more precisely it is not I but a counterpart of mine who was successful.

Lewis had already proposed this view in some of his earlier papers: "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic" (1968), "Anselm and Actuality" (1970), and "Counterparts of Persons and their Bodies" (1971). The theory was widely considered implausible, but Lewis urged that it be taken seriously. Most often the idea that there exist infinitely many causally isolated universes, each as real as our own but different from it in some way, and that alluding to objects in this universe as necessary to explain what makes certain counterfactual statements true but not others, meets with what Lewis calls the "incredulous stare" (Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds , 2005, pp. 135–137). He defends and elaborates his theory of extreme modal realism, while insisting that there is nothing extreme about it, in On the Plurality of Worlds (1986). Lewis acknowledges that his theory is contrary to common sense, but believes its advantages far outweigh this disadvantage, and that therefore we should not be hesitant to pay this price.

According to Lewis, "actual" is merely an indexical label we give a world when we are in it. Things are necessarily true when they are true in all possible worlds. (Lewis is not the first to speak of possible worlds in this context.

Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and C.I. Lewis , for example, both speak of possible worlds as a way of thinking about possibility and necessity, and some of David Kaplan 's early work is on the counterpart theory. Lewis's original suggestion was that all possible worlds are equally concrete, and the world in which we find ourselves is no realer than any other possible world.) Criticisms [ edit ] This theory has faced a number of criticisms. In particular, it is not clear how we could know what goes on in other worlds. After all, they are causally disconnected from ours; we can't look into them to see what is going on there.

[ 13 ] A related objection is that, while people are concerned with what they could have done, they are not concerned with what people in other worlds, no matter how similar to them, do. As Saul Kripke once put it, a presidential candidate could not care less whether someone else, in another world, wins an election, but does care whether he himself could have won it (Kripke 1980, p. 45).

[ citation needed ] Another criticism of the realist approach to possible worlds is that it has an inflated ontology —by extending the property of concreteness to more than the singular actual world it multiplies theoretical entities beyond what should be necessary to its explanatory aims, thereby violating the principle of parsimony, Occam's razor . But the opposite position could be taken on the view that the modal realist reduces the categories of possible worlds by eliminating the special case of the actual world as the exception to possible worlds as simple abstractions.

Possible worlds are employed in the work of Kripke [ 14 ] and many others, but not in the concrete sense Lewis propounded. While none of these alternative approaches has found anything near universal acceptance, very few philosophers accept Lewis's brand of modal realism.

Influence [ edit ] At Princeton, Lewis was a mentor of young philosophers and trained dozens of successful figures in the field, including several current Princeton faculty members, as well as people now teaching at a number of the leading philosophy departments in the U.S. Among his prominent students were Robert Brandom , L. A. Paul , J. David Velleman , Peter Railton , Phillip Bricker , Cian Dorr , and Joshua Greene . His direct and indirect influence is evident in the work of many prominent philosophers of the current generation.

The work of David Lewis has been the subject of a quantitative analysis conducted by philosopher Benj Hellie in order to study his rate of philosophical progress. According to Hellie, Lewis’s most significant breakthroughs only started to occur during the midpoint of Lewis’s philosophical career, after transitioning from framing a descriptive science of mind and meaning to focusing on metaphysics. Hellie then argues that future philosophers can learn much about Lewis’s right and wrong steps in order to maximize philosophical breakthroughs.

[ 15 ] Later life and death [ edit ] Lewis suffered from severe diabetes for much of his life, which eventually grew worse and led to kidney failure. In July 2000 he received a kidney transplant from his wife Stephanie. The transplant allowed him to work and travel for another year, before he died suddenly and unexpectedly from further complications of his diabetes, on October 14, 2001.

[ 16 ] Since his death a number of posthumous papers have been published, on topics ranging from truth and causation to philosophy of physics.

Lewisian Themes , a collection of papers on his philosophy, was published in 2004.

[ 17 ] A two-volume collection of his correspondence, Philosophical Letters of David K. Lewis , was published in 2020. A 2015 poll of philosophers conducted by Brian Leiter ranked Lewis the fourth most important Anglophone philosopher active between 1945 and 2000, behind only Quine , Kripke , and Rawls .

[ 18 ] Works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Convention: A Philosophical Study , Harvard University Press 1969.

Counterfactuals , Harvard University Press 1973; revised printing Blackwell 1986.

On the Plurality of Worlds , Blackwell 1986.

Parts of Classes , Blackwell 1991.

Lewis published five volumes containing 99 papers—almost all the papers he published in his lifetime. They discuss his counterfactual theory of causation , the concept of semantic score , a contextualist analysis of knowledge, and a dispositional value theory , among many other topics.

Philosophical Papers, Vol. I (1983) includes his early work on counterpart theory and the philosophy of language and of mind .

Philosophical Papers, Vol. II (1986) includes his work on counterfactuals , causation, and decision theory , where he promotes his principal principle about rational belief.

[ 19 ] Its preface discusses Humean supervenience , the name Lewis gave to his overarching philosophical project.

Papers in Philosophical Logic (1998).

Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology (1999) contains "Elusive Knowledge" and "Naming the Colours", honored by being reprinted in the Philosopher's Annual for the year they were first published.

Papers in Ethics and Social Philosophy (2000).

Lewis's monograph Parts of Classes (1991), on the foundations of mathematics , sketched a reduction of set theory and Peano arithmetic to mereology and plural quantification . Very soon after its publication, Lewis became dissatisfied with some aspects of its argument; it is currently out of print (his paper "Mathematics is megethology", in Papers in Philosophical Logic , is partly a summary and partly a revision of "Parts of Classes") Nachlass Lewis, David (2023-09-28). Janssen-Lauret, Frederique; MacBride, Fraser (eds.).

Philosophical Manuscripts . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780192847393.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-284739-3 .

Selected papers [ edit ] "Counterpart Theory and Quantified Modal Logic", Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968): pp. 113–126.

"General semantics", Synthese , 22(1) (1970): pp. 18–67.

"Causation", Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973): pp. 556–67. Reprinted with postscripts in Philosophical Papers: Volume II (1986).

"Semantic Analyses for Dyadic Deontic Logic" in Logical Theory and Semantic Analysis: Essays Dedicated to Stig Kanger on His Fiftieth Birthday , Reidel 1974.

"The Paradoxes of Time Travel", American Philosophical Quarterly , April (1976): pp.  145–152.

"Truth in Fiction", American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978): pp. 37–46.

"How to Define Theoretical Terms", Journal of Philosophy 67 (1979): pp. 427–46.

"Scorekeeping in a Language Game", Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1979): pp. 339–59.

" Mad pain and Martian pain ", Readings in the Philosophy of Psychology Vol. I. N. Block, ed.

Harvard University Press (1980): pp. 216–222.

"A Subjectivist's Guide to Objective Chance", in R. Jeffrey, ed., Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability: Volume II . Reprinted with postscripts in Philosophical Papers: Volume II (1986).

"Are We Free to Break the Laws?" Theoria 47 (1981): pp. 113–21.

"New Work for a Theory of Universals", Australasian Journal of Philosophy 61 (1983): pp. 343–77.

"What Experience Teaches", in Mind and Cognition by William G. Lycan , (1990 Ed.) pp. 499–519. Article omitted from subsequent editions.

"Elusive Knowledge", Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 74/4 (1996): pp. 549–567.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy Bayesian epistemology List of American philosophers Canberra Plan Causal model Conversational scoreboard Counterfactuals Extended modal realism Formal semantics (natural language) Humeanism § Causality and necessity Lewis's triviality result Modal realism Possible world References [ edit ] ^ Guglielmi, Giorgia (1 August 2017).

"Philosophy journal corrects 35-year-old article 'written' by a cat" .

Science .

^ "Review of Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra, Resemblance Nominalism: A Solution to the Problem of Universals " – ndpr.nd.edu ^ Lewis, D. K. 1986.

On the Plurality of Worlds Oxford: Blackwell.

^ Stefano Gattei, Thomas Kuhn's 'Linguistic Turn' and the Legacy of Logical Empiricism: Incommensurability, Rationality and the Search for Truth , Ashgate Publishing, 2012, p. 122 n. 232.

^ "On Quantitative and Qualitative Parsimony" by Maciej Sendłak, Metaphilosophy 49 (1–2):153–166 (2018).

^ "David Lewis's Metaphysics" ^ French, Rohan (2016).

"An Argument for the Ontological Innocence of Mereology" .

Erkenntnis .

81 (4): 683– 704.

doi : 10.1007/s10670-015-9762-x .

^ Wolterstorff, Nicholas (November 2007). "A Life in Philosophy".

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

81 (2): 93– 106.

JSTOR 27653995 .

^ "David Lewis" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2021.

^ Princeton Alumni Weekly , Volume 42, Princeton University Press, 1941.

^ O'Grady, Jane (2001-10-23).

"David Lewis" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2023-03-22 .

^ Kratzer, Angelika (2012).

Modals and Conditionals: New and Revised Perspectives . Oxford University press. pp. chapter 3.

ISBN 9780199234691 .

^ Robert Stalnaker , Inquiry , MIT Press, 1984, p. 49: "But if other possible worlds are causally disconnected from us, how do we know anything about them?" ^ " Naming and Necessity ". In Semantics of Natural Language , edited by D. Davidson and G. Harman. Reidel, 1980 (1972), pp. 253–355.

^ Hellie, Benj (2017).

David Lewis and the Kangaroo: Graphing philosophical progress . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 213--225 . Retrieved 4 July 2025 .

^ "David Kellogg Lewis" .

The New York Times . October 20, 2001.

^ Weatherson, Brian (2005-08-02).

"Review of Lewisian Themes: The Philosophy of David K. Lewis" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

ISSN 1538-1617 .

^ Leiter, Brian.

"Most Important Anglophone philosophers, 1945-2000: the top 20" .

Leiter Reports: A Philosophy Blog . Retrieved 6 September 2020 .

^ Originally in Lewis, David (1980). "A Subjectivist's Guide to Objective Chance". In Jeffrey, R.

(ed.).

Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability . Vol. 2. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

263– 293.

ISBN 0-520-03826-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Weatherson, Brian.

"David Lewis" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Hall, Ned.

"David Lewis's Metaphysics" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Dixon, Scott.

"David Lewis" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Nolan, Daniel Patrick (2005).

David Lewis . Chesham [U.K.]: Acumen.

Loewer, Barry ; Schaffer, Jonathan , eds. (2015).

A Companion to David Lewis . Oxford, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

doi : 10.1002/9781118398593 External links [ edit ] Service of Remembrance Friday, February 8, 2002 – Princeton University Chapel at the Wayback Machine (archived October 3, 2003) Photos from the weekend of the memorial service for David Lewis in Princeton, February 2002 v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Lewis_(philosopher)&oldid=1298833974 " Categories : 1941 births 2001 deaths 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers American male non-fiction writers American metaphysics writers Analytic philosophers Burials at Princeton Cemetery American epistemologists Harvard University alumni Kidney transplant recipients American metaphysicians American philosophers of language American philosophers of logic American philosophers of mind Philosophers of probability Princeton University faculty Swarthmore College alumni 20th-century American male writers 21st-century American male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2010 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 01:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David Lewis (philosopher) 25 languages Add topic

