Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Determining LI 2 Significance to thunderstorms 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Lifted index 5 languages العربية Français Lombard 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Computer generated Lifted Index field from April 6th, 2009, at 1 pm EDT. Unstable areas are in yellow (slightly) and red (highly) while the stable zone is in blue.

The lifted index ( LI ) is the temperature difference between the environment Te(p) and an air parcel lifted adiabatically Tp(p) at a given pressure height in the troposphere (lowest layer where most weather occurs) of the atmosphere , usually 500 hPa ( mb ). The temperature is measured in Celsius. When the value is positive, the atmosphere (at the respective height) is stable and when the value is negative, the atmosphere is unstable .

Determining LI [ edit ] LI can be computed using computer algorithms but can also be determined graphically. To do this, generally, the parcel is lifted from the portion of the planetary boundary layer (PBL) that lies below the morning inversion . The air here should be about 60 to 65% RH , which is then lifted along the dry adiabat (see also adiabatic process ) to the lifting condensation level (LCL) , which is the intersection of that curve with the average mixing ratio in the boundary layer. Once the LCL is found, the parcel is lifted along the moist adiabat to 500 mb. It is then that one finds LI = Te(p) - Tp(p).

LI is generally scaled as follows: LI 6 or Greater, Very Stable Conditions LI Between 1 and 6 : Stable Conditions, Thunderstorms Not Likely LI Between 0 and -2 : Slightly Unstable, Thunderstorms Possible, With Lifting Mechanism (i.e., cold front, daytime heating, ...) LI Between -2 and -6 : Unstable, Thunderstorms Likely, Some Severe With Lifting Mechanism LI Less Than -6: Very Unstable, Severe Thunderstorms Likely With Lifting Mechanism Significance to thunderstorms [ edit ] The lifted index can be used in thunderstorm forecasting, however, convective available potential energy (CAPE) is considered by most as a superior measurement of instability and is preferred by many meteorologists for convection forecasting.

[ 1 ] However, LI is easier and faster to determine without using a computer, as determining CAPE requires integration from one level to another.

See also [ edit ] Atmospheric convection Atmospheric thermodynamics Convective instability Lapse rate References [ edit ] ^ Blanchard, David O. (1998-09-01).

"Assessing the Vertical Distribution of Convective Available Potential Energy" .

Weather and Forecasting .

13 (3): 870– 877.

Bibcode : 1998WtFor..13..870B .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0434(1998)013<0870:ATVDOC>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0882-8156 .

S2CID 124375544 .

External links [ edit ] Lifted Index ( University of Illinois ) A look at LI Convective indices (NWS St. Louis) AMS Glossary stability indices, including LI Doswell, III, Charles A.

; D.M. Schultz (2006).

"On the Use of Indices and Parameters in Forecasting Severe Storms" .

Electronic Journal of Severe Storms Meteorology .

1 (3): 1– 22.

doi : 10.55599/ejssm.v1i3.4 .

v t e Meteorological data and variables General Adiabatic processes Advection Buoyancy Lapse rate Lightning Surface solar radiation Surface weather analysis Visibility Vorticity Wind Wind shear Condensation Cloud Cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) Fog Convective condensation level (CCL) Lifting condensation level (LCL) Precipitable water Precipitation Water vapor Convection Convective available potential energy (CAPE) Convective inhibition (CIN) Convective instability Convective momentum transport Conditional symmetric instability Convective temperature ( T c ) Equilibrium level (EL) Free convective layer (FCL) Helicity K Index Level of free convection (LFC) Lifted index (LI) Maximum parcel level (MPL) Bulk Richardson number (BRN) Temperature Dew point ( T d ) Dew point depression Dry-bulb temperature Equivalent temperature ( T e ) Forest fire weather index Haines Index Heat index Humidex Humidity Relative humidity (RH) Mixing ratio Potential temperature ( θ ) Equivalent potential temperature ( θ e ) Sea surface temperature (SST) Temperature anomaly Thermodynamic temperature Vapor pressure Virtual temperature Wet-bulb temperature Wet-bulb globe temperature Wet-bulb potential temperature Wind chill Pressure Atmospheric pressure Baroclinity Barotropicity Pressure gradient Pressure-gradient force (PGF) Velocity Maximum potential intensity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lifted_index&oldid=1277142462 " Categories : Severe weather and convection Atmospheric thermodynamics This page was last edited on 22 February 2025, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lifted index 5 languages Add topic

