Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Deposition from the Cross 3 Gallery 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rosso Fiorentino 37 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian painter This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(August 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Rosso Fiorentino]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Rosso Fiorentino}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Rosso Fiorentino Rosso Fiorentino, in the Lives of Giorgio Vasari Born Giovanni Battista di Jacopo 8 March 1495 Florence , Republic of Florence Died 14 November 1540 (1540-11-14) (aged 45) Fontainebleau , Kingdom of France Nationality Italian Known for Painting Movement Mannerism Moses Defending the Daughters of Jethro by Rosso Fiorentino (c.1523) at the Uffizi Gallery , Florence.

Giovanni Battista di Jacopo (8 March 1495 [ a ] – 14 November 1540), known as Rosso Fiorentino (meaning "Florentine Redhead" in Italian) or Il Rosso ("The Redhead"), was an Italian Mannerist painter who worked in oil and fresco and belonged to the Florentine school .

Biography [ edit ] Born in Florence with the red hair that gave him his nickname, Rosso first trained in the studio of Andrea del Sarto alongside his contemporary, Pontormo .  His early works include Holy Family with the Infant Saint John the Baptist (Walters Art Gallery), Cherub Playing a Lute (Uffizi) and The Infant Saint John the Baptist (private collection), all produced around 1521. In late 1523, Rosso moved to Rome, where he was exposed to the works of Michelangelo , Raphael , and other Renaissance artists, resulting in the realignment of his artistic style.

Fleeing Rome after the Sacking of 1527 , Rosso eventually went to France where he secured a position at the court of Francis I in 1530, remaining there until his death. Together with Francesco Primaticcio , Rosso was one of the leading artists to work at the Chateau Fontainebleau as part of the "First School of Fontainebleau ", spending much of his life there. Following his death in 1540 (which, according to an unsubstantiated claim by Vasari , was a suicide [1] ), Francesco Primaticcio took charge of the artistic direction at Fontainebleau.

Rosso's reputation, along those of other stylized late Renaissance Florentines,  was long out of favour in comparison to other more naturalistic and graceful contemporaries, but has revived considerably in recent decades. That his masterpiece is in a small city, away from the tourist track, was a factor in this, especially before the arrival of photography. His poses are certainly contorted, and his figures often appear haggard and thin, but his work has considerable power.

Deposition from the Cross [ edit ] Rosso Fiorentino.

Descent from the Cross . 1521. Oil on wood. 375 × 196 cm. Pinacoteca Comunale di Volterra, Italy.

His masterpiece is generally considered to be the Deposition or Descent from the Cross altarpiece in the Pinacoteca Comunale di Volterra (initially painted for the Duomo). In contrast to the frozen grief of other depositions, this one appears as a hurried and complicated operation, while the figures below have simple and forceful expressions of quiet grief, with powerful expressions hinted at by hidden faces. The sky is somber. The three ladders and those carrying down Christ appear precarious. Christ himself is sallow. Contrast this frenetic, windswept scene with the equally complex, but more restrained composition on the same theme by the near contemporary Florentine Mannerist Pontormo .

Rosso would go on to paint a second, darker and more crowded Deposition altarpiece for the church of San Lorenzo in Sansepolcro.

Gallery [ edit ] Portrait of a Young Man (1516–18) Portrait of a Young Man Seated on a Carpet (c. 1525–1527) Sacred Conversation with Musical Angels (1518), Uffizi, Florence Allegory of Salvation with the Virgin and Christ Child, St. Elizabeth, the Young St. John the Baptist and Two Angels (c. 1520) Descent from the Cross, detail Descent from the Cross, detail Marriage of the Virgin and Saints (1523) Bacchus, Venus and Cupid (c. 1531) Elephant , Château de Fontainebleau (c. 1536) Diana , Château de Fontainebleau Notes [ edit ] ^ According to the calendar system in use in Florence at the time , the year began on 25 March, meaning that his birth year was marked as 1494.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rosso Fiorentino .

Rosso Fiorentino's biography at Web Gallery of Art Examples of Fiorentino's art Example of unfinished Rosso painting showing underdrawing v t e Rosso Fiorentino Paintings Portrait of a Young Woman (c. 1510) Assumption of the Virgin (1513–1514) Madonna and Child with Cherubs (c. 1512–1517) Portrait of a Young Man (c. 1517–1518) Portrait of a Young Man Holding a Letter (1518) Spedalingo Altarpiece (1518) Portrait of a Young Man in Black (c. 1520) Portrait of a Young Man with a Helmet (c. 1520) Cherub Playing a Lute (1521) Villamagna Altarpiece (1521) Holy Family with the Infant Saint John the Baptist (c. 1521) The Infant Saint John the Baptist (c. 1521) Volterra Deposition (c. 1521) Dei Altarpiece (1522) Portrait of a Man (c. 1522) Portrait of a Man in Black (c. 1520–1522) Marriage of the Virgin (1523) Moses Defends Jethro's Daughters (c. 1523–1524) Death of Cleopatra (c. 1525) The Dead Christ with Angels (c. 1525–1526) Portrait of a Young Man Seated on a Carpet (c. 1525–1527) Sansepolcro Deposition (1528) The Risen Christ in Glory (1528–1530) Bacchus, Venus and Cupid (1531–1532) Pietà (c. 1537–1540) Related Andrea del Sarto (master) Cesi Chapel Florentine painting Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists KulturNav 2 Auckland Städel People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosso_Fiorentino&oldid=1302495299 " Categories : Italian male painters 16th-century Italian painters Italian Mannerist painters Painters from Florence 1495 births 1540 deaths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Biography articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rosso Fiorentino 37 languages Add topic

