Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Reception 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Prozac Nation 6 languages العربية فارسی Français עברית Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Memoir by Elizabeth Wurtzel This article is about the book. For the film, see Prozac Nation (film) .

Prozac Nation Author Elizabeth Wurtzel Language English Genre Memoir Publisher Riverhead Trade Publication date 1994 Publication place United States Pages 384 pages ISBN 978-1-573-22512-0 first edition Prozac Nation is a memoir by American writer Elizabeth Wurtzel published in 1994. The book describes the author's experiences with atypical depression , [ 1 ] her own character failings and how she managed to live through particularly difficult periods while completing college and working as a writer. Prozac is a trade name for the antidepressant fluoxetine .

[ 2 ] Wurtzel originally titled the book I Hate Myself and I Want To Die but her editor convinced her otherwise.

[ 3 ] It ultimately carried the subtitle Young and Depressed in America: A Memoir.

The book was adapted into a feature film, Prozac Nation (2001), starring Christina Ricci .

Reception [ edit ] Reviews were mixed. In The New York Times , Michiko Kakutani characterized Prozac Nation as "by turns wrenching and comical, self-indulgent and self-aware," comparing it with the "raw candor of Joan Didion 's essays, the irritating emotional exhibitionism of Sylvia Plath's The Bell Jar and the wry, dark humor of a Bob Dylan song." While praising Wurtzel's prose style as "sparkling" and "luminescent," Kakutani thought the memoir "would have benefited enormously from some strict editing" and said that its "self-pitying passages make the reader want to shake the author, and remind her that there are far worse fates than growing up during the '70s in New York and going to Harvard." [ 4 ] Publishers Weekly was ambivalent: "By turns emotionally powerful and tiresomely solipsistic, [Wurtzel's] book straddles the line between an absorbing self-portrait and a coy bid for public attention." [ 5 ] Writing in New York Magazine , Walter Kirn found that although Prozac Nation had "moments of shapely truth-telling," altogether it was "almost unbearable" and "a work of singular self-absorption." [ 6 ] Calling the book a "tedious and poorly written story of Wurtzel's melodramatic life, warts and all (actually all warts)," Erica L. Werner asked in The Harvard Crimson , "How did this chick get a book contract in the first place? Why was she allowed to write such crap?" Werner also described Prozac Nation as "obscenely exhibitionistic," with "no purpose other than alternately to bore us and make us squirm." She said that the author "comes off as an irritating, solipsistic brat." [ 7 ] "It would be possible to have more sympathy for Ms. Wurtzel if she weren't so exasperatingly sympathetic to herself," wrote Ken Tucker in the New York Times Book Review . He observed, "The reader may well begin riffling the pages of the book in the vain hope that there will be a few complimentary Prozac capsules tucked inside for one's own relief." [ 8 ] Kirkus Reviews thought the book to be filled with "narcissistic pride" and concluded, "By alternately belittling and belaboring her depression, Wurtzel loses her credibility: Either she's a brat who won't shape up or she needs the drugs. Ultimately, you don't care which." [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Cosmetic pharmacology Eli Lilly and Company Let Them Eat Prozac (2004) Listening to Prozac (1993) References [ edit ] ^ Wurtzel, Elizabeth (1994).

Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America . New York: Penguin Books. p. 298.

The McLean people have recommended fluoxetine because they have diagnosed me with atypical depression.

^ Kirn, Walter (September 5, 1994).

"For White Girls Who Have Considered Suicide" .

New York Magazine . p. 50.

^ Sifre, Gabi; Ettlinger, Marion (1 October 2009).

"I Hate Myself and I Want to Die" .

^ Kakutani, Michiko (20 September 1994).

"Books of the Times; The Examined Life Is Not Worth Living Either" – via NYTimes.com.

^ "Nonfiction Book Review: Prozac Nation by Elizabeth Wurtzel, Author Houghton Mifflin Harcourt (HMH) (317p) ISBN 978-0-395-68093-3" . Publishersweekly.com. 1994-08-29 . Retrieved 2019-06-02 .

^ LLC, New York Media (5 September 1994).

"New York Magazine" . New York Media, LLC – via Google Books.

^ "Prozac Nation: Elizabeth Wurtzel's Unofficial Guide to Whining – News – The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com .

^ Tucker, Ken (25 September 1994).

"Rambunctious With Tears" – via NYTimes.com.

^ "Prozac Nation by Elizabeth Wurtzel" – via www.kirkusreviews.com.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Prozac Nation .

Excerpts of reviews , from a Penguin Group website Release me , a July 2004 article in The Guardian Prozac Nation at IMDb Prozac Nation: Young and Depressed in America: A Memoir Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Prozac_Nation&oldid=1290185582 " Categories : 1994 non-fiction books Books about depression Memoirs adapted into films Eli Lilly and Company Memoirs about drugs American memoirs Novels set in Harvard University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 07:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Prozac Nation 6 languages Add topic

