Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Awards 4 Selected publications Toggle Selected publications subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Scientific publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mikhail Fedonkin 7 languages Deutsch Euskara فارسی Français Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian paleontologist This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Mikhail Fedonkin" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mikhail А. Fedonkin М. Fedonkin in Moscow, 2017 Born ( 1946-06-19 ) 19 June 1946 Orekhovo-Zuyevo , USSR Nationality Russian Alma mater Moscow State University Known for Paleontologist, Academician Scientific career Fields Paleontology , Geology , Biology Institutions Geological Institute RAS Academician Mikhail Aleksandrovich Fedonkin ( Russian : Михаи́л Алекса́ндрович Федо́нкин ; born June 19, 1946) is a Russian paleontologist specializing in documentation of the earliest animals' body fossils , tracks, and trails. He has also described numerous Vendian-aged fossils including Hiemalora , Cephalonega , and Nimbia occlusa .

Early life [ edit ] Fedonkin was born in Orekhovo-Zuevo , Moscow Region , Russia .

In 1969, Fedonkin presented a thesis titled "Biostratigraphy and paleontology of the Late Precambrian deposits of Kharaulakh Mountains, Northern Yakutia (Sakha)" to earn his MSc in Geology from Moscow State University . He went on to obtain a PhD in Stratigraphy \ Paleontology (1978) and a Doctorate of Science in Paleobiology (1985) from the Geological Institute , USSR Academy of Sciences , Moscow for his dissertations on "Precambrian fauna and trace fossils from the Russian Platform north" and "Non-skeletal fauna of the Vendian and its place in the evolution of metazoans", respectively.

Career [ edit ] In 1971, Fedonkin was a junior scientific researcher at the Geological Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow. In 1978, he became a senior scientific researcher at the Paleontological Institute, USSR Academy of Sciences, Moscow.

In 1985 he was promoted to be the Lead Scientific Researcher.

Since 1992, Fedonkin has been the Head of the laboratory of Precambrian paleobiology at the Paleontological Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences , Moscow .

Over his career he has completed field work in Australia , Canada , Norway , Poland , Russia , Spain and the United States .

Awards [ edit ] 1997, awarded the Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal by the National Academy of Sciences [ 1 ] 2000, awarded the Peter The Great Medal for the merits in the revival of science and economics in Russia by the International Academy of Science on Nature and Society .

Selected publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] 1981. White Sea Biota of the Vendian (Precambrian non-skeletal fauna of the Russian Platform north). Transactions of the Geological Institute, vol. 342. Moscow, Nauka, p. 1-100. (In Russian).

1983. Organic World of the Vendian. Moscow, VINITI, p. 1-128. (In Russian).

1987. Non-skeletal Fauna and Its Place in the Evolution of Metazoans. Transactions of the Paleontological Institute, vol. 226. Moscow, Nauka, p. 1-176. (In Russian).

Scientific publications [ edit ] Fedonkin M.A. 1976. Traces of the multicellular animals from Valdai Series. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR, ser. geol., N 4, p. 128-132. (In Russian).

Keller B.M. and Fedonkin M.A. 1977. New organic fossil finds in the Precambrian Valdai Series along the Syuz'ma River. Internat. Geol. Rev., 19(8), p. 924-930. (Translation of the previous paper).

Fedonkin M.A. 1980. Early stages of evolution of Metazoa on the basis of the paleoichnological data. Zhurnal Obchei Biologii, N 2, c. 226-233. (In Russian, abstract in English).

Fedonkin, M.A. 1990. Precambrian metazoans. In: Briggs, D.E.G. & Crowther, P.R., eds., Palaeobiology. A Synthesis. Blackwell Scientific Publ. Ltd., p. 17-24.

Crimes T.P. and Fedonkin M.A. 1994. Evolution and dispersal of deepsea traces. Palaios, vol. 9, N 1, p. 74-83.

Fedonkin M.A. 1996. Geobiological trends and events in the Precambrian biosphere. In: Walliser O.H. (ed.) Global Events and Event Stratigraphy in the Phanerozoic: Results of the International Interdisciplinary Cooperation in the IGCP-Project 216 "Global Biological Events in Earth History"). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 89–112.

Lipps J.H., Collins A.G. and Fedonkin M.A. 1998. Evolution of biological complexity: Evidence from geology, paleontology and molecular biology. In: Hoover R.B. (ed.) Instruments, Methods, and Missions for Astrobiology. Proceedings of the International Society for Optical Engineering, vol. 3441, p. 138-148.

Fedonkin, M.A. and Ivantsov A. Yu. 2001. Faunal succession in the Vendian (Terminal Proterozoic) deposits of the White Sea Region, north of the Russian Platform. North American Paleontological Convention, Berkeley, California. Abstracts. P. 50.

References [ edit ] ^ "Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal" . National Academy of Sciences. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 February 2011 .

External links [ edit ] National Academy of Science Awards Fedonkin Curriculum Vitae Talk of Mikhail A. Fedonkin  at the Origins 2011 congress Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Belgium Academics Scopus Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mikhail_Fedonkin&oldid=1254722642 " Categories : 1946 births Living people Russian paleontologists Full Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Charles Doolittle Walcott Medal winners Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from March 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text This page was last edited on 1 November 2024, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mikhail Fedonkin 7 languages Add topic

