Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Revival of religion 3 Parish of Saint-Sulpice 4 Society of Saint-Sulpice 5 Seminary of St. Sulpice 6 New establishments 7 Political influence Toggle Political influence subsection 7.1 Founder of Ville-Marie in New France 8 Later life 9 Attempt at canonization 10 Legacy 11 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 11.1 Works 11.2 Monographs and articles 12 See also 13 References Toggle the table of contents Jean-Jacques Olier 10 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Euskara Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 17th-century French Catholic priest and founder of the Sulpicians Abbé Jean-Jacques Olier S.S Portrait of Jean-Jacques Olier, founder of the Society of Saint-Sulpice , by an unknown author Orders Ordination 21 May 1633 Personal details Born ( 1608-09-20 ) 20 September 1608 Paris , Kingdom of France Died 2 April 1657 (1657-04-02) (aged 48) Paris , Kingdom of France Denomination Roman Catholic Alma mater College of Sorbonne Jean-Jacques Olier , S.S.

(20 September 1608 – 2 April 1657) was a French Catholic priest and the founder of the Sulpicians . He also helped to establish the Société Notre-Dame de Montréal , which organized the settlement of a new town called Ville-Marie (now Montreal ) in the colony of New France .

Early life [ edit ] Olier was born in Paris , but the family moved to Lyon , where his father had become a judge. There he was given a thorough education in the classics at the local Jesuit college (1617–25). He was encouraged to become a priest by Francis de Sales , who predicted his sanctity and great services to the Catholic Church.

[ 1 ] In preparation for this career, Olier first studied philosophy at the College of Harcourt in Paris, then scholastic theology and patristics at the College of Sorbonne . He preached during this period, by virtue of a benefice which his father had obtained for him. The young student became a man of great ambition; he also frequented fashionable society, which caused anxiety to those interested in his spiritual welfare.  He lived in the grand manner of the day, having two carriages and many servants.

[ 2 ] His success in defending theses in Latin and Greek led him to go to Rome for the purpose of learning Hebrew so as to gain greater notice by being able to defend his theses in that language at the Sorbonne.

[ 1 ] When his eyesight began to fail, Olier made a pilgrimage to the Shrine of the Holy House in Loreto, Italy , where his official biographies attest not only to a cure, but also a complete religious conversion. For a time he considered entering the Carthusians , and visited the charterhouses in southern Italy. Upon the news of his father's death in 1631, however, he returned to Paris. Once back in the capital, he refused a chaplaincy at the royal court, with its prospect of high honours. Instead he gathered the poor and the outcast on the streets for instruction in the Catholic faith, a practice which was at first derided but soon widely imitated. Under the guidance of Vincent de Paul , Olier assisted de Paul's missionaries, both in Paris and the rural countryside, while he prepared for Holy Orders , being ordained 21 May 1633.

[ 1 ] Revival of religion [ edit ] A disciple of Father Vincent de Paul and of Father Charles de Condren , Jean-Jacques Olier (1608-1657) took part in "missions" organized by them in France.

[ 2 ] The work Condren had most at heart was the foundation of seminaries after the Counter-Reformation model mandated by the Council of Trent . The Catholic Church felt that its success in its own renewal lay in the thorough and systematic formation of the clergy through their education in these schools. The attempts in France to carry out the designs of the Council having failed, Condren, unable to succeed through the Oratory, gathered a few young ecclesiastics around him for that purpose, Olier among them. The missions in which he employed them were meant to impress on their minds the religious needs of the country.

Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Parish of Saint-Sulpice [ edit ] A first attempt to found a seminary at Chartres failed. On 29 December 1641, Olier and two others, the Abbés de Foix and du Ferrier, formed a small community at Vaugirard , then a suburban village near Paris. Others soon joined them, and before long there were eight seminarians, who followed with the priests the same rule of life and were instructed in theology, with Olier teaching Scripture . The pastor of Vaugirard took advantage of the presence of the priests in his parish to take an extended vacation, during which time they reformed his parish.

[ 2 ] Impressed by the reports of this reform, the curé of the Church of St. Sulpice in Paris , who had become discouraged by the deplorable state of his parish, offered it in exchange for some of Olier's benefices. In August 1641, Olier took charge of the Parish of St. Sulpice. His aims were to reform the parish, establish a seminary, and Christianize the Sorbonne, then very secular in its instruction. This was to be achieved through the example set by the seminarians who attended its courses. The parish covered all of the Faubourg Saint-Germain-des-Prés , with a population as numerous and varied as a large city. It was commonly described as the largest and most fashionable parish in the city. There Olier trained his priests in community life. The parish name came to be identified with the society he founded.

[ 2 ] Of special attention were the poor, the uninstructed, and those in irregular marital unions. Thirteen catechetical centres were established, for the instruction not only of children but of many adults who were almost equally ignorant of the Catholic faith. Special instructions were provided for every class of persons, for the beggars, the poor, domestic servants, midwives, workingmen, the aged, etc. Instructions and debates on Catholic doctrine were organized for the benefit of Calvinists , hundreds of whom were converted. A vigorous campaign was waged against immoral and heretical literature and obscene pictures. Pamphlets, holy pictures and prayer books were distributed to those who could or would not come to church, and a bookstore was opened at the parish church to supply good literature.

It would appear that Vincent de Paul so esteemed Olier that in February 1644 he risked the ire of Cardinal Mazarin by obtaining a benefice for Olier that Mazarin was seeking for the son of the Duke de la Rouchefoucault.

[ 3 ] Society of Saint-Sulpice [ edit ] Main article: Society of Saint-Sulpice In 1645, Olier founded the Society of St. Sulpice, which established seminaries throughout France that became known for their moral and academic teaching.

[ 4 ] During the period of the Fronde (1648-1653), the civil war which reduced Paris to widespread misery and famine, Olier supported hundreds of families and provided many with clothing and shelter. None were refused. The poor were cared for according to methods of relief inspired by the practical genius of Vincent de Paul. His rules of relief, adapted in other parishes, became the accepted methods and are still followed at St. Sulpice.

At times, as many as 60 to 80 priests were ministering together in the parish, of whom the most illustrious, a little after Olier's time, was the Abbé Fénelon , later Archbishop of Cambrai . This was one of the best effects of Olier's work, for it sent trained, enlightened, zealous priests into all parts of France, and later beyond.

Orphans, very numerous during the war, were placed in good parishes, and a house of refuge established for orphan girls. A home was open to shelter and reform the many women rescued from prostitution, and another for young girls exposed to that danger. Many free schools for poor girls were founded by Olier, and he laboured also at the reform of the teachers in boys' schools, not, however, with great success.

Olier perceived that the reform of boys' schools could be accomplished only through a religious community; which in fact came about after his death through the work of Jean-Baptiste de la Salle , a former pupil of St. Sulpice. Free legal aid was provided for the poor. He also gathered under one roof the nuns from many different communities and Orders who had been driven out of their monasteries in the countryside and had fled to Paris for refuge. He cared for them till the close of the war. In the end, there was no misery among the people, spiritual or corporal, for which the pastor did not seek a remedy.

Olier led the movement against duelling, formed a society for its suppression, and enlisted the active aid of military men of renown, including the marshals of France and some famous duellists. He converted many of noble and royal blood, both men and women. He worked to overcome the common idea that Christian perfection was only for priests and religious orders, and inspired many to the practices of a devout life, including daily meditation, spiritual reading and other exercises of piety, and to a more exact fulfillment of their duties, whether at the court, in business or at home.

Seminary of St. Sulpice [ edit ] The second great work of Olier was the establishment of the seminary of St. Sulpice. By his parish, which he intended to serve as a model to the parochial clergy, as well as by his seminary, he hoped to help give France a worthy secular priesthood, through which alone, he felt, the revival of religion could come. The seminary was at first installed in the rectory of the parish, but very soon (1 October 1642) moved to a little house in the vicinity, de Foix being placed in charge by Olier. The beginnings were in great poverty, which lasted many years, for Olier would never allow any revenues from the parish to be expended except on parish needs. From the start he designed to make it a national seminary and regarded as providential the fact that the Parish of St. Sulpice, and thus the seminary, depended directly on the Holy See .

Within two years, students had come to the seminary from about twenty dioceses of France. Some attended the courses at the Sorbonne, others followed those given in the seminary itself. His seminarians were initiated into parochial work, being employed very fruitfully in teaching the catechism . At the Sorbonne their piety, it appears, had a very marked influence. After Father Olier described his model of a seminary to the Assembly of Clergy of France in 1651, bishops throughout the country asked the Sulpicians to oversee the operation of their seminaries.

At this time, Mere Marie Alvequin , superior of the Dames Augustines de St. Magloire, petitioned Olier directly and through others to undertake the responsibility of spiritual director of the monastery, but Olier preferred to focus his attentions on the parish and seminary of St. Sulpice.

[ 5 ] New establishments [ edit ] The rules of Olier's seminary, approved by the General Assembly of the Clergy in 1651, were adopted in many new establishments.

[ 6 ] Within a few years, Olier, at the urgent request of the bishops, sent priests to found seminaries in several dioceses throughout the country. The first was at Nantes in 1648. It was not Olier's intention to establish a congregation to conduct seminaries, but merely to lend priests for the foundation of a seminary to any bishop and to recall them after their work was well established. The repeated requests of bishops, considered by him as indications of God's will, caused him to modify his plan, and to accept a few seminaries permanently.

The society which formed around Olier at St. Sulpice was not formed into a religious institute , but instead continued as a community of secular priests , following a common life but bound by no special religious vows . The aim of the society was to live perfectly the life of a secular priest. Olier wished it to remain a small company, decreeing that it should never consist of more than seventy-two members, besides the superior and his twelve assistants. This regulation remained in force until circumstances induced a successor, the Abbé Emery, to abolish the limitation.

Political influence [ edit ] Olier's influence was powerful with the Queen Regent , Anne of Austria , to whom he spoke with great plainness, yet with great respect, denouncing her prime minister, Cardinal Mazarin , as responsible for simoniacal and unworthy nominations to the episcopate. He persuaded the rich— royalty, nobles, and others— to a great generosity, without which his large works of charity would have been impossible. The foundation of the present Church of St. Sulpice was laid by him.

Founder of Ville-Marie in New France [ edit ] Olier was always the missionary, with a global outlook. His zeal led to his helping in the foundation of the Society of Our Lady of Montreal . The society organized the establishment of the colony of Fort Ville-Marie in New France, the nucleus of the modern city of Montreal . The Sulpicians undertook their first overseas mission at the colony in 1657, and eventually were given the control of the seigneury of much of the colony.

[ 7 ] Later life [ edit ] Olier suffered a stroke in February 1652. He resigned his pastorate into the hands of Abbé de Bretonvilliers and, when he regained sufficient strength, on the orders of his physicians he visited various spas of Europe in search of health, as well as making many pilgrimages. On his return to Paris, his old energy and enthusiasm reasserted themselves, especially in his warfare against Jansenism . A second stroke at Saint-Péray , in September 1653, left him completely paralysed.

Olier was an influential author. Besides letters, which reveal his strength as spiritual director, he wrote four books intended for his parishioners: La journee chretienne (1655), a Catechisme chretien (1656), L'Introduction a la vie et aux vertus chretiennes (1657), and L'Explication des ceremonies de la grande messe de paroisse (1657). These books, written in the years immediately before his death, are all the more remarkable as Olier was partially paralyzed at that time.

[ 3 ] Olier's last years were full of intense suffering, both bodily and mental, which he bore with the utmost sweetness and resignation. His visions and his mysticism caused the Jansenists to ridicule him as a visionary; but they, as well as others, acknowledged his sanctity. His numerous ascetical writings show him a profound master of spiritual doctrine. His friend Vincent de Paul was with him at his death.

Olier was buried in the Church of St. Sulpice. When the interior of the church was destroyed during the French Revolution , his remains were lost. Only his heart, removed per the customs of the day, is preserved in the Sulpician seminary in Issy-les-Moulineaux .

[ 8 ] He is the author of mystical writings.

[ citation needed ] Attempt at canonization [ edit ] Diocesan attempts to canonize Olier were introduced in Paris and Montreal between 1865 and 1867, but the Vatican did not proceed with the cause. Vincent de Paul regarded Olier as a saint. Writing to Mademoiselle d' Aubrai on 26 July 1660, just two months before his own death, Vincent de Paul stated that he had "asked God for great graces through the intercession of M. Olier." [ 3 ] Church historian, Frederick William Faber , in his Growth in Holiness (Baltimore ed., p. 376) says of him: "Of all the uncanonized servants of God whose lives I have read, he most resembles a canonized Saint." Legacy [ edit ] "When we look to the legacy of Jean-Jacques Olier," Donald Cardinal Wuerl, Archbishop of Washington and Chancellor of The Catholic University of America, has said, "we can find three enduring elements: the priests of the Society of St. Sulpice, the structure of seminary formation and the outline of the spirituality for the diocesan priest." [ 4 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Works [ edit ] Lettres de M. Olier , 2 vol., ed. E. Levesque, de Gigord, Paris, 1935 Le catéchisme chrétien et La journée chrétienne , ed. F. Amiot, Le Rameau, Paris, 1954 Introduction à la vie et aux vertus chrétiennes , ed. F. Amiot, Le Rameau, Paris, 1954 Le traité des Saints Ordres, comparé aux écrits authentiques de Jean-Jacques Olier († 1657) , ed. G. Chaillot, P; Cochois, I. Noye, Procure de la Compagnie de Saint-Sulpice, Paris, 1984 L’Esprit des cérémonies de la messe , ed. C. Barthe, Le Forum, Perpignan, 2004 L'Ame cristal. Des Attributs divins en nous , ed. Mariel Mazzocco, Paris, Editions du Seuil, 2008 De La Création du monde à La Vie divine , ed. M. Mazzocco, Paris, Editions du Seuil, 2009 Des anges. Fragrances divines et odeurs suaves , ed. M. Mazzocco, Paris, Editions du Seuil,2011 Tentations diaboliques et Possession divine , ed. M. Mazzocco, Paris, Champion, 2012.

Monographs and articles [ edit ] Michel Dupuy, Se laisser à l'Esprit. Itinéraire spirituel de Jean-Jacques Olier , Paris, Cerf, 1982.

Mariel Mazzocco, I volti del nulla tra le pagine di Jean-Jacques Olier , in Rivista di Storia e Letteratura Religiosa, Olschki, Firenze, 2009, vol. 45, n° 1, pp. 53–84 .

Mariel Mazzocco, Note di semplicità: gli appunti spirituali di Jean-Jacques Olier , in Rivista di Storia e Letteratura Religiosa, Olschki, Firenze, 2010, vol. 46, n° 1, pp. 59–101.

(Various Authors), Jean-Jacques Olier : Homme de talent, serviteur de l'Evangile (1608–1657), ed. M. Vidal, Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 2010.

Mariel Mazzocco, Les petits mots d'un aventurier mystique , in Tentations diaboliques et possession divine , Paris, Champion, 2012.

See also [ edit ] French school of spirituality References [ edit ] ^ a b c "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Jean-Jacques Olier" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ a b c d "A Brief History" .

sulpc.org . Archived from the original on 28 March 2014 . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ a b c Mahoney C.M., Robert P., "Vincent de Paul and Jean-Jacques Olier: Unlikely Friends".

Vincentian Heritage Journal , Vol.28, Issue 1, 1 October 2008 ^ a b "Priestly Examples of Faith, Hope, Love", 4 August 2009, Catholic University of America Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Thompson, Edward Healy (1886).

The Life of Jean-Jacques Olier: Founder of the Seminary of St. Sulpice . Burns & Oates.

^ "History | The Sulpicians, Province of the United States" .

sulpicians.org . Retrieved 4 May 2020 .

^ "Sulpicians" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Archived from the original on 5 April 2012.

^ "Founder" .

Society of the priests of Saint-Sulpice .

v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Christianity France Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9m2md
Cached time: 20250817051223
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.498 seconds
Real time usage: 0.697 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2877/1000000
Revision size: 21267/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 134283/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5268/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 97273/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.284/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7947186/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  542.316      1 -total
 26.75%  145.076      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.16%  109.312      1 Template:Reflist
 19.07%  103.432      1 Template:Christian_mysticism
 18.16%   98.461      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
 17.08%   92.638      1 Template:Infobox
 13.75%   74.573      4 Template:Cite_web
 12.01%   65.111      1 Template:Short_description
  8.87%   48.094      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology
  8.48%   45.986      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4553860:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051223 and revision id 1274319777. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean-Jacques_Olier&oldid=1274319777 " Categories : 1608 births 1657 deaths Clergy from Paris Dominican tertiaries Lay Dominicans 17th-century French Roman Catholic priests 17th-century French Catholic theologians Founders of Catholic religious communities Société Notre-Dame de Montréal Roman Catholic mystics Burials at Saint-Sulpice, Paris Superiors General of the Society of the Priests of Saint Sulpice Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 This page was last edited on 6 February 2025, at 17:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean-Jacques Olier 10 languages Add topic

