Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 Additional sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Snottite 7 languages Català Deutsch Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Microbial mat often found in caves Snottites in Cueva de Villa Luz in Southern Mexico Snottite , also snoticle , is a microbial mat of single-celled extremophilic bacteria which hang from the walls and ceilings of caves and are similar to small stalactites , but have the consistency of nasal mucus . In the Frasassi Caves in Italy, over 70% of cells in Snottite have been identified as Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans , with smaller populations including an archaeon in the uncultivated 'G-plasma' clade of Thermoplasmatales (>15%) and a bacterium in the Acidimicrobiaceae family (>5%).

[ 1 ] The bacteria derive their energy from chemosynthesis of volcanic sulfur compounds including H 2 S and warm-water solution dripping down from above, producing sulfuric acid . Because of this, their waste products are highly acidic (approaching pH=0), with similar properties to battery acid .

[ 2 ] Researchers at the University of Texas have suggested that this sulfuric acid may be a more significant cause of cave formation than the usual explanation offered of the carbonic acid formed from carbon dioxide dissolved in water.

[ 3 ] Snottites were brought to attention by researchers Diana Northup and Penny Boston studying them (and other organisms) in a toxic sulfur cave called Cueva de Villa Luz ( Cave of the Lighted House ), in Tabasco , Mexico .  Snottites were first discovered in this cave by Jim Pisarowicz in 1986, who also coined the term.

[ 4 ] The BBC series Wonders of the Solar System saw Professor Brian Cox examining snottites and positing that if there is life on Mars , it may be similarly primitive and hidden beneath the surface of the Red Planet .

See also [ edit ] Archaea References [ edit ] ^ Jones, DS; Albrecht, HL; Dawson, KS; Schaperdoth, I; Freeman, KH; Pi, Y; Pearson, A; Macalady, JL (2012).

"Community genomic analysis of an extremely acidophilic sulfur-oxidizing biofilm" .

ISME J .

6 (1): 158– 70.

doi : 10.1038/ismej.2011.75 .

PMC 3246232 .

PMID 21716305 .

^ "BBC Two - Wonders of the Solar System, Original Series" .

BBC Online . 4 Apr 2010.

^ Derasa, "Caves and snoticles" , Earth-pages , Wiley-Blackwell, 1 May 2004.

^ Michael Ray Taylor, Dark Life: Martian Nanobacteria, Rock-eating Cave Bugs, and Other Extreme Organisms of Inner Earth and Outer Space , pp. 56–57, Simon and Schuster, 1999 ISBN 0684841916 .

Additional sources [ edit ] Hose L. D., Pisarowicz J. A. (1999) "Cueva de Villa Luz, Tabasco, Mexico: reconnaissance study of an active sulfur spring cave and ecosystem" .

J Cave Karst Studies ; 61:13–21 External links [ edit ] Look up snottite in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Cave slime at NASA The Subsurface Life in Mineral Environments (SLIME) Team v t e Extremophiles Types Acidophile Alkaliphile Capnophile Endolith Halophile Hypolith Lipophile Lithoautotroph Lithophile Methanogen Metallotolerant Oligotroph Osmophile Piezophile Polyextremophile Psammophile Psychrophile Radioresistant Thermophile / Hyperthermophile Thermoacidophile Xerophile Notable extremophiles Bacteria Chloroflexus aurantiacus Deinococcus radiodurans Deinococcota Snottite Thermus aquaticus Thermus thermophilus Spirochaeta americana GFAJ-1 Archaea Pyrococcus furiosus Strain 121 Pyrolobus fumarii Thermococcus gammatolerans Eukaryota Cyanidioschyzon merolae Galdieria sulphuraria Paralvinella sulfincola Halicephalobus mephisto Pompeii worm Related articles Abiogenic petroleum origin Acidithiobacillales Acidobacteriota Acidophiles in acid mine drainage Archaeoglobaceae Berkeley Pit Blood Falls Thermoproteota Grylloblattidae Halobacteria Halobacterium Helaeomyia petrolei Hydrothermal vent Methanopyrus Movile Cave Radiotrophic fungus Rio Tinto Tardigrade Taq polymerase Thermostability Thermotogota Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Snottite&oldid=1300374011 " Categories : Cave organisms Speleothems Sulphophiles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Snottite 7 languages Add topic

