Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Foundation Toggle Foundation subsection 1.1 Dominic de Guzmán 1.2 Preaching to the Cathars 1.3 Dominican convent established 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Middle Ages 2.1.1 Women 2.1.2 English Province 2.2 From the Reformation to the French Revolution 2.3 18th century 2.4 From the 19th century to the present 2.5 Missions abroad 3 Divisions Toggle Divisions subsection 3.1 Governance 3.2 Nuns 3.3 Friars 3.4 Religious sisters 3.5 Priestly Fraternities of St. Dominic 3.6 Dominican laity (tertiary/third order) 3.7 Associates 4 Spirituality Toggle Spirituality subsection 4.1 Humbert of Romans 4.2 Mysticism 4.2.1 Saint Albertus Magnus 4.2.2 Rhineland mysticism 4.2.3 English Dominican mysticism 4.3 Theological tradition 4.4 Devotion to Mary 5 Other names 6 Mottoes 7 Notable members Toggle Notable members subsection 7.1 Dominican popes and cardinals 7.1.1 First elected cardinal 7.2 Other Dominicans 8 Educational institutions 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 11.2 Sources 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Dominican Order 74 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman Catholic medicant order "Order of Preachers" redirects here. For the Anglican religious order, see Anglican Order of Preachers .

"Black Friars" redirects here. For the Black Monks, see Benedictines . For other uses, see Blackfriars (disambiguation) .

Order of Preachers Ordo Prædicatorum Coat of arms of the order Abbreviation OP Formation 1206 (for women) 1215 (for men) December 22, 1216 ( 1216-12-22 ) (of pontifical right ) Founder Dominic de Guzmán Founded at Prouille , France (for women) Toulouse , France (for men) Headquarters Convento Santa Sabina , Piazza Pietro d'Illiria 1, Rome , Italy [ 1 ] Membership 5,545 members (includes 4,147 priests) [ 1 ] (2020) Master of the Order Fr.

Gerard Timoner III , OP Parent organization Catholic Church Website op .org Motto: Laudare, benedicere, praedicare ('To praise, to bless, to preach') Principal Patrons: The Blessed Virgin Mary Mary Magdalene Augustine of Hippo Francis of Assisi The Order of Preachers ( Latin : Ordo Prædicatorum , abbreviated OP ), commonly known as the Dominican Order , is a Catholic mendicant order of pontifical right that was founded in France by the Castilian priest Dominic de Guzmán . It was approved by Pope Honorius III via the papal bull Religiosam vitam on 22 December 1216. Members of the order, who are referred to as Dominicans , generally display the letters OP after their names, standing for Ordinis Praedicatorum , meaning 'of the Order of Preachers'. Membership in the order includes friars , [ a ] nuns , active sisters , and lay or secular Dominicans (formerly known as tertiaries ). More recently, there have been a growing number of associates of the religious sisters who are unrelated to the tertiaries.

Founded to preach the gospel and to oppose heresy , the teaching activity of the order and its scholastic organisation placed it at the forefront of the intellectual life of the Middle Ages .

[ 2 ] The order is famed for its intellectual tradition and for having produced many leading theologians and philosophers.

[ 3 ] In 2018, there were 5,747 Dominican friars, including 4,299 priests.

[ 1 ] The order is headed by the master of the order who, as of 2022 [update] , is Gerard Timoner III .

[ 4 ] The Blessed Virgin Mary , Mary Magdalene , Augustine of Hippo and Francis of Assisi are the Principal Patrons of the order.

Saint Dominic , portrayed in the Perugia Altarpiece by Fra Angelico , Galleria Nazionale dell'Umbria , Perugia Foundation [ edit ] The Dominican Order was established during the Middle Ages at a time when men of God were no longer expected to stay behind the walls of a cloister . Instead, they travelled among the people, taking as their examples the apostles of the primitive Church. Out of this ideal emerged two orders of mendicant friars – one, the Friars Minor, led by Francis of Assisi ; the other, the Friars Preachers, led by Dominic de Guzmán . Like his contemporary, Francis, Dominic saw the need for a new type of organization, and the quick growth of the Dominicans and Franciscans during their first century of existence confirms that conditions were favorable for the growth of the orders of mendicant friars . The Dominicans and other mendicant orders may have been an adaptation to the rise of the profit economy in medieval Europe.

[ 5 ] Dominic sought to establish a new kind of order, one that would bring the dedication and systematic education of the older monastic orders like the Benedictines to bear on the religious problems of the burgeoning population of cities, but with more organizational flexibility than either monastic orders or the secular clergy. The Order of Preachers was founded in response to a perceived need for informed preaching.

[ 6 ] [ better source needed ] Dominic's new order was to be trained to preach in the vernacular languages.

[ citation needed ] Dominic inspired his followers with loyalty to learning and virtue, a deep recognition of the spiritual power of worldly deprivation and the religious state, and a highly developed governmental structure.

[ 7 ] At the same time, Dominic inspired the members of his order to develop a "mixed" spirituality. They were both active in preaching, and contemplative in study, prayer and meditation. The brethren of the Dominican Order were urbane and learned, as well as contemplative and mystical in their spirituality. While these traits affected the women of the order, the nuns especially absorbed the latter characteristics and made those characteristics their own. In England, the Dominican nuns blended these elements with the defining characteristics of English Dominican spirituality and created a spirituality and collective personality that set them apart.

[ citation needed ] Dominic de Guzmán [ edit ] Main article: Saint Dominic Saint Dominic (1170–1221), portrait by El Greco , about 1600 As an adolescent, Dominic de Guzmán had a particular love of theology, and the Scriptures became the foundation of his spirituality.

[ 8 ] During his studies in Palencia , Spain, there was a dreadful famine, prompting Dominic to sell all of his beloved books and other equipment to help his neighbours.

[ 9 ] He was made a canon and ordained to the priesthood in the monastery of Santa María de La Vid.

[ 10 ] After completing his studies, Bishop Martin Bazan and Prior Diego de Acebo appointed him to the cathedral chapter of Osma .

[ 11 ] Preaching to the Cathars [ edit ] In 1203, Dominic de Guzmán joined Diego de Acebo , the Bishop of Osma , on a diplomatic mission to Denmark for the monarchy of Spain, to arrange the marriage between the son of King Alfonso VIII of Castile and a niece of King Valdemar II of Denmark .

[ 12 ] At that time the south of France was the stronghold of the Cathar movement. The Cathars (also known as Albigensians, due to their stronghold in Albi , France) were considered a heretical neo- gnostic sect. They believed that matter was evil and only the spirit was good; this was a fundamental challenge to the notion of the incarnation , central to Catholic theology . The Albigensian Crusade (1209–1229) was a 20-year military campaign initiated by Pope Innocent III to eliminate Catharism in Languedoc , in southern France .

Dominic saw the need for a response that would attempt to sway members of the Albigensian movement back to mainstream Catholic thought.

[ 13 ] [ better source needed ] Dominic became inspired to achieve this by preaching and teaching, starting near Toulouse , since the Albigensian Christians refused to compromise their principles despite the overwhelming force of the crusades brought against them. Diego suggested another reason that was possibly aiding the spread of the reform movement. The representatives of the Catholic Church acted and moved with an offensive amount of pomp and ceremony. In contrast, the Cathars generally led ascetic lifestyles . To try persuasion in place of persecution, Diego suggested that the regional papal legates begin to live a reformed apostolic life. The legates agreed to the proposed changes if they could find a strong leader who could meet the Albigensians on their own ground.

[ citation needed ] Saint Dominic on the front cover of Doctrina Christiana catechism in Spanish and Tagalog with an eight-pointed star (a symbol of the Blessed Virgin Mary ) over his head. Woodcut cover. Printed in Manila in 1593.

The prior took up the challenge, and he and Dominic dedicated themselves to the conversion of the Cathars.

[ 14 ] Despite this particular mission, Dominic met limited success converting Cathars by persuasion, "for though in his ten years of preaching a large number of converts were made, it has to be said that the results were not such as had been hoped for".

[ 15 ] The differences in religious principles of the Albigensians called for far greater reforms than moderated appearances.

[ citation needed ] Dominican convent established [ edit ] Dominic became the spiritual father to several Albigensian women he had reconciled to the faith, and in 1206 he established them in a convent in Prouille , near Toulouse .

[ 16 ] This convent would become the foundation of the Dominican nuns, thus making the Dominican nuns older than the Dominican friars. Diego sanctioned the building of a monastery for girls whose parents had sent them to the care of the Albigensians because their families were too poor to fulfill their basic needs.

[ 17 ] The monastery in Prouille would later become Dominic's headquarters for his missionary effort. After two years on the mission field, Diego died while travelling back to Spain.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Dominic founded the Dominican Order in 1215. Dominic established a religious community in Toulouse in 1214, to be governed by the rule of Saint Augustine and statutes to govern the life of the friars, including the Primitive Constitution.

[ 18 ] The founding documents establish that the order was founded for two purposes: preaching and the salvation of souls.

[ 2 ] Henri-Dominique Lacordaire noted that the statutes had similarities with the constitutions of the Premonstratensians , indicating that Dominic had drawn inspiration from the reform of Prémontré.

[ 19 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] In July 1215, with the approbation of Bishop Foulques of Toulouse , Dominic ordered his followers into an institutional life. Its purpose was revolutionary in the pastoral ministry of the Catholic Church. These priests were organized and well trained in religious studies. Dominic needed a framework—a rule—to organize these components. The Rule of Saint Augustine was an obvious choice for the Dominican Order, according to Dominic's successor Jordan of Saxony, in the Libellus de principiis , because it lent itself to the "salvation of souls through preaching".

[ 20 ] By this choice, however, the Dominican brothers designated themselves not monks, but canons regular . They could practice ministry and common life while existing in individual poverty.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Dominic's room at Maison Seilhan , in Toulouse , is considered the place where the order was born.

The Order of Preachers was approved in December 1216 and January 1217 by Pope Honorius III in the papal bulls Religiosam vitam and Nos attendentes . On January 21, 1217, Honorius issued the bull Gratiarum omnium [ 22 ] recognizing Dominic's followers as an order dedicated to study and universally authorized to preach, a power formerly reserved to local episcopal authorization.

[ 23 ] Along with charity, the other concept that most defines the work and spirituality of the order is study, the method most used by the Dominicans in working to defend the church against the perils it faced. In Dominic's thinking, it was impossible for men to preach what they did not or could not understand. On August 15, 1217, Dominic dispatched seven of his followers to the great university center of Paris to establish a priory focused on study and preaching. The Convent of St. Jacques would eventually become the order's first studium generale . Dominic was to establish similar foundations at other university towns of the day, Bologna in 1218, Palencia and Montpellier in 1220, and Oxford just before his death in 1221.

[ 24 ] The women of the order also established schools for the children of the local gentry.

[ citation needed ] Dominican epitaph of Berthold de Wyrbna from 1316 on the tower of the parish church in Szprotawa , Poland In 1219, Pope Honorius III invited Dominic and his companions to take up residence at the ancient Roman basilica of Santa Sabina , which they did by early 1220. Before that time the friars had only a temporary residence in Rome at the convent of San Sisto Vecchio which Honorius III had given to Dominic circa 1218 intending it to become a convent for a reformation of nuns at Rome under Dominic's guidance. In May 1220 at Bologna the order's first General Chapter mandated that each new priory of the order maintain its own studium conventuale , thus laying the foundation of the Dominican tradition of sponsoring widespread institutions of learning.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The official foundation of the Dominican convent at Santa Sabina with its studium conventuale occurred with the legal transfer of property from Honorius III to the Order of Preachers on June 5, 1222.

[ 27 ] This studium was transformed into the order's first studium provinciale by Thomas Aquinas in 1265. Part of the curriculum of this studium was relocated in 1288 at the studium of Santa Maria sopra Minerva which in the 16th century world be transformed into the College of Saint Thomas ( Latin : Collegium Divi Thomæ ). In the 20th century the college would be relocated to the convent of Saints Dominic and Sixtus and would be transformed into the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum .

[ citation needed ] The Dominican friars quickly spread, including to England, where they appeared in Oxford in 1221.

[ 28 ] In the 13th century the order reached all classes of Christian society, fought heresy , schism , and paganism by word and book, and by its missions to the north of Europe, to Africa, and Asia passed beyond the frontiers of Christendom . Its schools spread throughout the entire church; its doctors wrote monumental works in all branches of knowledge, including the extremely important Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas . Its members included popes, cardinals, bishops, legates, inquisitors, confessors of princes, ambassadors, and paciarii (enforcers of the peace decreed by popes or councils).

[ 2 ] Doctor Angelicus, Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), considered by many Catholics to be the greatest Catholic theologian, is girded by angels with a mystical belt of purity after his proof of chastity .

The order's origins in battling heterodoxy influenced its later development and reputation. Many later Dominicans battled heresy as part of their apostolate; many years after Dominic reacted to the Cathars, the first Grand Inquistor of Spain , Tomás de Torquemada , would be drawn from the Dominican Order. The order was appointed by Pope Gregory IX the duty to carry out the Inquisition .

[ 29 ] Torture was not regarded as a mode of punishment, but as a means of eliciting the truth. In his papal bull Ad extirpanda of 1252, Pope Innocent IV authorised the Dominicans' use of torture under prescribed circumstances.

[ 30 ] The expansion of the order produced changes. A smaller emphasis on doctrinal activity favoured the development here and there of the ascetic and contemplative life and there sprang up, especially in Germany and Italy, the mystical movement with which the names of Meister Eckhart , Heinrich Suso , Johannes Tauler , and Catherine of Siena are associated. (See German mysticism , which has also been called "Dominican mysticism".) This movement was the prelude to the reforms undertaken, at the end of the century, by Raymond of Capua , and continued in the following century.

[ citation needed ] Allegory of the Virgin Patroness of the Dominicans by Miguel Cabrera At the same time, the order found itself face to face with the Renaissance . It struggled against pagan tendencies in Renaissance humanism , in Italy through Dominici and Savonarola, in Germany through the theologians of Cologne but it also furnished humanism with such advanced writers as Francesco Colonna (probably the writer of the Hypnerotomachia Poliphili ) and Matteo Bandello . Many Dominicans took part in the artistic activity of the age, the most prominent being Fra Angelico and Fra Bartolomeo .

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] Women [ edit ] Although Dominic and the early brethren had instituted female Dominican houses at Prouille and other places by 1227, houses of women attached to the Order became so popular that some of the friars had misgivings about the increasing demands of female religious establishments on their time and resources. Nonetheless, women's houses dotted the countryside throughout Europe. There were 74 Dominican female houses in Germany, 42 in Italy, 9 in France, 8 in Spain, 6 in Bohemia, 3 in Hungary, and 3 in Poland.

[ 31 ] Many of the German religious houses that lodged women had been home to communities of women, such as Beguines , that became Dominican once they were taught by the traveling preachers and put under the jurisdiction of the Dominican authoritative structure. A number of these houses became centers of study and mystical spirituality in the 14th century, as expressed in works such as the sister-books . There were 157 nunneries in the order by 1358. After that year, the number lessened considerably due to the Black Death.

[ 32 ] In places besides Germany, convents were founded as retreats from the world for women of the upper classes. These were original projects funded by wealthy patrons. Among these was Countess Margaret of Flanders who established the monastery of Lille, while Val-Duchesse at Oudergem near Brussels was built with the wealth of Adelaide of Burgundy, Duchess of Brabant (1262).

[ 33 ] A figure depicting the term domini canes (' hounds of the lord ') since the Inquisition in the 13th century, [ b ] [ 29 ] [ clarification needed ] on a corner of a former Dominican monastery (before the Reformation), Old University, Marburg , Germany Female houses differed from male Dominican houses in that they were enclosed. The sisters chanted the Divine Office and kept all the monastic observances.

[ 34 ] The nuns lived under the authority of the general and provincial chapters of the order. They shared in all the applicable privileges of the order. The friars served as their confessors, priests, teachers and spiritual mentors.

[ 35 ] Women could be professed to the Dominican religious life at the age of 13. The formula for profession contained in the Constitutions of Montargis Priory (1250) requires that nuns pledge obedience to God, the Blessed Virgin, their prioress and her successors according to the Rule of Saint Augustine and the institute of the order, until death. The clothing of the sisters consisted of a white tunic and scapular, a leather belt, a black mantle, and a black veil. Candidates to profession were questioned to reveal whether they were actually married women who had merely separated from their husbands. Their intellectual abilities were also tested. Nuns were to be silent in places of prayer, the cloister, the dormitory, and refectory. Silence was maintained unless the prioress granted an exception for a specific cause. Speaking was allowed in the common parlor, but it was subordinate to strict rules, and the prioress, subprioress or other senior nun had to be present.

[ 36 ] As well as sewing, embroidery and other genteel pursuits, the nuns participated in a number of intellectual activities, including reading and discussing pious literature.

[ 37 ] In the Strassburg monastery of Saint Margaret, some of the nuns could converse fluently in Latin. Learning still had an elevated place in the lives of these religious. In fact, Margarette Reglerin, a daughter of a wealthy Nuremberg family, was dismissed from a convent because she did not have the ability or will to learn.

[ 38 ] English Province [ edit ] The English Province and the Hungarian Province both date back to the second general chapter of the Dominican Order, held in Bologna during the spring of 1221.

[ 39 ] Dominic dispatched 12 friars to England under the guidance of their English prior, Gilbert of Fresney, and they landed in Dover on August 5, 1221. The province officially came into being at its first provincial chapter in 1230.

[ 40 ] The English Province was a component of the international order from which it obtained its laws, direction, and instructions. It was also, however, a group of Englishmen. Its direct supervisors were from England, and the members of the English Province dwelt and labored in English cities, towns, villages, and roadways. English and European ingredients constantly came in contact. The international side of the province's existence influenced the national, and the national responded to, adapted, and sometimes constrained the international.

[ 41 ] The first Dominican site in England was at Oxford, in the parishes of St. Edward and St. Adelaide.

[ 42 ] The friars built an oratory to the Blessed Virgin Mary [ 43 ] and by 1265, the brethren, in keeping with their devotion to study, began erecting a school. The Dominican brothers likely began a school immediately after their arrival, as priories were legally schools.

[ 44 ] Information about the schools of the English Province is limited, but a few facts are known. Much of the information available is taken from visitation records.

[ 45 ] The "visitation" was an inspection of the province by which visitors to each priory could describe the state of its religious life and its studies at the next chapter. There were four such visits in England and Wales—Oxford, London, Cambridge and York.

[ 46 ] All Dominican students were required to learn grammar, old and new logic, natural philosophy and theology. Of all of the curricular areas, however, theology was the most important.

[ 47 ] Dartford Priory was established long after the primary period of monastic foundation in England had ended. It emulated, then, the monasteries found in Europe—mainly France and Germany-as well as the monastic traditions of their English Dominican brothers. The first nuns to inhabit Dartford were sent from the priory of Poissy [ fr ] in France.

[ 31 ] Even on the eve of the Dissolution , Prioress Jane Vane wrote to Cromwell on behalf of a postulant, saying that though she had not actually been professed, she was professed in her heart and in the eyes of God. Profession in Dartford Priory seems, then, to have been made based on personal commitment, and one's personal association with God.

[ 48 ] As heirs of the Dominican priory of Poissy in France, the nuns of Dartford Priory in England were also heirs to a tradition of profound learning and piety. Strict discipline and plain living were characteristic of the monastery throughout its existence.

[ 49 ] From the Reformation to the French Revolution [ edit ] Bartolomé de Las Casas ( c.

1484–1566 ) Bartolomé de Las Casas , as a settler in the New World , was galvanized by witnessing the brutal torture and genocide of the Native Americans by the Spanish colonists. He became famous for his advocacy of the rights of Native Americans, whose cultures, especially in the Caribbean , he describes with care.

[ 50 ] Gaspar da Cruz ( c.

1520–1570 ), who worked all over the Portuguese colonial empire in Asia, was probably the first Christian missionary to preach (unsuccessfully) in Cambodia . After a (similarly unsuccessful) stint, in 1556, in Guangzhou , China, he eventually returned to Portugal and became the first European to publish a book devoted exclusively to China in 1569/1570.

[ 51 ] The beginning of the 16th century confronted the order with the upheavals of Reformation. The spread of Protestantism cost it six or seven provinces and several hundreds of convents , but the discovery of the New World opened up a fresh field of activity. In the 18th century, there were numerous attempts at reform, accompanied by a reduction in the number of devotees. The French Revolution ruined the order in France, and crises that more or less rapidly followed considerably lessened or wholly destroyed numerous provinces.

[ 2 ] 18th century [ edit ] In 1731, a book entitled " The second volume of the history of the Province of Spain of the Order of Preachers, chronicling the progress of their foundations and the lives of illustrious figures," was written by the chronicler of the Order of Preachers and the province of Spain, the General Preacher Fr.

Manuel Joseph de Medrano, Prior of the convent of Santo Domingo in Guadalajara . Medrano, a native of Logroño , dedicated his book to, and under the protection of the Illustrious and Reverend Lord D. Fr. Francisco Lasso de la Vega y Cordova, bishop of Plasencia , with privilege, printed in Madrid at the printing press of Geronimo Roxo.

[ 52 ] In addition to his historical works, Fr. Manuel Joseph de Medrano, Predicador General and Choronista of the Dominican Order, also played a major theological role in defending Savonarola's reputation in the early 18th century.

[ 53 ] His Vida de la admirable Virgen Santa Inés de Monte Policiano included a defense of Savonarola’s sanctity and prophetic mission. Medrano's scholarship was recognized and discussed in the Tertulia histórica y apologética (Zaragoza, c. 1730) by the jurist Doctor Jayme Ardanaz y Centellas, [ 53 ] which presented a scholarly dialogue addressing criticisms of Savonarola raised by the Benedictine scholar Benito Jerónimo Feijóo . This Spanish Dominican contribution reflects a broader European Catholic engagement with Savonarola’s legacy in the pre-modern period.

[ 53 ] From the 19th century to the present [ edit ] During the early 19th century, the number of Preachers seems never to have sunk below 3,500. Statistics for 1876 show 3,748, but 500 of these had been expelled from their convents and were engaged in parochial work. Statistics for 1910 show a total of 4,472 nominally or actually engaged in proper activities of the order.

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] As of 2013 [update] , there were 6,058 Dominican friars, including 4,470 priests.

[ 1 ] As of January 2021 [update] , there were 5,753 friars overall, and 4,219 priests.

[ citation needed ] Portrait of Lacordaire France held a foremost place in the revival movement, owing to the reputation and convincing power of the orator, Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire (1802–1861). He took the habit of a Friar Preacher at Rome (1839), and the province of France was canonically erected in 1850.

[ 54 ] From this province were detached the province of Lyon , called Occitania (1862), that of Toulouse (1869), and that of Canada (1909). The French restoration likewise furnished many laborers to other provinces, to assist in their organization and progress. From it came the master general who remained longest at the head of the administration during the 19th century, Père Vincent Jandel (1850–1872). Here should be mentioned the province of Saint Joseph in the United States . Founded in 1805 by Edward Fenwick (1768–1832), afterwards first Bishop of Cincinnati , Ohio (1821–1832). In 1905, it established the Dominican House of Studies in Washington, D.C.

,.

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] The province of France has produced many preachers. The conferences of Notre-Dame-de-Paris were inaugurated by Père Lacordaire. The Dominicans of the province of France furnished Lacordaire (1835–1836, 1843–1851), [ 2 ] [ better source needed ] Jacques Monsabré , [ 55 ] and Joseph Ollivier. The pulpit of Notre Dame has been occupied by a succession of Dominicans. Père Henri Didon (1840–1900) was a Dominican. The house of studies of the province of France publishes L'Année Dominicaine (founded 1859), La Revue des Sciences Philosophiques et Theologiques (1907), and La Revue de la Jeunesse (1909).

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] French Dominicans founded and administer the École Biblique et Archéologique française de Jérusalem founded in 1890 by Marie-Joseph Lagrange (1855–1938), one of the leading international centres for biblical research. It is at the École Biblique that the famed Jerusalem Bible (both editions) was prepared. Likewise Cardinal Yves Congar was a product of the French province of the Order of Preachers.

[ citation needed ] Doctrinal development has had an important place in the restoration of the Preachers. Several institutions, besides those already mentioned, played important parts. Such is the École Biblique at Jerusalem , open to the religious of the order and to secular clerics, which publishes the Revue Biblique . The Pontificium Collegium Internationale Angelicum , the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas ( Angelicum ) established in Rome in 1908 by Master Hyacinth Cormier , opened its doors to regulars and seculars for the study of the sacred sciences. In addition to the reviews above are the Revue Thomiste , founded by Père Thomas Coconnier ( d.

1908), and the Analecta Ordinis Prædicatorum (1893). Among numerous writers of the order in this period are: Cardinals Thomas Zigliara ( d.

1893) and Zephirin González ( d.

1894), two esteemed philosophers; Alberto Guillelmotti ( d.

1893), historian of the Pontifical Navy, and historian Heinrich Denifle ( d.

1905).

[ 2 ] [ better source needed ] During the Reformation, many of the convents of Dominican nuns were forced to close. One which managed to survive, and afterwards founded many new houses, was St Ursula's in Augsburg. In the 17th century, convents of Dominican women were often asked by their bishops to undertake apostolic work, particularly educating girls and visiting the sick. St Ursula's returned to an enclosed life in the 18th century, but in the 19th century, after Napoleon had closed many European convents, King Louis I of Bavaria in 1828 restored the Religious Orders of women in his realm, provided that the nuns undertook some active work useful to the State (usually teaching or nursing).

[ 56 ] In 1877, Bishop Ricards in South Africa requested that Augsburg send a group of nuns to start a teaching mission in King Williamstown.

[ 57 ] From this mission were founded many Third Order Regular congregations of Dominican sisters, with their own constitutions, though still following the Rule of Saint Augustine and affiliated to the Dominican Order. These include the Dominican Sisters of Oakford, KwazuluNatal (1881), [ 58 ] the Dominican Missionary Sisters, Zimbabwe (1890) [ 57 ] and the Dominican Sisters of Newcastle, KwazuluNatal (1891).

[ 59 ] The Dominican Order has influenced the formation of other orders outside of the Catholic Church, such as the Anglican Order of Preachers within the Anglican Communion . Since not all members are obliged to take solemn or simple vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, it operates more like a third order with a third order style structure, with no contemporary or canonical ties to the historical order founded by Dominic of Guzman.

[ 6 ] [ better source needed ] The Order of Christ the Saviour is a dispersed Anglo-Catholic Dominican community founded in the 21st century within the Episcopal Church .

[ 60 ] [ better source needed ] Missions abroad [ edit ] The Pax Mongolica of the 13th and 14th centuries that united vast parts of the European-Asian continents enabled Western missionaries to travel east. "Dominican friars were preaching the Gospel on the Volga Steppes by 1225 (the year following the establishment of the Kipchak Khanate by Batu), and in 1240 Pope Gregory IX despatched others to Persia and Armenia." [ 61 ] The most famous Dominican was Jordanus de Severac who was sent first to Persia then in 1321, together with a companion (Nicolas of Pistoia) to India. Jordanus' work and observations are recorded in two letters he wrote to the friars of Armenia, and a book, Mirabilia , translated as Wonders of the East .

[ citation needed ] Another Dominican, Ricold of Monte Croce , worked in Syria and Persia. His travels took him from Acre to Tabriz, and on to Baghdad. There "he was welcomed by the Dominican fathers already there, and with them entered into a disputation with the Nestorians." [ 62 ] Although a number of Dominicans and Franciscans persevered against the growing faith of Islam throughout the region, all Christian missionaries were soon expelled with Timur 's death in 1405.

[ citation needed ] By the 1850s, the Dominicans had half a million followers in the Philippines and well-established missions in the Chinese province of Fujian and Tonkin , Vietnam, performing thousands of baptisms each year.

[ 63 ] The Dominicans presence in the Philippines has become one of the leading proponents of education with the establishment of Colegio de San Juan de Letran .

[ 64 ] [ better source needed ] Divisions [ edit ] The friars, nuns, third orders (Dominican laity), and the members of priestly fraternities of Saint Dominic form the Order of Preachers. Together with the religious sisters, Associates of the Religious Sisters, and Dominican youth they form the Dominican Family.

[ 65 ] Governance [ edit ] The highest authority within the Order of Preachers is the General Chapter, which is empowered to develop legislation governing all organizations within the Dominican umbrella, as well as enforce that legislation. The General Chapter is composed of two bodies, the Chapter of Provincials and the Chapter of Definitors (or Diffinitors ), a unique configuration within the Catholic Church. Each body is of equal authority to propose legislation and discuss other matters of general importance within the order, and each body may be called individually or jointly. The Provincials consists of the superiors of individual Dominican provinces, while the Diffinitors consists of "grass root" representatives of each province, so created to avoid provincial superiors having to spend excessive time away from their day-to-day duties of governing. To maintain stability of the legislation of the order, new legislation is enacted only when approved by three successive meetings of the General Chapter.

[ 66 ] The first General Chapters were held at Pentecost in the years 1220 and 1221.

[ 67 ] More recent General Chapters have been held as follows: 1998 – Bologna , Italy [ 68 ] 2001 – Providence , USA [ 68 ] 2004 – Kraków , Poland [ 69 ] 2010 – 290th General Chapter, 1–21 September 2010, Rome, [ 70 ] which elaborated the mission mandates of the order [ 67 ] 2016 – Bologna [ 71 ] 2019 – Elective General Chapter, 9 July – 4 August 2019, at the Convent of St. Martin de Porres, Biên Hòa , Viet Nam 2022 – 16 July – 8 August 2022, Tultenango in the State of Mexico , a Chapter of Definitors [ 72 ] The General Chapter elects a Master of the Order , who has "broad and direct authority over every brother, convent and province, and over every nun and monastery".

[ 73 ] The master is considered the successor of Dominic, the first Master of the Order, who envisioned the office to be one of service to the community. The master is currently elected for a nine-year term, and is aided by the General Curia of the Order. His authority is subject only to the General Chapter.

[ 73 ] He, along with the General Chapter, may assign members, and appoint or remove superiors and other officials for the good of the order.

[ 73 ] [ 66 ] Nuns [ edit ] The Dominican nuns were founded by Dominic even before he had established the friars. They are contemplatives in the cloistered life. The nuns celebrated their 800th anniversary in 2006.

[ 74 ] Some monasteries raise funds for their operations by producing religious articles such as priestly vestments or baking communion wafers .

[ 75 ] Friars [ edit ] Friars are male members of the order, and consist of members ordained to the priesthood as well as non-ordained members, known as cooperator brothers. Both priests and cooperators participate in a variety of ministries, including preaching, parish assignments, educational ministries, social work, and related fields.

[ 75 ] Dominican life is organized into four pillars that define the order's chrism: prayer, study, community and preaching.

[ 76 ] Dominicans are known for their intellectual rigor that informs their preaching, as well as engaging in academic debate with contemporary scholars.

[ 77 ] A significant period of academic study is required prior to taking final vows of membership.

[ 78 ] Religious sisters [ edit ] Marble relief of SS Dominic and Catherine Women have been part of the Dominican Order since the beginning, but distinct active congregations of Dominican sisters in their current form are largely a product of the nineteenth century and afterward. They draw their origins both from the Dominican nuns and the communities of women tertiaries (laywomen) who lived in their own homes and gathered regularly to pray and study: the most famous of these was the Mantellates attached to Saint Dominic's church in Siena, to which Catherine of Siena belonged.

[ 79 ] In the seventeenth century, some European Dominican monasteries (e.g. St Ursula's, Augsburg) temporarily became no longer enclosed, so they could engage in teaching or nursing or other work in response to pressing local need. Any daughter houses they founded, however, became independent.

[ 80 ] But in the nineteenth century, in response to increasing missionary fervor, monasteries were asked to send groups of women to found schools and medical clinics around the world. Large numbers of Catholic women traveled to Africa, the Americas, and the East to teach and support new communities of Catholics there, both settlers and converts. Owing to the large distances involved, these groups needed to be self-governing, and they frequently planted new self-governing congregations in neighboring mission areas in order to respond more effectively to the perceived pastoral needs.

[ 81 ] Following on from this period of growth in the nineteenth century, and another great period of growth in those joining these congregations in the 1950s, there are currently [ when?

] 24,600 sisters belonging to 150 Dominican religious congregations present in 109 countries affiliated to Dominican Sisters International.

[ 82 ] As well as the friars, Dominican sisters live their lives supported by four common values, often referred to as the Four Pillars of Dominican Life, they are community life, common prayer, study, and service. Dominic called this fourfold pattern of life "holy preaching". Henri Matisse was so moved by the care that he received from the Dominican sisters that he collaborated in the design and interior decoration of their Chapelle du Saint-Marie du Rosaire in Vence , France.

[ 83 ] Priestly Fraternities of St. Dominic [ edit ] The Priestly Fraternities of St. Dominic [ 84 ] consist of diocesan priests who are formally affiliated to, and "true members" of, [ 85 ] the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) through a rule of life that they profess, and who strive for evangelical perfection under the overall direction of the Dominican friars. The origins of the Dominican fraternities can be traced from the Dominican third Order secular, which then included both priests and lay persons as members.

[ 86 ] Now existing as a separate association from that of the laity, and with its own distinct rule to follow, the Priestly Fraternities of St. Dominic continue to be guided by the order in embracing the gift of the spirituality of Dominic in the unique context of the diocesan priesthood. Along with the special grace of the Sacrament of Holy Orders, which helps them to perform the acts of the sacred ministry worthily, they receive new spiritual help from the profession, which makes them members of the Dominican Family and sharers in the grace and mission of the order. While the order provides them with these spiritual aids and directs them to their own sanctification, it leaves them free for the complete service of the local church, under the jurisdiction of their own bishop.

[ citation needed ] Dominican laity (tertiary/third order) [ edit ] The Mystic Marriage of Saint Catherine of Siena (1347–1380) by Giovanni di Paolo , c.

1460 ( Metropolitan Museum of Art , New York ) Lay Dominicans are governed by their own rule, the Rule of the Lay Fraternities of St. Dominic, promulgated by the Master in 1987.

[ 87 ] It is the fifth Rule of the Dominican Laity; the first was issued in 1285.

[ 88 ] Lay Dominicans are also governed by the Fundamental Constitution of the Dominican Laity, and their provinces provide a General Directory and Statutes. According to their Fundamental Constitution of the Dominican Laity, sec. 4, "They have a distinctive character in both their spirituality and their service to God and neighbor. As members of the Order, they share in its apostolic mission through prayer, study and preaching according to the state of the laity." [ 89 ] Pope Pius XII, in Chosen Laymen, an Address to the Third Order of St. Dominic (1958), said, "The true condition of salvation is to meet the divine invitation by accepting the Catholic 'credo' and by observing the commandments.  But the Lord expects more from you [Lay Dominicans], and the Church urges you to continue seeking the intimate knowledge of God and His works, to search for a more complete and valuable expression of this knowledge, a refinement of the Christian attitudes which derive from this knowledge." [ 90 ] The two greatest saints among them are Catherine of Siena and Rose of Lima , who lived ascetic lives in their family homes, yet both had widespread influence in their societies.

[ citation needed ] Associates [ edit ] In the 20th century, Associates who share the Dominican charism with congregations of religious sisters were formed. Dominican Associates are Christian women and men; married, single, divorced, and widowed; clergy members and lay persons who were first drawn to and then called to live out the charism and continue the mission of the Dominican Order – to praise, to bless, to preach. Associates do not take vows, but rather make a commitment to be partners with vowed members, and to share the mission and charism of the Dominican Family in their own lives, families, churches, neighborhoods, workplaces, and cities. They are most often associated with a particular apostolic work of the congregation of active Dominican sisters to which they belong.

[ 91 ] Spirituality [ edit ] The Dominican emphasis on learning and charity distinguishes it from other monastic and mendicant orders. As the order first developed in Europe, learning continued to be emphasized by those friars and their sisters in Christ. These religious also struggled for a deeply personal and intimate relationship with God. When the order reached England, many of the attributes were kept, but the English gave the order additional specialized characteristics.

[ citation needed ] Humbert of Romans [ edit ] Humbert of Romans , the master general of the order from 1254 to 1263, was a great administrator, preacher, and writer.

[ 92 ] It was under his tenure as master general that the nun of the order were given a new constitution. He also wanted his friars to reach excellence in their preaching, his most lasting contribution to the order.

[ citation needed ] Humbert is at the center of ascetic writers in the Dominican Order.

[ citation needed ] He advised his readers, "[Young Dominicans] are also to be instructed not to be eager to see visions or work miracles, since these avail little to salvation, and sometimes we are fooled by them; but rather they should be eager to do good in which salvation consists. Also, they should be taught not to be sad if they do not enjoy the divine consolations they hear others have; but they should know the loving Father for some reason sometimes withholds these. Again, they should learn that if they lack the grace of compunction or devotion they should not think they are not in the state of grace as long as they have good will, which is all that God regards".

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The English Dominicans took this to heart and made it the focal point of their mysticism.

[ citation needed ] Mysticism [ edit ] The Dominican Order was affected by a number of elemental influences. Its early members imbued the order with a mysticism and learning. Mysticism refers to the conviction that all believers have the capability to experience God's love. This love may manifest itself through brief ecstatic experiences, such that one may be engulfed by God and gain an immediate knowledge of him, which is unknowable through the intellect alone. Although the ultimate attainment for mysticism is union with God, the goal is just as much to become like Christ as it is to become one with him. Those who believe in Christ should first have faith in him without becoming engaged in such overwhelming phenomena.

[ citation needed ] The Europeans of the order embraced ecstatic mysticism on a grand scale and looked to a union with the Creator. The English Dominicans looked for this complete unity as well but were not so focused on ecstatic experiences. Instead, their goal was to emulate the moral life of Christ more completely. The Dartford nuns were surrounded by all of those legacies and used them to create something unique.

[ citation needed ] Saint Albertus Magnus [ edit ] Painting of Albertus Magnus (1206–1280) by Justus van Gent , c.

1475 Another member of the order who contributed significantly to its spirituality is Albert the Great , whose influence on the brotherhood permeated nearly every aspect of Dominican life. Albertus Magnus championed the idea, drawn from Dionysius the Areopagite , that positive knowledge of God is possible but obscure. Thus, it is easier to state what God is not than to state what God is: [W]e affirm things of God only relatively, that is, casually, whereas we deny things of God absolutely, that is, with reference to what He is in Himself. And there is no contradiction between a relative affirmation and an absolute negation. It is not contradictory to say that someone is white-toothed and not white.

[ 95 ] Albert the Great wrote that wisdom and understanding enhance one's faith in God. According to him, these are the tools that God uses to commune with a contemplative. Love in the soul is both the cause and result of true understanding and judgement. It causes not only an intellectual knowledge of God, but a spiritual and emotional knowledge as well. Contemplation is the means whereby one can obtain this goal of understanding. Things that once seemed static and unchanging become full of possibility and perfection. The contemplative then knows that God is, but they do not know what God is. Thus, contemplation forever produces a mystified, imperfect knowledge of God. The soul is exalted beyond the rest of God's creation but it cannot see God himself.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] Rhineland mysticism [ edit ] Mysticism in the Rhineland emerged from a series of crises—political, social (the Black Death and its consequences), and religious.

[ 98 ] The writings of Albertus Magnus made a significant contribution to German mysticism, which became vibrant in the minds of the Beguines and women such as Hildegard of Bingen and Mechthild of Magdeburg .

[ 99 ] In Europe, it was often the female members of the order, such as Catherine of Siena , Mechthild of Magdeburg , Christine of Stommeln , Margaret Ebner , and Elsbet Stagl, [ 100 ] who gained reputations for having mystical experiences. Notable male members of the order associated with mysticism include Henry Suso and Johannes Tauler .

[ 98 ] One of Meister Eckhart 's themes is that one should be mindful of the great nobility which God has given the soul.

[ 101 ] English Dominican mysticism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) By 1300, the enthusiasm for preaching and conversion within the order had lessened. Mysticism, full of the ideas Albertus Magnus expostulated, became the devotion of the greatest minds and hands within the organization. It became a "powerful instrument of personal and theological transformation both within the Order of Preachers and throughout the wider reaches of Christendom.

[ c ] Although Albertus Magnus did much to instill mysticism in the Order of Preachers, it is a concept that reaches back to the Hebrew Bible. In the tradition of Holy Writ, the impossibility of coming face to face with God is a recurring motif. As time passed, Jewish and early Christian writings presented the idea of "unknowing" in which God's presence was enveloped in a dark cloud. All of those ideas associated with mysticism were at play in the spirituality of the Dominican community.

English Dominican mysticism in the late medieval period differed from European strands of it in that, whereas European Dominican mysticism tended to concentrate on ecstatic experiences of union with the divine, English Dominican mysticism's ultimate focus was on a crucial dynamic in one's personal relationship with God. That was an essential moral imitation of the Savior as an ideal for religious change and as the means for reformation of humanity's nature as an image of divinity. This type of mysticism carried with it four elements. Firstly, spiritually it emulated the moral essence of Christ's life. Secondly, there was a connection linking moral emulation of Christ's life and humanity's disposition as images of the divine. Thirdly, English Dominican mysticism focused on an embodied spirituality with a structured love of fellow men at its center. Finally, the supreme aspiration of this mysticism was either an ethical or an actual union with God.

For English Dominican mystics, the mystical experience was not expressed just in one moment of the full knowledge of God but in the journey of or process of faith. That then led to an understanding that was directed toward an experiential knowledge of divinity. However, for these mystics it was possible to pursue mystical life without the visions and voices that are usually associated with such a relationship with God.

The centre of all mystical experience is of course Christ. English Dominicans sought to gain a full knowledge of Christ through an imitation of his life. English mystics of all types tended to focus on the moral values that the events in Christ's life exemplified. That led to a "progressive understanding of the meanings of Scripture—literal, moral, allegorical, and anagogical," [ attribution needed ] which was contained within the mystical journey itself. From these considerations of Scripture comes the simplest way to imitate Christ: an emulation of the moral actions and attitudes that Jesus demonstrated in his earthly ministry becomes the most significant way to feel and have knowledge of God.

The English concentrated on the spirit of the events of Christ's life. They neither expected nor sought the appearance of the stigmata or any other physical manifestation. They wanted to create in themselves that environment that allowed Jesus to fulfill his divine mission, insofar as they were able. At the centre of that environment was love, which Christ showed for humanity in becoming human. Christ's love reveals the mercy of God and his care for his creation. English Dominican mystics sought through that love to become images of God. English Dominican spirituality concentrated on the moral implications of image-bearing. Love led to spiritual growth that, in turn, reflected an increase in love for God and humanity.

Theological tradition [ edit ] Since the 13th century, the Dominicans have maintained a continuous tradition of Thomism , a system of scholastic theology informed by the writings of Thomas Aquinas . J. A. Weisheipl emphasizes that within the order the history of Thomism has been continuous since the time of Aquinas: Thomism was always alive in the Dominican Order, small as it was after the ravages of the Reformation, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic occupation. Repeated legislation of the General Chapters, beginning after the death of St. Thomas, as well as the Constitutions of the Order, required all Dominicans to teach the doctrine of St. Thomas both in philosophy and in theology.

[ 103 ] Devotion to Mary [ edit ] Devotion to the Virgin Mary was another very important aspect of Dominican spirituality. As an order, the Dominicans believed that they were established through the good graces of Christ's mother, and through prayers, she sent missionaries to save the souls of nonbelievers. Dominican brothers and sisters unable to participate in the Divine Office sang the Little Office of the Blessed Virgin Mary each day and saluted her as their advocate.

[ 104 ] Throughout the centuries, the Holy Rosary has been an important element among the Dominicans.

[ 105 ] Pope Pius XI stated: "The Rosary of Mary is the principle and foundation on which the very Order of Saint Dominic rests for making perfect the life of its members and obtaining the salvation of others." [ 106 ] Histories of the Holy Rosary often attribute its origin to Dominic himself through the Virgin Mary .

[ 107 ] Our Lady of the Rosary is the title related to the Marian apparition to Dominic in 1208 in the church of Prouille in which the Virgin Mary gave the Rosary to him. For centuries, Dominicans have been instrumental in spreading the rosary and emphasizing the Catholic belief in the power of the rosary .

[ 108 ] On January 1, 2008, the master of the order declared a year of dedication to the Rosary.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Other names [ edit ] A number of other names have been used to refer to both the order and its members.

In England and other countries, the Dominican friars are referred to as Black Friars because of the black cappa or cloak they wear over their white habits .

[ 111 ] Dominicans were "Blackfriars", as opposed to "Whitefriars" (i.e., Carmelites ) or "Greyfriars" (i.e., Franciscans ). They are also distinct from the "Austin friars" (i.e., Augustinian Friars ) who wear a similar habit.

In France, the Dominicans were known as Jacobins because their convent in Paris was attached to the Church of Saint-Jacques, now demolished, on the way to Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas , which belonged to the Italian Order of Saint James of Altopascio [ 112 ] ( James the Less ) Sanctus Iacobus in Latin.

Their identification as Dominicans gave rise to the pun that they were the Domini canes , or "Hounds of the Lord".

[ b ] Mottoes [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Laudare, benedicere, praedicare To praise, to bless and to preach (from the Dominican Missal, Preface of the Blessed Virgin Mary ) Veritas Truth Contemplare et contemplata aliis tradere To study and to hand on the fruits of study (or, to contemplate and to hand on the fruits of contemplation) One in faith, hope, and love Notable members [ edit ] See also: List of Dominican saints and beatified and List of Dominican friars Pope Innocent V depicted in a 1350s fresco by Tommaso da Modena , in Treviso Dominican popes and cardinals [ edit ] Four Dominican friars have served as bishop of Rome : Pope Innocent V (r. 1276) Pope Benedict XI (r. 1303–04) Pope Pius V (r. 1566–72) Pope Benedict XIII (r. 1724–30) First elected cardinal [ edit ] Hugh of Saint-Cher (elected 1244), first Dominican cardinal [ 113 ] There are currently five Dominican friars, and one member of the priestly fraternity in the College of Cardinals: Dominik Duka (b. 1943), Czech, Archbishop Emeritus of Prague Christoph Schönborn (b. 1945), Austrian, Archbishop of Vienna Jose Advincula Jr.

(b. 1952), Filipino, Archbishop of Manila Jean-Paul Vesco (b. 1962), French, Archbishop of Algiers Frank Leo (b. 1971), Canadian, Archbishop of Toronto - Member of Priestly Fraternity Timothy Radcliffe (b. 1945), British, 85th Master Emeritus of the Order of Preachers Other Dominicans [ edit ] Other notable Dominicans include: Fra Angelico (1395–1455), painter Thomas Aquinas (c. 1225–1274), doctor of the Church Teodoro Bacani Jr.

(b. 1947), Bishop of Novaliches Matteo Bandello (c. 1480–1562), author of novellas and soldier Gabriel Barletta (fl. 15th century), renowned preacher Fra Bartolomeo (1472–1517), Italian Renaissance painter Rodolfo Fontiveros Beltran (1948–2017), Bishop of San Fernando de La Union Frei Betto (b. 1945), Brazilian friar, theologian, political activist and former government adviser Giordano Bruno (1548–1600), philosopher and astronomer; condemned as a heretic and burned in Rome by the Inquisition Martin Bucer (1491–1551), German friar who left the order to join the Protestant Reformation Edward Ambrose Burgis (c. 1673–1747), historian and theologian Elias Bruneti of Bergerac (fl. 13th century), theologian Anne Buttimer (1938–2017), University College Dublin Thomas Cajetan (1469–1534), theologian, philosopher, and cardinal, who famously debated Martin Luther Tommaso Campanella (1568–1639), philosopher, theologian, astrologer, and poet; denounced by the Inquisition Melchor Cano (1509–1560), Spanish theologian of the School of Salamanca Oliviero Carafa (1430–1511), Italian cardinal and diplomat Christopher Cardone (b. 1957), Archbishop of the Archdiocese of Honiara Diego Carranza (b. 1559), Mexican missionary Bartolomé de las Casas (1484–1566), Spanish bishop in the West, known as the Protector of the Indians Marie-Dominique Chenu (1895–1990), French theologian of the Nouvelle Théologie Richard Luke Concanen (1747–1810), first Bishop of New York Yves Congar (1904–1995), French theologian of the Nouvelle Théologie , later cardinal Conradin of Bornada (d. 1429), renowned preacher Brian Davies (b. 1951), distinguished Professor of Philosophy, Fordham University ; former regent of Blackfriars, Oxford Domingo de Soto (1494–1546), Spanish theologian and philosopher of the School of Salamanca Jeanine Deckers (1933–1985), briefly famous Belgian singer-songwriter Michel-Louis Guérard des Lauriers (1898–1988), French theologian, professor at the Pontifical Lateran University in Rome, advisor of Pope Pius XII on the dogma of the Assumption of Mary , author of the Thesis of Cassiciacum , Sedevacantist bishop Joseph Augustine Di Noia (b. 1943), American Theologian, Adjunct Secretary of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Meister Eckhart (c. 1260-c. 1328), German mystic and preacher Nicholas Eymerich (c. 1316–1399), Inquisitor General of the Kingdom of Aragon and theologian Anthony Fisher (b. 1960), Archbishop of Sydney Réginald Marie Garrigou-Lagrange (1877–1964), leading 20th-century Thomist Bernard Gui (1261–1331), French bishop and inquisitor of the Cathars Gustavo Gutierrez (1928–2024), Peruvian liberation theologian Jean Jérôme Hamer (1916–1996), Belgian theologian and Curia official, cardinal Henrik Kalteisen (c. 1390–1464), 24th Archbishop of Nidaros Hermann of Minden , 13th-century provincial superior of the German province of Dominicans James of Lausanne (d. 1321), superior of the order in France Robert Kilwardby (c. 1215–1279), Archbishop of Canterbury and cardinal Heinrich Kramer (1430–1505), German author of the Malleus Maleficarum , a handbook for witch hunting Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire (1802–1861), French theologian, journalist, and political activist Osmund Lewry (1929–1987), English theologian Jacques Loew (1908–1999), French worker-priest Patricia Madigan (b. 1950), Australian religious sister ; member and leader of the Dominican Sisters of Eastern Australia and the Solomon Islands; executive director of the Dominican Centre for Interfaith Ministry Education and Research (CIMER) Herbert McCabe (1926–2001), English theologian and scholar Malcolm McMahon (b. 1949), Archbishop of Liverpool Vincent McNabb (1868–1943), Irish scholar, apologist and ecumenist Aidan Nichols (b. 1948), English theologian Flannery O'Connor , American author, Dominican tertiary laywoman José S. Palma (b. 1950), Archbishop of Cebu Marco Pellegrini (fl.1500), Vicar-General of the Dominicans in Lombardy Dominique Pire (George) (1910–1969), recipient of the Nobel Peace Prize Girolamo Savonarola (1452–1498), Italian orator, de facto ruler of Florentine Republic after the overthrow of the Medici family , burned by the Inquisition Edward Schillebeeckx (1914–1998), Belgian theologian E. Anne Schwerdtfeger (1930–2008), American composer Rufino Sescon Jr.

(b. 1972), Bishop of Balanga Napoleon Sipalay Jr.

(b. 1970), Bishop of Alaminos John Tauler ( c.

1300 –1361), one of the Rhineland Mystics Johann Tetzel ( c.

1465 –1519), Inquisitor for Poland and Saxony, renowned preacher and indulgence seller Socrates Villegas (b. 1960), Archbishop of Lingayen-Dagupan Vincent of Beauvais (c. 1184-c. 1264), author/compiler of the encyclopedic text The Great Mirror ( Speculum Maius ) Francisco de Vitoria (c. 1483–1546), Spanish philosopher and theologian of the School of Salamanca , renowned for his work in international law Bruno Grego Santos (b. 1985), Tertiary Dominican , Brazilian lawyer, canonist and academic, Full Professor by the Pontifical Catholic University of Parana and Philisophiae Doctor by the Law School of the University of São Paulo Educational institutions [ edit ] Young Dominican in 2012 Main article: List of sites of the Dominican Order Albertus Magnus College , New Haven , Connecticut , United States – est.1925 Angelicum School Iloilo , Iloilo City , Philippines – est. 1978 Aquinas College , Grand Rapids , Michigan , United States – est. 1886 Aquinas Institute of Theology , St. Louis , Missouri , United States – est. 1939 Aquinas School , San Juan, Metro Manila , Philippines – est. 1965 Barry University , Miami Shores , Florida , United States – est. 1940 Bishop Lynch High School , Dallas , Texas , United States – est. 1963 Blackfriars Hall , Oxford , United Kingdom Blackfriars Priory School , Prospect , South Australia, Australia – est. 1953 Blessed Imelda's School , Taipei , Taiwan – est. 1916 Cabra Dominican College , Adelaide , South Australia, Australia – est. 1886 Caldwell University , Caldwell, New Jersey , United States – est. 1939 Catholic Dominican School, Yigo, Guam – est. 1995 Centro Universitario Cultural (Cultural Univeristary Center), Mexico City , Mexico – est. 1959 Colegio de San Juan de Letran , Bataan , Abucay , Bataan, Philippines Colegio de San Juan de Letran , Calamba , Philippines Colegio de San Juan de Letran , Intramuros , Philippines – est. 1620 Colegio de San Juan de Letran , Manaoag (formerly Our Lady of Manaoag College) , Manaoag , Pangasinan, Philippines Colegio Lacordaire , Cali , Colombia – est. 1956 Dominican College of San Juan, San Juan, Metro Manila , Philippines Dominican College of Santa Rosa, Santa Rosa, Laguna , Philippines – est. 1994 Dominican College of Tarlac, Capas , Tarlac, Philippines – est. 1947 Dominican Convent High School, Bulawayo , Bulawayo , Zimbabwe – est. 1956 Dominican Convent High School , Harare, Zimbabwe – est. 1892 Dominican International School Kaohsiung, Taiwan – est. 1953 Dominican International School , Taipei City , Taiwan – est. 1957 Dominican School, Semaphore, South Australia – est. 1899 Dominican School Manila , Sampaloc, Manila , Philippines – est. 1958 Dominican School of Calabanga, Calabanga , Metro Naga , Camarines Sur , Philippines Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology , Berkeley, California , United States – est. 1861 Dominican University , River Forest, Illinois , United States – est. 1901 Dominican University College , [ 114 ] Ottawa , Ontario , Canada – est. 1900 Dominican University of California , San Rafael , California, United States – est. 1890 Domuni Universitas, Toulouse , France, France – est. 1998 Edgewood College , Madison, Wisconsin , United States – est. 1927 Emerald Hill School, Zimbabwe , Harare, Zimbabwe Fenwick High School , Oak Park , Illinois, United States – est. 1929 Frassati Catholic High School , Spring , Texas, United States – est. 2013 Holy Cross College , Arima , Trinidad & Tobago- est. 1957 Holy Rosary School of Pardo, El Pardo, Cebu Ciyy, Philippines – est. 1965 Holy Trinity University , Puerto Princesa City , Philippines – est. 1940 Marian Catholic High School , Chicago Heights , Illinois, United States – est. 1958 Molloy University , Rockville Centre , New York , United States – est. 1955 Mount Saint Mary College , Newburgh, New York, United States Newbridge College , Newbridge, Co. Kildare, Ireland Ohio Dominican University , Columbus, Ohio, United States Pontifical Faculty of the Immaculate Conception The Pontifical and Royal University of Santo Tomas , The Catholic University of the Philippines – est. 1611 Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas Providence College , Providence, Rhode Island, United States Rosaryhill School , Hong Kong, China – 1959–2024 San Pedro College , Davao City Santa Sabina Dominican College, Dublin Siena College , Camberwell, Victoria, Australia Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of San Jose Siena College of Taytay , Taytay, Rizal St Agnes Academy , Houston , Texas, United States – est. 1905 St. Catharine College , St. Catharine, Kentucky, United States St Dominic's Chishawasha , Zimbabwe St Dominic's College, Henderson , Auckland , New Zealand St Dominic's College, Wanganui , New Zealand St Dominic's Priory College , North Adelaide , South Australia – est. 1884 St. John's High School , Zimbabwe St Mary's College, Adelaide , South Australia – est. 1869 St. Mary's Dominican High School , New Orleans, Louisiana, United States St. Michael Academy , Northern Samar , Philippines St. Rose of Lima School, Bacolod City, Philippines Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas Universidad Santo Tomas de Aquino , Bogota, Colombia Universidad Santo Tomas de Aquino , Santo Domingo, Dominican Republic, est. 1538 – First University of the New World University of Santo Tomas-Legazpi (formerly Aquinas University of Legazpi) , Legazpi City , Albay – est. 1948 UST-Angelicum College (formerly Angelicum College) , Quezon City , Philippines – est. 1972 See also [ edit ] Anglican Order of Preachers The Blackfriars of Shrewsbury Community of the Lamb , a new branch of the Dominican Order, founded in 1983 Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominican Rite , the Separate Use for Dominicans in the Latin Church Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Jacobins Convent, Nantes List of saints of the Dominican Order List of sites of the Dominican Order Master of the Order of Preachers Spanish Inquisition Third Order of Saint Dominic Thomistic sacramental theology Thought of Thomas Aquinas Notes [ edit ] ^ The word friar is etymologically related to the word for brother in Latin .

"friar – Definition from the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary" . Retrieved 2008-10-21 .

^ a b The reference to " hounds " draws on the tradition that Dominic's mother, while pregnant with him, had a vision of a black and white dog with a torch in its mouth; wherever the dog went, it set fire to the earth. It was explained that the vision was fulfilled when Dominic and his followers went forth, clad in black and white, setting fire to the earth with the Gospel . In English, the word "hound" has two further meanings that may be drawn upon. A hound is loyal, and the Dominicans have a reputation as obedient servants of the faith.

^ Albertus Magnus helped shape English Dominican thought through his idea that God is knowable, but obscure. Additionally, the English friars shared his belief that wisdom and understanding enhance one's faith in God. The English Dominicans also studied classical writers. This was also part of his legacy.

[ 102 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Order of Friars Preachers – Dominicans " .

Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney . Retrieved January 18, 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Mandonnet 1911 .

^ Marshall 2011 .

^ Lomonaco 2019 .

^ Little 1983 .

^ a b "History of the Dominican Friars" .

Dominican Friars Foundation .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-23 . Retrieved 2017-12-23 .

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 7.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 17.

^ Tugwell 1982 , p. 53.

^ Hook, Walter Farquhar (1848).

An ecclesiastical biography, containing the lives of ancient fathers and modern divines, interspersed with notices of heretics and schismatics, forming a brief history of the church in every age . Vol. 4. London: F. and J. Rivington ; Parker, Oxford; J. and J. J. Deighton, Cambridge; T. Harrison, Leeds. p. 467.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 19.

^ O'Connor 1909 .

^ " "History", Ordo Praedicatorum" .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-10 . Retrieved 2023-03-10 .

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 23.

^ Butler 1911 , pp. 401–402.

^ "St. Dominic – Order of preachers" .

www.op.org . Ordo Praedicatorum. 2015. Archived from the original on 2018-05-30 . Retrieved 2018-05-18 .

^ Tugwell 1982 , pp. 54–55.

^ O'Connor 1917 , p. 48.

^ Lacordaire, Henri-Dominique (1883).

Life of Saint Dominic . Translated by Hazeland, Edward. London: Burns and Oates.

^ a b Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 44.

^ Tugwell 1982 , p. 55.

^ Duggan et al. 2005 , p. 202.

^ Renard 1977 .

^ Weisheipl 1960 .

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , Ch 1.

^ Hastings, Selbie & Gray 1919 , p. 701.

^ Mandonnet 1944 , Ch. III, note 50.

^ Morgan 2010 , p. 748.

^ a b Van Helden 1995 .

^ Blötzer 1910 .

^ a b Lee 2001 , p. 13.

^ Lee 2001 , p. 14.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 337.

^ Lee 2001 , pp. 70–73.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 382.

^ Lee 2001 , p. 30.

^ Lee 2001 , p. 31.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 384.

^ Lew, L., Blessed Paul, Founder of the Hungarian Province Archived 2022-08-07 at the Wayback Machine , Dominican Friars Foundation , accessed 1 July 2022 ^ Hinnebusch 1951 , p. 1.

^ Hinnebusch 1951 , p. 2.

^ Hinnebusch 1951 , p. 4.

^ Hinnebusch 1951 , p. 6: There was a dispute over this oratory in 1228.

^ Hinnebusch 1951 , pp. 8–9.

^ O'Carroll 1980 , p. 32.

^ O'Carroll 1980 , p. 33.

^ O'Carroll 1980 , p. 57.

^ Lee, Monastic and Secular Learning , 61.

^ Page 1926 , pp. 181–190.

^ Wagner & Parish 1967 , p. 11.

^ Lach 1994 , pp. 742–743.

^ Medrano, Manuel Joseph de (1731).

Historia de la provincia de Espana, de la orden de predicadores...Escriviala el presentado Fr. Manuel Joseph de Medrano,...

(in Spanish). en la oficina de D. Gabriel del Barrio.

^ a b c "Tertulia historica y apologetica, o examen critico, donde se averigua en el chrisòl de monumentos antiguos, y escritores de mayor autoridad, lo que contra ... pp. 14-53" .

HathiTrust . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

^ Scannell 1910 .

^ Schroeder 1911 .

^ "History" .

Dominican Sisters, King William's Town . Archived from the original on 2016-01-12.

^ a b "Dominican Missionary Sisters – of the Sacred Heart of Jesus" .

Dominican Missionary Sisters .

Archived from the original on 2019-01-29 . Retrieved 2019-02-15 .

^ "Dominican Sisters of Oakford – Our Congregation" .

oakforddominicans.org .

Archived from the original on 2016-11-03 . Retrieved 2016-08-22 .

^ Sisters, Dominican (25 February 2010).

"Mother Rose Niland" . Archived from the original on 15 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 .

^ "National Association of Episcopal Christian Communities" .

naecc . Retrieved 2024-02-08 .

^ Marsh-Edwards 1937 , p. 599.

^ Marsh-Edwards 1937 , p. 603.

^ Bowring 1859 , pp. 211, 213.

^ "Philippine Sugar Estates Development Co., Limited, v. Government of the Philippine Islands" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2021 . Retrieved 14 July 2021 .

^ "INFORMATION FROM THE LAITY OFFICE AT ROME" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-09-25 . Retrieved 2020-01-27 .

^ a b D'Amato, O.P., A. (April 1983).

"The General Chapter in the Order of Preachers" .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2022 . Retrieved August 7, 2022 .

^ a b Order of Preachers, RELATIO OF THE MASTER OF THE ORDER TO THE GENERAL CHAPTER OF TULTENANGO JULY 2022 , Prot. n. 50/20/485 Tultenango 2022, accessed 28 July 2023 ^ a b Stooker, G., Report of the Promoter General of the Dominican Laity to the Friars General Chapter, Krakow, Poland, 2004 , published June 2004, archived 19 August 2011, accessed 11 February 2024 ^ Deeb, M., A3413: Michael Deeb Papers, 1969–2012 , accessed 17 August 2023 ^ Irish Dominicans, General Chapter of Dominican Order Archived 2022-12-08 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 8 December 2022 ^ Flickr , General Chapter – Bologna 2016 , accessed 1 August 2023 ^ Ordo Praedicatorum, Logo of the General Chapter, Tultenango, 2022 , accessed 8 December 2022 ^ a b c "The Master of Dominican Order" .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2022 . Retrieved August 7, 2022 .

^ "OP 800 – Home" . 800.op.org. 2006-03-16. Archived from the original on 2006-06-14 . Retrieved 2012-06-04 .

^ a b "Our Order" .

Dominican Friars | Province of the Most Holy Name of Jesus .

Archived from the original on 2022-08-19 . Retrieved 2022-08-26 .

^ "The Dominican Charism" .

www.rosaryhs.com .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ " 'Dominicans value the intellectual life' " . July 1, 2021.

Archived from the original on August 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 26, 2022 .

^ "THE DOMINICAN VOCATION | Dominican Friars – St. Albert the Great" .

Dominican Vocations .

Archived from the original on 2022-08-26 . Retrieved 2022-08-26 .

^ Ritchie & Ronald 2001 , p. 29.

^ Gouws 1978 , Ch. 1.

^ Cleary, Murphy & McGlynn 1997 .

^ "Dominican Sisters International" . Archived from the original on 2016-08-23 . Retrieved 2016-08-22 .

^ Billot 1999 .

^ Website: Fraternitates Sacerdotales Sancti Dominici Archived 2023-02-11 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 11 February 2023 ^ Priestly Fraternities of St. Dominic, What We Do Archived 2023-02-11 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 11 February 2023 ^ "Who We Are – Order of preachers" .

www.op.org . Archived from the original on 2017-12-24 . Retrieved 2017-12-23 .

^ "Information from the Laity Office at Rome" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-09-09 . Retrieved 2013-03-29 .

^ See also the Lay Dominican Web Library .

Archived August 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Dominican Laity – Lay Fraternities of St. Dominic – Dominican Third Order" .

Dominican Laity – Lay Fraternities of St. Dominic – Dominican Third Order .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-24 . Retrieved 2017-12-23 .

^ "Chosen Laymen" .

Wayback Machine . Archived from the original on 2013-01-13.

See the official transcript, in French "Acta Apostolicae Sedis" (PDF) .

The Holy See .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-06-21 . Retrieved 2020-03-15 .

beginning at page 674.

^ "Who Are Dominican Associates?" . Archived from the original on 2015-03-31 . Retrieved 2015-04-03 .

^ Ott, Michael. "Humbert of Romans." The Catholic Encyclopedia Archived 2012-10-16 at the Wayback Machine Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 9 March 2023 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Woods 1998 , p. 37.

^ Ashley 2009 , p. 240.

^ Tugwell 1982 , p. 153.

^ Hinnebusch 1975 , p. 299.

^ Tugwell 1982 , pp. 40–95, 134–198.

^ a b "Bara, Silvia. "Do you know about Dominican mysticism?", Dominican Sisters of the Roman Congregation" .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-10 . Retrieved 2023-03-10 .

^ Woods 1998 , p. 39.

^ Woods 1998 , p. 110.

^ McColman, Carl.

Christian Mystics: 108 Seers, Saints, and Sages (Hampton Roads: 2016), 130‒131 ^ Woods 1998 .

^ "The Dominican Friars of the Province of St. Albert the Great » "The Revival of Thomism: An Historical Survey" (James Weisheipl)" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 2013-08-21 .

"The Revival of Thomism: An Historical Survey, " James Weisheipl, 1962.

^ Lee 2001 , p. 152.

^ Bedouelle 2017 .

^ Feeney 1991 .

^ Beebe 1996 .

^ History of the Dominicans "Dominican Spirituality: In Italy, B" . Archived from the original on 2008-10-08 . Retrieved 2008-07-27 .

^ "Re-discovering the Rosary as a means of contemplation International Dominican Information" . Archived from the original on May 14, 2008.

^ Randal, Felix (2008-01-06).

"Dominican Year of the Rosary" . Felixrandal.blogspot.com.

Archived from the original on 2012-03-12 . Retrieved 2012-06-04 .

^ "Black friar" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "Jacobin" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Hieronymus, Frank (1997).

1488 Petri-Schwabe 1988: eine traditionsreiche Basler Offizin im Spiegel ihrer frühen Drucke (in German). Schwabe. p. 14.

ISBN 978-3-7965-1000-7 .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-26 . Retrieved 2023-01-07 .

^ Dominican University College Sources [ edit ] Bedouelle, Guy (2017).

Saint Dominic: The Grace of the Word . Ignatius.

ISBN 978-1-68149-414-2 .

Beebe, Catherine (1996).

Saint Dominic and the Rosary . Ignatius.

ISBN 978-0-89870-518-8 .

Ashley, Benedict M.

(2009).

The Dominicans . Wipf and Stock.

ISBN 978-1-60608-933-0 .

Blötzer, Joseph (1910).

"Inquisition" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Billot, Marcel (1999).

Henri Matisse The Vence Chapel: The Archive of a Creation . Milan, Italy: Menil Foundation.

ISBN 978-88-8118-402-6 .

Bowring, Sir John (1859).

A Visit to the Philippine Islands . London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Cleary, Columba; Murphy, Eleanora; McGlynn, Flora (1997).

Being Driven Forward: The Story of Mother Rose Niland and the Foundation of Newcastle Dominican Sisters . Boksburg.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Butler, Edward Cuthbert (1911).

"Dominic, Saint" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Duggan, Anne; Greatrex, Joan; Bolton, Brenda; Boyle, Leonard E. (2005).

Omnia disce: medieval studies in memory of Leonard Boyle, O.P.

Ashgate.

ISBN 9780754651154 .

Feeney, Robert (1991).

The Rosary: "The Little Summa" . Aquinas Press.

ISBN 978-0-9622347-7-4 .

OL 1575444M .

Gouws, Mariette (1978).

All for God's People: 100 Years : Dominican Sisters, King William's Town . Generalate of the King Dominican Sisters.

Hastings, James; Selbie, John Alexander; Gray, Louis Herbert (1919).

Encyclopædia of Religion and Ethics: Picts-Sacraments . Vol. 10. T. & T. Clark.

ISBN 9780567065100 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Hinnebusch, William A. (1951).

The Early English Friars Preachers . Ad S. Sabinae.

Hinnebusch, William A. (1975).

The Dominicans: A Short History . Dominican Publications.

ISBN 978-0-907271-61-1 . Archived from the original on 2020-05-08 . Retrieved 2015-02-22 .

Lach, Donald F. (1994).

Asia in the Making of Europe . Vol. I: The Century of Discovery. Book 2. University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-46732-0 .

Lee, Paul (2001).

Nunneries, Learning, and Spirituality in Late Medieval English Society: The Dominican Priory of Dartford . Boydell & Brewer.

ISBN 978-1-903153-02-4 .

Lomonaco, Amedeo (13 July 2019).

"Il filippino Gerard Timoner III eletto nuovo maestro dei domenicani" [The Filipino Gerard Timoner III elected new Dominican master].

Vatican News (in Italian).

Archived from the original on 13 July 2019 . Retrieved 13 July 2019 .

Little, Lester K. (1983).

Religious Poverty and the Profit Economy in Medieval Europe . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-9247-1 .

Mandonnet, Pierre-François-Félix (1911).

"Order of Preachers" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 12. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Mandonnet, Pierre (1944).

"Ch.III: Years of Experimental Activity (1215–19)" .

St. Dominic and His Work . Translated by Sister Mary Benedicta Larkin. St. Louis: B. Herder. Archived from the original on 2012-06-18.

Marshall, Taylor (2011-02-24).

"Scoreboard for the Doctors of the Church" .

Taylor Marshall .

Archived from the original on 2015-09-29 . Retrieved 28 September 2015 .

Marsh-Edwards, J. C. (August 1937). "Dominicans in the Mongol Empire".

Blackfriars .

18 (209). Wiley: 599– 605.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-2005.1937.tb00094.x .

JSTOR 43813927 .

Morgan, Kenneth O. (2010).

The Oxford History of Britain . Oxford: OUP.

ISBN 978-0-19-104015-3 .

O'Carroll, Maura (1980).

The Educational Organisation of the Dominicans in England and Wales 1221–1348: A Multidisciplinary Approach . Archivum Fratrum Praedicatorum.

O'Connor, John Bonaventure (1909).

"St. Dominic" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

O'Connor, John B. (1917).

Saint Dominic and the Order of Preachers . New York: Holy Name Bureau.

Page, William, ed. (1926), "Friaries: The Dominican nuns of Dartford" , A History of the County of Kent , vol. 2, London: Victoria County History, archived from the original on 2018-05-19 , retrieved 2018-05-18 – via British History Online Renard, Jean-Pierre (1977).

La formation et la designation des predicateurs au debut de l'Ordre des Prêcheurs: (1215–1237) [ The formation and designation of preachers at the beginning of the Order of Preachers: (1215–1237) ] (in French). Freiburg: Imprimerie St. Canisius.

Ritchie, Joy; Ronald, Kate (2001).

"Catherine of Siena" .

Available Means: An Anthology Of Women'S Rhetoric(s) . University of Pittsburgh Press.

ISBN 978-0-8229-7975-3 .

Scannell, Thomas (1910).

"Jean-Baptiste-Henri Dominique Lacordaire" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Schroeder, Henry Joseph (1911).

"Jacques-Marie-Louis Monsabré" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Tugwell, Simon (1982).

Early Dominicans: Selected Writings . SPCK.

ISBN 978-0-281-04024-7 .

Van Helden, Al (1995).

"The Inquisition" .

The Galileo Project . Rice University.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 April 2012 .

Wagner, Henry Raup; Parish, Helen Rand (1967).

The Life and Writings of Bartolome de Las Casas . University of New Mexico Press.

ISBN 9780826301031 .

Weisheipl, James A. (30 August 1960).

"The Place of Study In the Ideal of St. Dominic" . River Forest, Illinois: Dominican House of Studies. Archived from the original on 2010-12-29.

Woods, Richard (1998).

Mysticism and Prophecy: The Dominican Tradition . Darton, Longman & Todd.

ISBN 978-0-232-52225-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dominican Order .

Order of Preachers Homepage – Available (in English, French, and Spanish) Dominican Observer – weekly magazine of Dominican friars "Roman Catholic Saints of the Dominican Order" .

domenicani.net (in Italian).

Archived from the original on October 9, 2018.

The Dominican Monastery of Saint Jude in Marbury, Alabama Our Lady of the Holy Rosary Monastery in Buffalo, New York (a Dominican contemplative monastery with Latin chant) Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Lectures in Dominican History Online Resource Library Greyfriars and Blackfriars , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Henrietta Leyser, Anthony Kenny & Alexander Murray ( In Our Time , Nov.10, 2005) Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist v t e Order of Preachers A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans) Members of the Dominican Order Beatified Dominicans Agnes of Jesus Diana degli Andalò Andrea Franchi Fra Angelico Simone Ballachi Pope Benedict XI Pauline Jaricot Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Matthew Carrieri Catherine of Racconigi Chiara Gambacorti Antonio della Chiesa Columba of Rieti Hyacinthe-Marie Cormier Domenico Spadafora John Dominici Margareta Ebner Emilia Bicchieri Augustine Fangi Francisco Martín Fernández de Posadas Pier Giorgio Frassati Peter González Buzád Hahót Humbert of Romans John of Vercelli Jordan of Saxony Ana of the Angels Monteagudo Manés de Guzmán Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Osanna of Mantua Nicola Paglia Maddalena Panattieri Luke Spicola of Pontecorvo Marie Poussepin Stephana de Quinzanis Bernardo Scammacca Sebastian Maggi Henry Suso Raymond of Capua Reginald of Orleans Villana de' Botti Congregations of Nuns Congregation of the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Dominican Nuns of the Holy Cross Convent, Regensburg Dominican Nuns of the Perpetual Rosary Dominicans of the Monastery of the Angels, Karachi Dominicans of the Monastery of the Heart of Jesus, Lockport Congregations of Sisters Adrian Dominican Sisters Dominican Sisters of Ilanz Dominican Sisters of Blauvelt Dominican Sisters of Hawthorne Dominican Sisters of Peace Dominican Sisters of St. Catherine of Siena Dominican Sisters of St. Cecilia Dominican Sisters of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Dominican Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Dominican Sisters of Grand Rapids Dominican Sisters of San Rafael Dominican Sisters of Mary, Mother of the Eucharist Dominican Sisters of Sparkill Racine Dominican Sisters Sinsinawa Dominican Sisters Dominican Bishops Diego de Aguilar (bishop) Johannes Alberti (bishop) Jose Advincula Nicolò Albertini Albertus Magnus Bernardo de Albuquerque Domingo de Alzola Andrea Franchi Rodolfo Fontiveros Beltran Teodoro Bacani Jr.

Rufino Sescon Napoleon Sipalay José S. Palma Socrates Villegas Antoninus of Florence Giacomo Balardi Arrigoni Carlos Azpiroz Costa Daniele Barboli Frank Leo Giovanni Battista Natali Archangelo de' Bianchi Franciscus Buratti James Burke Martín Cabeza de Vaca Francisco de la Cámara y Raya Thomas Cammerota Ambrosius Capello Tomás de Cárdenas Andrew of Carniola Bartolomé de las Casas Alfonso de la Cerda Jerónimo Clavijo Jean-Paul Vesco Antonio Cogorno R. Luke Concanen John Connolly Gregorio Cruz Edward Celestin Daly Vincent Darius Agustín Dávila Padilla Michael James Dempsey Joseph Augustine Di Noia Giulio Doffi John Dominici Jean-Paul Vesco Vincenzo de Doncelli Alberto Drago Vincenzo Ercolano Georg Fabri Edward Fenwick Felipe Fernandez de Pardo Anthony Fisher Eustache Fontana Serafino Fortibraccia Ambrosio Fracassini Felipe Galindo Chávez y Pineda Johannes de Galonifontibus John III of Soltaniyeh Ludovico Giamagna Andrés González Pietro de Gozzo Thomas Grace Alfonso Guerra Antonio de Hervias Jean Heysterbach John Howden Guy of Ibelin Henrik Kalteisen Thomas C. Kelly Edward Thaddeus Lawton Giorgio Lazzari Bartolomé de Ledesma Reginaldo de Lizárraga Jerónimo de Loayza Eustachio Locatelli Umberto Locati Bartolomeo Lopaci Juan Lópe Giovanni Marquet Martin of Opava Bartolomé Martinez Menacho y Mesa Pascase Maupair Stefan Antonin Mdzewski Godfried van Mierlo Paolo Isaresi della Mirandola Hermann Molitoris Antonio de Monroy Alonso de Montúfar Munio of Zamora Francisco Naranjo Girolamo Michele Nichesola Berthold von Oberg Michael Padrolo Dionysius Part Alberto Pascaleo Richard Payl Pedro de la Peña Vicente de Peraza Paolo Pico Sigfried Piscator Ponsa Antonio Ponticorona Agostino Quinzio Juan Ramírez de Arellano Miguel Ramírez de Salamanca Raphael Riva Cristóbal Rodríguez Juárez Giovanni Romano Reginaldo Romero Heinrich von Rübenach Abel de Saint-Brieuc Hugh of Saint-Cher Juan de Salamanca Thomas, bishop of Finland Thomas of Mancasola Tommaso da San Cipriano Peter Sanz Christoph Schönborn Tommaso Scotti Pedro Silva y Tenorio Juan Solano John Sproten Luigi Suppa Johannes Tideln Miguel de Torres Pablo de Torres Burchard Tuberflug Domingo de Ulloa Domingo Valderrama y Centeno Antonio de Valdivieso Vicente de Valverde Vincente de Valverde Vitas John of Wildeshausen Juan de Witte Hoos Pedro Xague Dominican Cardinals Nicolò Albertini Michael Browne Yves Congar John Dominici Andreas Frühwirth Hugh of Saint-Cher Christoph Schönborn Jose Advincula Juan de Torquemada Jean-Paul Vesco Frank Leo Timothy Radcliffe Dominican Martyrs Anna Abrikosova Luis Cancer Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Buzád Hahót John of Cologne Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Peter Sanz 17 Thomasian Martyrs Dominican Missionaries Jerónimo de Loayza Luise Radlmeier Peter Sanz Juan Solano Vincente de Valverde José Álvarez Fernández Leo Hofstee Dominican Mystics Agnes of Jesus Albertus Magnus Benvenuta Bojani Lucy Brocadelli Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Columba of Rieti Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Louis of Granada Osanna of Mantua Stephana de Quinzanis Catherine of Ricci Rose of Lima Elsbeth Stagel Henry Suso Thomas Aquinas Simone Weil Dominican Nuns Anna Abrikosova Agnes of Denmark Agnes of Jesus Agnes of Montepulciano Diana degli Andalò Concepción Argüello La Beata de Piedrahita Sister Bertranda Infanta Branca, Lady of Guadalajara Violante do Ceo Chiara Gambacorti Teresa Chikaba Anna Vittoria Dolara Augusta Theodosia Drane Christina Ebner Margareta Ebner Stephanie Gorodets Elizabeth of Töss Emilia Bicchieri Patricia Fresen Irmengard of Oettingen Marion Irvine Catherine Jarrige Joanna, Princess of Portugal Theresa Kugel Saint Margaret of Fontana Margaret of Hungary Juliana Morell Osanna of Cattaro Lea Ráskay Bartolomea Riccoboni Nora Rubashova Elsbeth Stagel Yolanda of Vianden Maria Petra Giordano Dominican Popes Pope Benedict XI Pope Benedict XIII Pope Innocent V Pope Pius V Dominican Saints Agnes of Montepulciano Albertus Magnus Antoninus of Florence Louis Bertrand Francis Ferdinand de Capillas Catherine of Siena Saint Dominic Vincent Ferrer Marie-Alphonsine Danil Ghattas Hyacinth of Poland John of Cologne John Macias Margaret of Hungary Martyrs of Gorkum Paul and Ninety Companions Pope Pius V Martin de Porres Raymond of Penyafort Rose of Lima Peter Sanz Thomas Aquinas Zdislava Berka Dominican Scholars Francisco Burgoa Jean Maurice Fiey Bede Jarrett Stjepan Krasić Raymond-Joseph Loenertz Martin of Opava Jean de Menasce Luise Radlmeier Lea Ráskay Antonin Sertillanges Rose Thering Dominican Sisters Anna Abrikosova Mother Mary Alphonsa Lucy Brocadelli Columba of Rieti Carol Gilbert Jackie Hudson Mary of Jesus de León y Delgado Margaret MacCurtain Ascensión Nicol y Goñi Ardeth Platte Stephana de Quinzanis Luise Radlmeier Catherine of Ricci Rose Thering Marjorie Tuite Rose Whitty Dominican Theologians Nicholas Bayard Catherine of Siena Yves Congar Joseph Augustine Di Noia Marcel-Jacques Dubois Luis Galiana y Cervera Henrik Kalteisen John Lutterell Aidan Nichols Paulus Hungarus Juan de Torquemada Benedict T. Viviano Dominican Tertiaries Francis Amherst Simone Ballachi Benvenuta Bojani Jose Gabriel del Rosario Brochero Catherine of Racconigi Catherine of Siena Pier Giorgio Frassati Pauline Jaricot Martin Grabmann Margaret of Castello Maria Bagnesi Osanna of Mantua Rose of Lima Villana de' Botti Lorenzo Ruíz of Manila Dominican Churches, Convents, and Monasteries Dominican Churches Basilica of San Sisto Vecchio Basilica of Santa Maria Novella Basilica of St Dominic, Valletta Blessed Sacrament Church, Seattle Church of St Catherine, Saint Petersburg Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Košice Church of St. Vincent Ferrer, Manhattan Dominican Church, Lviv Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Church, Vienna Église Saint-Cannat Monastery Church, Sighișoara Nuestra Señora del Rosario y Santo Domingo, Montevideo Our Lady of Pompei Church, Victoria, Gozo Predigerkirche Zürich San Domenico Maggiore San Domenico, Palermo San Giacomo Apostolo, Forlì Sant'Anastasia, Verona Santa Maria di Castello Santa Maria della Pietà, Palermo Santa Maria sopra Minerva Santa Sabina Santi Giovanni e Paolo, Venice Santissima Trinità a Via Condotti Santo Domingo, Mexico City St. Andrew's Church, Cologne St Cuthbert's Church, Durham St Dominic's Priory Church St. Paul's Church, Antwerp St. Hyacinth's Church, Warsaw Dominican Convents Convent of San Domenico, Fiesole Convento de Santo Tomás Dominican Church and Convent of St. James, Sandomierz Dominican Church and Convent of the Assumption of Mary, Tarnobrzeg Dominican Convent, Ilanz Dominican Convent, Zaragoza Predigerkloster St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde Schlehdorf Abbey Skänninge Abbey St. John's Priory, Kalmar Wettenhausen Abbey Dominican Monasteries Ballindoon Friary Black Friars' Monastery of Stockholm Burrishoole Friary Corpus Christi Monastery Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Honoré Couvent des Jacobins de la rue Saint-Jacques Dominican Priory, Viborg Flavigny Abbey Holbæk Priory Kirchberg convent Liebenau monastery Matris Domini Monastery Monastère de Chalais North Abbey, Youghal Notre-Dame-de-Prouille Monastery Oetenbach nunnery Our Lady's Priory, Aarhus Priory of the Immaculate Conception Paulinerkirche, Leipzig Rue Saint-Dominique Sainte Marie de La Tourette Santa Catalina Monastery Sligo Abbey St. Agnes' Priory, Gavnø St Catherine's Monastery, Bremen St. Catherine's Monastery, Tallinn St. Catherine's Priory, Roskilde St. Catherine's Priory, Ribe St. Catherine Monastery, Olomouc Töss Monastery Weesen Abbey Dominican Education Colleges and Universities Albertus Magnus College Angelicum College Aquinas College, Michigan Aquinas College, Tennessee Aquinas Institute of Theology Aquinas University Barry University Caldwell University Colegio de San Juan de Letran Dominican College, New York Dominican School of Philosophy and Theology Dominican University, Illinois Dominican University of California Edgewood College Holy Trinity University Molloy College Mount Saint Mary College Providence College St. Catharine College St. Mary's Dominican College St. Thomas Aquinas College Siena Heights University Pontifical Universities Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas University of Santo Tomas Schools Albertus Magnus High School Angelicum School Iloilo Aquinas High School, New York Aquinas School Blackfriars Priory School Cabra Dominican College Dominican Academy Dominican Convent High School, Harare Dominican Convent High School, Bulawayo Dominican Convent Primary School, Bulawayo Dominican College Sion Hill Dominican College, Fortwilliam Dominican College, Portstewart Dominican High School, Whitefish Bay Dominican International School Dominican School Manila Edgewood High School of the Sacred Heart Fenwick High School (Oak Park, Illinois) Flintridge Sacred Heart Academy Frassati Catholic High School Immaculate Conception Academy (San Francisco, California) Marian Catholic High School (Illinois) Maryknoll School of Lupon Mount de Sales Academy (Catonsville, Maryland) Mount Saint Dominic Academy Newbridge College Queen of Peace High School, Illinois Regina Dominican High School Rosarian Academy Rosary High School, Aurora Rosaryhill School Sacred Heart High School (California) San Gabriel Mission High School Santa Catalina School Saint Agnes Academy, Texas Saint Dominic Academy Saint John Paul the Great Catholic High School (Virginia) Saint Michael Academy, Catarman Santa Sabina College Siena College, Camberwell Siena College of Quezon City Siena College of Taytay St Catherine's Academy St Catherine's School, Germiston St Dominic's Catholic School for Girls, Boksburg St Dominic's Chishawasha St Dominic's College, Henderson St Dominic's Grammar School St Dominic's Grammar School for Girls St Dominic's Priory School, Stone St Dominic's Priory College, Adelaide St Dominic's Sixth Form College St John's High School, Harare St Joseph's School, Oamaru St Mary's Dominican High School St Rose's Senior High School, Akwatia St Vincent Ferrer High School Superior Institute of Religious Sciences of St. Thomas Aquinas Trinity Catholic College, Dunedin, New Zealand Trinity High School (River Forest, Illinois) Catholicism portal v t e Catholic religious institutes Male and female Alexians Assumptionists (AA) Augustinian Recollects (OAR) Basilian Aleppians (BA) Basilian Chouerites (BC) Benedictines (OSB) Bridgettines (OSsS) Canossians (FDCC) Carmelites (OCarm) Carthusians (OCart) Cistercians (OCist) Congregation of Our Lady of Sion (NDS) Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (SSCC) Discalced Carmelites (OCD) Dominicans (OP) Franciscans (OFM) Institute of the Incarnate Word (IVE) Mercedarians (O de M) Missionaries of Charity (MC) Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo (CS) Monastic Family of Bethlehem, of the Assumption of the Virgin and of Saint Bruno Premonstratensians (OPraem) Servants of Charity (SC) Servite Order (OSM) Society of the Atonement (SA) TOR Franciscans Trappists (OCSO) Trinitarian Order (OSST) Coat of arms of Vatican City Male Adorno Fathers (CRM) Albertine Brothers Augustinians (OSA) Barnabites (B) Basilians (CSB) Brothers of Our Lady of Mercy (FDM) Camillians (MI) Canons Regular of St. John Cantius (SJC) Capuchins (OFM Cap) Christian Brothers (Irish) (CFC) Congregatio Discipulorum Domini (CDD) Immaculate Heart of Mary (CICM) Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Claretians (CMF) Congregation of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux (CST) Conventual Franciscans (OFM Conv) Crosiers (OSC) De La Salle Brothers (FSC) Discalced Augustinians (OAD) Franciscan Friars of the Renewal (CFR) Franciscan Missionaries of the Eternal Word (MFVA) Gabrielites Heralds of Good News (HGN) Holy Cross (CSC) Holy Ghost Fathers (CSSp) Josephites (SSJ) Legionaries of Christ (LC) Little Brothers of Jesus Marians of the Immaculate Conception (MIC) Society of Jesus (Jesuits) (SJ) Society of Mary (Marianists) (SM) Society of Mary (Marists) (SM) Society of the Divine Word (SVD) Society of Saint Edmund (SSE) Marist Brothers (FMS) Mechitarists (CAM) Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus (MCCI) Missionaries of La Salette (MS) Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales (MSFS) Missionaries of the Poor (MOP) Missionaries of the Sacred Heart (MSC) Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Oblates of Mary Immaculate (OMI) Oblates of the Virgin Mary (OMV) Oblates of St. Francis de Sales (OSFS) Order of Friars Minor (OFM) Passionists (CP) Pauline Fathers (OSPPE) Redemptorists (CSsR) Rogationists of the Heart of Jesus (RCJ) Sacred Heart Brothers Salesians (SDB) Servants of Jesus and Mary (SJM) Sons of the Most Holy Redeemer (FSSR) Stigmatines (CSS) Xaverian Brothers (CFX) Female Adorers of the Blood of Christ (ASC) Apostolic Carmel (AC) Basilian Aleppian Sisters Basilian Chouerite Sisters Brigidines Congregation of the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary (CSIC) Carmelite Sisters of Saint Teresa (CSST) Congregation of the Franciscan Hospitaller Sisters of the Immaculate Conception (FHIC) Daughters of Divine Love Daughters of Mary of the Immaculate Conception (DM) Daughters of the Holy Heart of Mary Faithful Companions of Jesus Felicians (CSSF) Filippini Sisters (MPF) Handmaids of the Heart of Jesus Handmaids of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Hijas de Jesús Holy Spirit Adoration Sisters Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary Little Sisters Disciples of the Lamb Little Sisters of Jesus Little Sisters of the Poor Living the Gospel Community (LGC) Lovers of the Holy Cross Marianites of Holy Cross (MSC) Maryknoll Sisters (MM) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God (SMIC) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (ICM) Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (MSC) Oblate Sisters of Providence (OSP) Oblates of Jesus the Priest Oblate Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Fatima (OMVF) Order of Our Lady of Charity (ODNC) Order of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary Poor Clares (OSC) Poor Clare Missionaries of the Blessed Sacrament (MC) Religious of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (RSCJ) Religious of the Virgin Mary (RVM) Servants of St. Joseph (SSJ) Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Sisters of Charity Sisters of Maria Bambina (SCCG) Sisters of Christian Doctrine of Nancy (DC) Sisters of the Cross and Passion Sisters of the Destitute (SD) Sisters of the Good Shepherd (RGS) Sisters of Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Family-Louisiana Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters of Life (SV) Sisters of Mercy (RSM) Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur (SNDdeN) Sisters of Providence of Saint Mary-of-the-Woods Sisters of the Sacred Heart Sisters of Saint Francis Sisters of Saint Joseph The Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart (RSJ) Sisters of St. Paul of Chartres (SPC) Society of the Helpers of the Holy Souls Sisters of Social Service (sss) Servants of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Ursulines (OSU) White Sisters See also: Third orders of Catholic laity Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Portugal Norway Argentina Sweden Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mlzfm
Cached time: 20250818015518
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.142 seconds
Real time usage: 2.512 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20636/1000000
Revision size: 101999/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 446172/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 36508/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 23/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 292766/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.263/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18107689/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1999.818      1 -total
 19.95%  398.885      2 Template:Reflist
 14.31%  286.117     36 Template:Cite_web
 11.38%  227.655     76 Template:Sfn
 11.23%  224.628      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 10.56%  211.200     33 Template:Fix
 10.56%  211.195      1 Template:Infobox
  8.73%  174.509     28 Template:Cite_book
  8.23%  164.660     33 Template:Lang
  7.75%  154.940     20 Template:Cn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8973:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818015518 and revision id 1300657337. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dominican_Order&oldid=1300657337 " Categories : Dominican Order 1216 establishments in Europe Catholic orders and societies Catholic religious orders established in the 13th century Christian religious orders established in the 13th century Dominican spirituality Inquisition Religious organizations established in the 1210s Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Source attribution CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2021 Articles containing French-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from March 2023 All articles needing additional references All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from September 2023 Articles needing additional references from April 2025 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dominican Order 74 languages Add topic

