Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding 1.2 20th century 1.3 21st century 2 Popular culture Toggle Popular culture subsection 2.1 Films 2.2 Television 3 Reception and influence 4 Notes 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Commentary (magazine) 12 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano עברית Magyar Português Română Русский Simple English Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American magazine Commentary Cover of November 2021 issue Editor John Podhoretz Frequency 11 issues / year (monthly, but with a combined July–August issue) Circulation 26,000 (2017) [ 1 ] First issue 1945 ; 80 years ago ( 1945 ) Company Commentary Inc.

Country United States Based in New York City , New York , U.S.

Language English Website commentary.org ISSN 0010-2601 OCLC 488561243 Commentary is a monthly American magazine on religion, Judaism , Israel and politics, as well as social and cultural issues. It is currently headed by John Podhoretz . Founded by the American Jewish Committee in 1945 under Elliot E. Cohen , editor from 1945 to 1959, Commentary magazine developed into the leading post- World War II journal of Jewish affairs. The periodical strove to construct a new American Jewish identity while processing the events of the Holocaust , the formation of the State of Israel , and the Cold War .

Norman Podhoretz edited the magazine from 1960 to 1995.

Besides its coverage of cultural issues, Commentary provided a voice for the anti-Stalinist left . As Podhoretz shifted from his original ideological beliefs as a liberal Democrat to neoconservatism in the 1970s and 1980s, he moved the magazine with him to the right and toward the Republican Party .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Founding [ edit ] Commentary was the successor to the Contemporary Jewish Record , which was published by the American Jewish Committee (AJC) and ran from 1938 to 1945, [ 3 ] when its editor, AJC executive secretary Morris Waldman , retired.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] 20th century [ edit ] In 1944, with the Record ' s editor retiring, the AJC consulted with New York City intellectuals including Daniel Bell and Lionel Trilling , who recommended that AJC hire Elliot Cohen , who had been the editor of a Jewish cultural magazine and was then a fundraiser, to start a new journal. Cohen designed Commentary to reconnect assimilated Jews and Jewish intellectuals with the broader, more traditional, and very liberal Jewish community.

[ citation needed ] At the same time, the magazine was designed to bring ideas of the young Jewish New York intellectuals to a wider audience. It demonstrated that Jewish intellectuals, and by extension all American Jews, had turned away from their past political radicalism to embrace mainstream U.S. culture and values. Cohen stated his grand design in the first issue: [ 6 ] With Europe devastated, there falls upon us here in the United States a far greater share of the responsibility for carrying forward, in a creative way, our common Jewish cultural and spiritual heritage...to harmonize heritage and country into a true sense of at-home-ness.

Although many or even most of the editors and writers had been socialists , Trotskyites , or Stalinists in the past, that was no longer tolerated.

Commentary articles were anti- Communist and also anti- McCarthyite ; it identified and attacked any perceived weakness among liberals on Cold War issues, backing President Harry Truman 's policies such as the Truman Doctrine , the Marshall Plan , and NATO . The "soft-on-Communism" position of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) and Henry A. Wallace came under steady attack.

[ citation needed ] Liberals who hated Joseph McCarthy were annoyed when Irving Kristol wrote at the height of the controversy that "there is one thing that the American people know about Senator McCarthy: he, like them, is unequivocally anti-Communist. About the spokesmen for American liberalism, they feel they know no such thing." [ 7 ] In the late 1950s, the magazine quality sagged, as Cohen suffered from mental illness and committed suicide .

A protégé of Lionel Trilling , Norman Podhoretz took over in 1960, running the magazine with an iron hand until his retirement in 1995.

[ 8 ] Podhoretz said, Commentary was founded to lead the Jewish intellectuals "out of the desert of alienation...and into the promised land of democratic, pluralistic, and prosperous America".

[ 6 ] Cohen brought on board strong editors who themselves wrote important essays, including Irving Kristol ; art critic Clement Greenberg ; film and cultural critic Robert Warshow ; and sociologist Nathan Glazer .

Commentary published Hannah Arendt , Daniel Bell , Sidney Hook , and Irving Howe .

[ 9 ] The emergence of the New Left , which was bitterly hostile to Johnson, to capitalism and to universities, angered Podhoretz for what he perceived as its shallowness and hostility to Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War . Articles attacked the New Left on questions ranging from crime, the nature of art, drugs, poverty, to the new egalitarianism; Commentary said that the New Left was a dangerous anti-American, anti-liberal, and anti-Semitic force.

Daniel Patrick Moynihan used Commentary to attack the Watts riots and liberals who defended it as a just revolution.

[ 10 ] 21st century [ edit ] In 2007, the magazine ended its affiliation with AJC when Commentary, Inc., an independent 501(c)(3) non-profit enterprise, took over as publisher.

[ 11 ] In 2011, the journal donated its archives from 1945 to 1995 to the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas at Austin . These included letters and essay revisions.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Popular culture [ edit ] Films [ edit ] Commentary has been referred to in three Woody Allen films: In 1971, in Bananas , as an old lady is threatened on a subway car, Allen hides his face by holding up an issue of Commentary in an image now featured at the New York Transit Museum in Brooklyn Heights .

In 1977, in Annie Hall , Allen, as character Alvy Singer, makes a pun by saying that he heard that Dissent and Commentary had merged to form " Dysentery .

" In 1989, in Crimes and Misdemeanors , an issue of Commentary lies on a character's bedside table.

Television [ edit ] Between 1989 and 1992, in the ABC sitcom Anything but Love , stand-up comedian Richard Lewis was often shown holding or reading a copy of Commentary .

Reception and influence [ edit ] American-Israeli journalist Benjamin Balint and former editor at Commentary described the magazine as the "contentious magazine that transformed the Jewish left into the neoconservative right".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Historian and literary critic Richard Pells said that "no other journal of the past half century has been so consistently influential, or so central to the major debates that have transformed the political and intellectual life of the United States." [ 16 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Frank, T.A. (January 25, 2018).

"Why conservative magazines are more important than ever" .

Washington Post . Retrieved September 5, 2020 .

^ Abrams, Nathan (2009). "Introduction".

Norman Podhoretz and Commentary magazine: the rise and fall of the neocons . Continuum.

^ Abraham Moses Klein (2011).

The Letters: The Letters . University of Toronto Press. p. 356.

ISBN 978-1-4426-4107-5 .

^ "Guide to the Records of the American Jewish Committee Executive Offices (EXO-29), Morris Waldman (1879-1963). Files 1905-1963, RG 347.1.29" .

yivoarchives.org . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ "EBSCO Locate" .

drew.locate.ebsco.com . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ a b Ehrman, John (June 1, 1999) "Commentary, the Public Interest, and the Problem of Jewish Conservatism" , American Jewish History ^ Pells, Richard H. (1989).

The liberal mind in a conservative age: American intellectuals in the 1940s . Wesleyan University Press. p. 296.

^ Thomas L. Jeffers, Norman Podhoretz: A Biography (2010) pp. 20, 62, 129, 145 ^ Yair Rosenberg (June 6, 2014).

"Commentary Opens its Archives" .

Tablet Magazine . Retrieved February 15, 2019 .

^ Sam Tanenhaus (September 1, 2009).

The Death of Conservatism . Random House Publishing Group. p.

72 .

ISBN 9781588369482 . Retrieved October 18, 2013 .

^ "Commentary, American Jewish Committee Separate" .

The New York Sun .

^ Cohen, Patricia (September 19, 2011).

"Commentary Magazine Archive Given to University of Texas" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 27, 2011.

^ See announcement Archived August 23, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ Balint, Benjamin (2010).

Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine That Transformed the Jewish Left Into the Neoconservative Right . PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1586487492 .

^ Patricia Cohen (June 11, 2010).

"Commentary Is All About Commentary These Days" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 14, 2019 .

^ Quoted from Murray Friedman (ed.): Commentary in American Life , Philadelphia 2005, p.1, Temple University Press.

References [ edit ] Podhoretz, Norman.

Breaking Ranks (1979), memoir Nathan Glazer, Thomas L. Jeffers, Richard Gid Powers, Fred Siegel, Terry Teachout, Ruth R. Wisse et al. in Commentary in American Life , ed. Murray Friedman. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2005 Bibliography [ edit ] Balint, Benjamin.

Running Commentary: The Contentious Magazine That Transformed the Jewish Left Into the Neoconservative Right (PublicAffairs; 2010) 290 pages Ehrman, John. " Commentary , the Public Interest , and the Problem of Jewish Conservatism", American Jewish History 87.2&3 (1999) 159–181. online in Project MUSE , scholarly article by conservative historian Franczak, Michael. "Losing the Battle, Winning the War: Neoconservatives versus the New International Economic Order, 1974–82," Diplomatic History, Volume 43, Issue 5, November 2019, Pages 867–889, Losing the Battle, Winning the War: Neoconservatives versus the New International Economic Order, 1974–82 .

Jeffers, Thomas L.

Norman Podhoretz: A Biography (Cambridge University Press, 2010) Further reading [ edit ] Weekly Standard article on Commentary The New York Sun article on who attends the annual Commentary -hosted gathering More bio bits on Cohen and Commentary history Vallentine Mitchell Publishers Forthcoming Titles Nathan Abrams, Commentary Magazine 1945–1959: 'A Journal of Significant Thought and Opinion . Bio on Cohen and Commentary' s early history] External links [ edit ] Official website "Commentary Magazine: An Inventory of Its Records" at the Harry Ransom Center v t e American Jewish Committee Presidents Mayer Sulzberger (1906–1912) Louis B. Marshall (1912–1929) Cyrus Adler (1929–1940) Sol M. Stroock (1941) Maurice Wertheim (1941–1943) Joseph M. Proskauer (1943–1949) Jacob Blaustein (1949–1954) Herbert B. Ehrmann (1959–1961) Morris B. Abram (1964–1968) Arthur J. Goldberg (1968–1969) Philip E. Hoffman (1969–1973) Elmer L. Winter (1973–1977) Maynard I. Wishner (1980–1983) Alfred H. Moses (1991–1994) Harold Tanner (2001–2004) Michael L. Tichnor (2022–) CEOs David Harris (1990–2022) Ted Deutch (2022–present) Other key people Elliot E. Cohen Felice D. Gaer Jerry Goodman Max Horkheimer Avital Leibovich Nathan Perlmutter Norman Podhoretz A. James Rudin Jacob Schiff Harry Schneiderman Kenneth S. Stern Marc H. Tanenbaum Institutions Atlanta Jewish Film Festival Muslim-Jewish Advisory Council Project Interchange Transatlantic Institute Publications American Jewish Year Book (1908–2008) The Authoritarian Personality (1950) Commentary (1945–2007) Present Tense (1973–1990) " Progressive Jewish Thought and the New Anti-Semitism " (2006) v t e New York Intellectuals Associated people Daniel Bell Elliot E. Cohen Midge Decter Paul Goodman Irving Howe Alfred Kazin Irving Kristol Mary McCarthy Dwight Macdonald William Phillips Philip Rahv Harold Rosenberg Isaac Rosenfeld Delmore Schwartz Diana Trilling Lionel Trilling Robert Warshow Major publications Partisan Review (1934–2003) Commentary (1945–) The Oasis (1949) The Liberal Imagination (1950) Encounter (1953–1991) Dissent (1954–) The Public Interest (1965–2005) Works about The New York Intellectuals (1987 book) Related Anti-Stalinist left Neoconservatism v t e Jews and Judaism in the United States Major communal organizations B'nai B'rith Jewish Community Centers Jewish Federations of North America Local Jewish Federations Major advocacy organizations (not exclusively Israel-focused) American Jewish Committee American Jewish Congress Anti-Defamation League Conference of Presidents Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law (LDB) Religious Action Center Jewish Community Relations Councils (JCRCs) Jewish Council for Public Affairs Jewish environmental groups Jewish Future Pledge Jewish Institute for National Security of America (JINSA) Jewish Women's Archive National Jewish Democratic Council Republican Jewish Coalition Office of the Special Envoy to Monitor and Combat Antisemitism White House Jewish Liaison Jewish Labor Committee Jewish Democratic Council of America Major humanitarian organizations American Jewish World Service Joint Distribution Committee Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society United Israel Appeal Major Israel-focused organizations American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) Birthright Israel Hadassah Israeli-American Council J Street Jewish Voice for Peace IfNotNow Masa Israel Journey Middle East Media Research Institute Nefesh B'Nefesh New Israel Fund New Jewish Narrative Tzofim Friendship Caravan Zionist Organization of America Major domestic and neighborhood assistance organizations Chaverim Hatzalah Secure Community Network Shomrim Tomchei Shabbos Major religious movement organizations (and associated rabbinical membership and policy body; seminary) Agudath Israel of America ( Moetzes Gedolei HaTorah ; etc.) Agudas Chasidei Chabad ( Vaad Rabonei Lubavitch ; Tomchei Tmimim-U.S.

, RCA , etc.) Jewish Reconstructionist Federation ( Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association ; RRC ) Young Israel Orthodox Union ( Rabbinical Council of America ; RIETS-YU , etc.) Society for Humanistic Judaism United Synagogue of Conservative Judaism ( Rabbinical Assembly ; JTSA / AJU-Ziegler ) Union for Reform Judaism ( Central Conference of American Rabbis ; HUC ) List of synagogues (by movements) by US states Former Conservative Humanistic Orthodox and Modern Orthodox Reconstructionist Reform Unaffiliated Youth organizations Jewish summer camp B'nai B'rith Youth Organization (BBYO) ( AZA / BBG ) Bnei Akiva NCSY North American Federation of Temple Youth (NFTY) Tzivos Hashem United Synagogue Youth (USY) / Kadima Young Judaea Education College Jewish studies programs Hebrew school Jewish day school See template for schools Schechter Torah Umesorah Yeshiva / Mesivta Major university groups Organizations Chabad on Campus Hillel Masorti on Campus World Union of Jewish Students (WUJS) Fraternities and sororities Alpha Epsilon Pi Alpha Epsilon Phi Sigma Alpha Epsilon Pi Sigma Alpha Mu Sigma Delta Tau Tau Delta Phi Tau Epsilon Phi Zeta Beta Tau Media News wires Jewish Telegraphic Agency Jewish News Syndicate News outlets Algemeiner Journal Baltimore Jewish Times Charlotte Jewish News Cleveland Jewish News Der Blatt Der Yid Di Tzeitung Hamodia The Forward The Jewish Exponent (Phila.) The Jewish Journal (L.A.) The Jewish Ledger (Conn.) Jewish News of Greater Phoenix The Jewish Press Jewish Standard (N.J.) The Jewish Star (N.Y.) Jewish Voice JWeekly (S.F.) New York Jewish Week New Jersey Jewish News Pittsburgh Jewish Chronicle St. Louis Jewish Light Washington Jewish Week Yated Ne'eman VIN News Yeshiva World News Magazines Ami Binah Commentary Emunah Magazine Jewish Currents Jewish World Review Kindline Lilith Mishpacha Moment San Diego Jewish Journal San Diego Jewish World SAPIR Tablet We Are in America Television Jewish Broadcasting Service Jewish Life Television (JLTV) National Jewish Television The Jewish Channel Websites AskMoses.com Chabad.org Heeb Jewcy Jewish Virtual Library Kosher.com Mosaic Tablet Magazine Yeshiva.co Dating JDate JSwipe Lox Club Matzo Ball SawYouAtSinai Major communal activities Siyum HaShas Super Sunday phone-a-thon Category v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commentary_(magazine)&oldid=1282212582 " Categories : 1945 establishments in New York (state) American Jewish Committee Conservative magazines published in the United States Jewish magazines published in New York City Magazines established in 1945 Neoconservatism Political magazines published in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 01:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commentary (magazine) 12 languages Add topic

