Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Degrees and programs Toggle Degrees and programs subsection 2.1 Undergraduate 2.2 Graduate 3 In popular culture 4 Notable faculty 5 Notable alumni 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Siebel School of Computing and Data Science Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign ) Siebel School of Computing and Data Science Siebel Center building Former name Department of Computer Science (1964–2024) Type Public Established 1964 (1949 as the Digital Computer Laboratory) Dean Nancy M. Amato [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Address 201 North Goodwin Avenue , Urbana , Illinois , USA Website siebelschool .illinois .edu The Siebel School of Computing and Data Science (formerly known as the Department of Computer Science from 1964 to 2024) is a department-level school within the Grainger College of Engineering at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign .

History [ edit ] In 1949, the University of Illinois created the Digital Computer Laboratory following the joint funding between the university and the U.S. Army to create the ORDVAC and ILLIAC I computers under the direction of physicist Ralph Meagher.

[ 3 ] The ORDVAC and ILLIAC computers the two earliest von-Neumann architecture machines to be constructed. Once completed in 1952, the ILLIAC I inspired machines such as the MISTIC , MUSASINO-1 , SILLIAC , and CYCLONE , as well as providing the impetus for the university to continue its research in computing through the ILLIAC II project. Yet despite such advances in high-performance computing, faculty at the Digital Computer Laboratory continued to conduct research in other fields of computing as well, such as in Human-Computer Interaction through the PLATO project, the first computer music (the ILLIAC Suite ), computational numerical methods through the work of Donald B. Gillies , and James E. Robertson , the 'R' co-inventor of the SRT division algorithm , to name a few.

[ 4 ] Given this explosion in research in computing, in 1964, the University of Illinois reorganized the Digital Computer Laboratory into the Department of Computer Science , and by 1967, the department awarded its first PhD and master's degrees in Computer Science. In 1982, UIUC physicist Larry Smarr wrote a blistering critique of America's supercomputing resources, [ 5 ] and as a result the National Science Foundation established the National Center for Supercomputing Applications in 1985. NCSA was one of the first places in industry or academia to develop software for the 3 major operating systems at the time – Macintosh, PC, and UNIX. NCSA in 1986 released NCSA Telnet and in 1993 it released the Mosaic web browser. In 2004, the Department of Computer Science moved out of the Digital Computer Laboratory building into the Thomas M. Siebel Center for Computer Science following a gift from alumnus Thomas Siebel .

[ 4 ] The Department of Computer Science was renamed the Siebel School of Computing and Data Science in 2024, following a $50 million gift from Thomas M. Siebel .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Degrees and programs [ edit ] Undergraduate [ edit ] The department offers 14 undergraduate degree programs, all leading to Bachelor of Science degrees, through six different colleges: Computer Science ( Engineering ) Computer Science and Physics ( Engineering ) Mathematics and Computer Science ( Liberal Arts and Science ) Statistics and Computer Science ( LAS ) Computer Science and Chemistry ( LAS ) Computer Science and Linguistics ( LAS ) Computer Science and Anthropology ( LAS ) Computer Science and Astronomy ( LAS ) Computer Science and Economics ( LAS ) Computer Science and Geography and Geographic Information Systems ( LAS ) Computer Science and Advertising ( Media ) Computer Science and Philosophy ( LAS ) Computer Science and Animal Sciences ( Agricultural, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences ) Computer Science and Crop Sciences ( Agricultural, Consumer, and Environmental Sciences ) Computer Science and Music ( Fine and Applied Arts ) The department also sponsors a minor in computer science available to all UIUC students.

The department also offers two 5-year bachelors/masters programs through the College of Engineering: Bachelor of Science/Master of Science (B.S./M.S.) in Computer Science and Bachelors of Science/Masters of Computer Science(B.S./M.C.S.).

Graduate [ edit ] Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) Master of Science (M.S.) in Computer Science Professional Masters of Computer Science (M.C.S.) Online MCS is offered in partnership with Coursera .

MCS in Data Science (MCS-DS) Track is offered in partnership with the School of Information Science , the Department of Statistics , and Coursera Master of Science in Bioinformatics (M.S. Bioinformatics) In popular culture [ edit ] In the 1968 film 2001: A Space Odyssey , the antagonist and sentient computer HAL 9000 says it was made operational at the HAL Plant in Urbana, Illinois which was meant to represent the Coordinated Science Laboratory where the ILLIAC project was conducted.

[ 8 ] Notable faculty [ edit ] Sarita Adve ,  principal investigator for the Universal Parallel Computing Research Center Vikram Adve , helped to create LLVM along with Chris Lattner , Former Interim Head of the Department of Computer Science [ 9 ] Gul Agha , director of the Open Systems Laboratory and researcher in concurrent computation Prith Banerjee , former senior Vice President of Research at Hewlett Packard and director of HP Labs Roy H. Campbell , Sohaib and Sara Abbasi Professor of Computer Science Timothy M. Chan , Founder Professor of Computer Science Herbert Edelsbrunner , recipient of the National Science Foundation 's Alan T. Waterman Award David Forsyth , Professor of Computer Science C. William Gear , mathematician specialized in numerical analysis , computer graphics , and software development Donald B. Gillies , mathematician and computer scientist specialized in game theory and computer architecture Bill Gropp , Thomas M. Siebel Chair Professor, director of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications , and co-creator of Message Passing Interface , IEEE Computer Society President-Elect [ 10 ] (2021) Jiawei Han , Abel Bliss Professor specialized in data mining Michael Heath , director of the Center for the Simulation of Advanced Rockets and former interim department head (2007–2009) Thomas Huang , researcher and professor emeritus specialized in Human-Computer Interaction Ralph Johnson , Research Associate Professor and co-author of Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software David Kuck , sole software designer on the ILLIAC IV and developer of the CEDAR project Steven M. LaValle , principal scientist at Oculus Rift Chung Laung Liu , Professor of Computer Science Ursula Martin , computer scientist specialized in theoretical computer science and formal methods and a Commander of the Order of the British Empire Bruce McCormick , professor of physics, computer science, and bioengineering Klara Nahrstedt , Ralph and Catherine Fisher Professor of Computer Science and director of the Coordinated Science Laboratory David Plaisted , faculty at the Department of Computer Science until professorship at UNC-Chapel Hill Daniel Reed , former department head (1996–2001) and former director of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications (2000–2003) Edward Reingold , specialized in algorithms and data structures Dan Roth , Professor of Computer Science Rob A. Rutenbar , Abel Bliss Professor and former department head (2010–2017), [ 11 ] noted for advances in computer hardware Marc Snir , Michael Faiman and Saburo Muroga Professor of Computer Science and former department head (2001–2007) Shang-Hua Teng , Professor of Computer Science and Gödel Prize laureate Josep Torrellas , Willett Faculty Scholar in Computer Science and research faculty for the Universal Parallel Computing Research Center Marianne Winslett , professor emerita of computer science Stephen Wolfram , former Professor of Physics, Mathematics, and Computer Science and founder of Wolfram Research Frances Yao , Professor of Computer Science and staff at Xerox Palo Alto Research Center Yuanyuan Zhou , Professor of Computer Science and founder of Emphora , Pattern Insight , and Whova Notable alumni [ edit ] Sohaib Abbasi B.S. 1978, M.S. 1980, former CEO of Informatica Nancy Amato Ph.D. 1995, Unocal Professor in the Department of Computer Science and Engineering at Texas A&M University , steering member of CRA-W , and current head of the Department of Computer Science, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Daniel E. Atkins III Ph.D. 1970, Inaugural Director of the Office of Cyberinfrastructure for the U.S. National Science Foundation.

Marc Andreessen B.S. 1993, Mosaic (web browser) , Netscape Eric Bina M.S. 1988, Mosaic (web browser) , Netscape Ed Boon B.S., Mortal Kombat Rick Cattell B.S. 1974, co-founder of Object Data Management Group , ACM Fellow , winner of the 1978 ACM Doctoral Dissertation Award Steve Chen B.S. 2002, YouTube Steve S. Chen Ph.D. 1975, Cray Computer Edward Davidson Ph.D. 1968, professor emeritus in Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at the University of Michigan , Ann Arbor Steve Dorner B.S. 1983, Eudora (email client) Brendan Eich M.S. 1986, JavaScript , Mozilla Clarence Ellis Ph.D. 1969, First African-American Computer Science Doctorate recipient and pioneer in Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Groupware Ping Fu M.S. 1990, Geomagic Mary Jane Irwin M.S. 1971, PhD. 1975, NAE member; computer architecture researcher Jawed Karim B.S. 2004, YouTube Robert L. Mercer M.S. 1970, Ph.D. 1972, co-CEO of Renaissance Technologies and pioneer in Computational Linguistics Marcin Kleczynski B.S. 2012, CEO and founder of Malwarebytes Pete Koomen M.S. 2006, co-founder and CTO of Optimizely Chris Lattner Ph.D. 2005, LLVM Der-Tsai Lee M.S. 1976, Ph.D. 1978, 14th President of National Chung Hsing University Max Levchin B.S. 1997, PayPal , Slide Nimit Maru B.S. 2004, co-founder and CEO of Fullstack Academy Robert McCool , B.S. 1995, author of the original NCSA HTTPd web server and the Common Gateway Interface (CGI) Mary T. McDowell B.S. 1986, former CEO of Polycom , former executive vice president at Nokia Peng T. Ong M.S. 1988, co-founder of Match.com Ray Ozzie B.S. 1979, Lotus Notes , Groove Networks , and former CTO and Chief Software Architect at Microsoft .

Anna Patterson Ph.D. 1998, Vice President of Engineering, Artificial Intelligence at Google and co-founder of Cuil Linda Petzold B.S. 1974, Ph.D. 1978, Professor of Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering at UC Santa Barbara , NAE member, and J. H. Wilkinson Prize for Numerical Software recipient; computational science and engineering researcher Fontaine Richardson Ph.D. 1968, founder of Applicon Thomas Siebel M.S. 1985, founder, chairman, and CEO of Siebel Systems ; founder, chairman, and CEO of C3.ai Russel Simmons B.S. 1998, co-founder and initial CTO of Yelp, Inc and a member of the PayPal Mafia Anil Singhal M.C.S. 1979, co-founder and CEO of NetScout Systems James E. Smith M.S. 1974, Ph.D. 1976, winner of the 1999 Eckert–Mauchly Award Jeremy Stoppleman B.S. 1999, co-founder and CEO of Yelp, Inc .

Parisa Tabriz B.S. 2005, M.S. 2007, computer security expert at Google and Forbes 2012 "Top 30 People Under 30 To Watch in the Technology Industry" Mark Tebbe B.S. 1983, Adjunct Professor of Entrepreneurship at Booth School of Business at the University of Chicago and co-founder of Answers Corporation Andrew Yao Ph.D. 1975, Turing Award winner, theoretical computer science researcher See also [ edit ] Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology Grainger College of Engineering References [ edit ] ^ a b "Nancy Amato Named Next Department Head of Computer Science" . Retrieved 13 Jul 2018 .

^ a b "Robotics expert to be first woman to lead UI computer-science department" . 12 July 2018 . Retrieved 13 Jul 2018 .

^ "CS History Timeline | Department of Computer Science at Illinois" . Archived from the original on 29 December 2015 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 .

^ a b "About the Siebel Center | Department of Computer Science at Illinois" . Archived from the original on 28 May 2016 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 .

^ Smarr, Larry (1982). P. D. Lax (ed.). "The supercomputer famine in american universities".

The Report of the Panel on Large Scale Computing in Science and Engineering .

^ Communications, Grainger Engineering Office of Marketing and.

"Siebel School of Computing and Data Science FAQ" .

siebelschool.illinois.edu . Retrieved 2025-04-14 .

^ "University of Illinois to Revamp Computer Science Department" .

GovTech . 2024-04-26 . Retrieved 2025-04-14 .

^ Alfred, Randy (January 12, 2011).

"HAL of a Computer" .

Wired . Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 .

^ "Vikram Adve named Interim Head of CS @ Illinois" . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

^ "William D. Gropp Voted IEEE Computer Society 2021 President-Elect | IEEE Computer Society" . 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 2021-07-06 .

^ "Head of UI's computer-science department leaving for Pitt" . 11 April 2017 . Retrieved 27 May 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Located in : Urbana and Champaign, Illinois Schools Agricultural Applied Health Sciences Medicine Education Fine Arts Architecture Business Engineering Computing Labor Law Liberal Information Media Social Work Veterinary Research Library Rare Book Advanced Science Genomic Biology International Business Advanced Rockets Coordinated Science Newspaper Project Information Trust Computing in the Humanities Condensed Matter Theory International Library Supercomputing Applications Prairie Regional Economics American Music State Farm Athletics NCAA Illinois Fighting Illini Baseball Football Men's basketball Men's golf Men's gymnastics Men's tennis Softball Women's basketball Women's volleyball Track and field Club Men's ice hockey Men's volleyball Rowing Wheelchair basketball Facilities Activities and Recreation Center Atkins Tennis Center Campus Recreation Center – East Freer Hall Huff Hall Ice Arena Illinois Field Kenney Gym and Kenney Gym Annex Memorial Stadium State Farm Center Rivalries Braggin' Rights Missouri Northwestern Ohio State Purdue Spirit Chief Illiniwek Songs (" Hail to the Orange ," " Illinois Loyalty ," " Oskee Wow-Wow ") Orange Krush Students Groups Fraternities and sororities Dial-A-Carol Graduate Employees' Organization Illinois Business Consulting Illinois Solar Decathlon Marching Illini Media Fighting Illini Sports Network Illini Media The Daily Illini WPGU Illinois Public Media Journals Comparative Labor Law and Policy Journal Illinois Journal of Mathematics Ninth Letter University of Illinois Law Review Campus Historic Altgeld Hall ( Altgeld Chimes ) Busey–Evans Residence Halls Engineering Hall English Building Foellinger Auditorium Harker Hall Illini Union Lincoln Hall Main Library Natural History Building Noyes Laboratory of Chemistry Observatory Round barns Smith Memorial Hall Uni High School Buildings Business Instructional Facility Grainger Engineering Library Japan House Krannert Art Museum Krannert Center for the Performing Arts Newmark Civil Engineering Laboratory Siebel Center for Computer Science Spurlock Museum Others History Alma Mater sculpture Arboretum Boneyard Creek Conservatory and Plant Collection Engineering Campus McFarland Memorial Bell Tower Morrow Plots Residence halls Related Allerton Park Campustown Mount Laguna Observatory Research Park Willard Airport History 1960s slush fund scandal 2000s clout scandal Unofficial Saint Patrick's Day Chancellors of UIUC COVID-19 pandemic response Notable people Other Blue Waters Pinto Bean Public transit Stoesser Lecturer University of Illinois System Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Siebel_School_of_Computing_and_Data_Science&oldid=1300402261 " Categories : University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Computer science departments in the United States 1964 establishments in Illinois Computer science institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using infobox university Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Siebel School of Computing and Data Science Add languages Add topic

