Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Additional reading 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Vākyakaraṇa 1 language हिन्दी Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cover page of Vakyakarana Vākyakaraṇa is the source book of Vākyapañcāṅga which is a type of almanac popular among Tamil speaking people of South India.

[ 1 ] In Vākyapañcāṅga , the positions of the celestial entities and the timings of celestial events as obtained using the computational methods expounded in the text Vākyakaraṇa . These methods make use of astronomical tables compiled centuries ago. Each entry in such tables is in the form of a vākya , that is, a sentence in Sanskrit, and it represents some numerical value encoded using the kaṭapayādi scheme . Different sets of such vākya -s have been compiled for different celestial entities. One such set is Cāndrvākya -s which is a set of 247 values relating to the position of the Moon. The original set of Cāndrvākya -s are attributed to the legendary Kerala astronomer Vararuci . These were later revised by Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma , another legendary astronomer and mathematician from Kerala. Such collections of vākya -s have been compiled in respect the five planets Mercury, Mars, Venus, Jupiter and Saturn. It may be noted that these vākya -s themselves are not part of the Vākyakaraṇa .

The authorship of the work has not been fully established. However, internal evidences suggest that the author should be somebody hailing from Kanchi in the Tamil country. The date of composition has been determined as c.1282 CE.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Vākyakaraṇa has been commented upon by Sundararāja, a contemporary of Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājī (1444 – 1545)) the author of Tantrasamgraha .

Even though Vākyakaraṇa is the source book of Vākyapañcāṅga , almanac makers now do not use this work directly. They make use of later modern adaptions of the work like Jyotiṣa Gaṇita Śāstram by Mūnāmpaṇṇai Kṛṣṇa Jyosyar and Parahita Gaṇitaṃ by Swamy Ayyangar of Karayur.

[ 1 ] Contents [ edit ] Most of the manuscripts of Vākyakaraṇa are divided into five chapters. However, there is one manuscript that contains an additional sixth chapter and it is believed to a later interpolation. The first chapter is concerned with computations involving the positions of the Sun, the Moon and the Rāhu , the second chapter with the planets, the third chapter with problems involving time, position and direction, the fourth chapter with eclipses and the fifth chapter with the rising and setting of the Mahāpāta -s.

T. S. Kuppanna Sastri and K. V. Sarma have critically assessed the contents of the work thus: [ 1 ] "Being a Karaṇa intended for practical use, ease of computation is the aim, which means that too much accuracy cannot be expected in the work. The vākya -s are given to the nearest minute. The differences between the vākya -s  are so great that interpolation gives values several minutes off the correct values. The sines are given for 15 degree intervals and the declination of points on the ecliptic for five degree intervals. The methods of computing the circumstances of the eclipses and the Mahāpāta -s are rough and can only give results not very accurate." Additional reading [ edit ] The full text of Vākyakaraṇa with the Laghuprakāśikā commentary by Sundararāja critically edited with introduction, English translation and appendices by T. S. Kuppanna sastri and K. V. Sarma is available for free download in the Internet Archive. the appendices of the downloadable version contain the full set of vākya -s in respect of the Moon and the five planets.

T. S. Kuppanna Sastri and K. V. Sarma (1962).

Vakya Karana with the commentary Laghuprakasika by Sundararaja . Madras (Chennai): Kuppanna Sastri Research Institute . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

For a critical study of the contents of Vākyakaraṇa : K Chandra hari (2001).

"Vakyakarana - A study" .

Indian Journal History of Science .

36 (3): 127– 149 . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

See also [ edit ] Vākyapañcāṅga References [ edit ] ^ a b c d T. S. Kuppanna Sastri and K. V. Sarma (1962).

Vakya Karana with the commentary Laghuprakasika by Sundararaja . Madras (Chennai): Kuppanna Sastri Research Institute . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

^ K Chandra hari (2001).

"Vakyakarana - A study" .

Indian Journal History of Science .

36 (3): 127– 149 . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vākyakaraṇa&oldid=1263958858 " Categories : Hindu astronomy Astronomy books Hindu astrological texts Indian astronomy texts This page was last edited on 19 December 2024, at 16:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vākyakaraṇa 1 language Add topic

