Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criticism 3 In France 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Difference feminism 23 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Galego Hrvatski 日本語 پنجابی Português Русский سرائیکی سنڌي Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Opposition to equality feminism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Difference feminism is a term developed during the equality-versus-difference debate [ 1 ] in American feminism to describe the view that men and women are different, but that no value judgment can be placed upon them and both sexes have equal moral status as persons .

[ 2 ] Most strains of difference feminism did not argue that there was a biological, inherent, ahistorical, or otherwise "essential" link between womanhood and traditionally feminine values, habits of mind (often called "ways of knowing" [ 3 ] ), or personality traits.

[ 4 ] These feminists simply sought to recognize that, in the present, women and men are significantly different and to explore the devalued "feminine" characteristics.

[ 5 ] This variety of difference feminism is also called gender feminism .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] However, some forms of difference feminism – such as Mary Daly 's cultural feminism – argue that women and their values are superior to those of men.

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] There is ongoing debate about whether Daly's feminism is essentialist.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] The "difference" feminist view was developed in the 1980s, in part as a reaction to popular liberal feminism (also known as " equality feminism "), which emphasized the similarities between women and men in order to argue for equal treatment for women. Difference feminism, although it still aimed at equality between men and women, emphasized the differences between men and women and argued that identicality or sameness are not necessary in order for men and women, and masculine and feminine values, to be treated equally.

[ 10 ] Liberal feminism aimed to make society and law gender-neutral, since it saw recognition of gender difference as a barrier to rights and participation within liberal democracy, while difference feminism held that gender-neutrality harmed women "whether by impelling them to imitate men, by depriving society of their distinctive contributions, or by letting them participate in society only on terms that favor men".

[ 11 ] Difference feminism drew on earlier nineteenth-century strains of thought, for example the work of German writer Elise Oelsner , which held that not only should women be allowed into formerly male-only spheres and institutions (e.g. public life, science) but that those institutions should also be expected to change in a way that recognizes the value of traditionally devalued feminine ethics, like care. On the latter point, many feminists have re-read the phrase "difference feminism" in a way that asks "what difference does feminism make?" (e.g. to the practice of science) rather than "what differences are there between men and women"?

[ 3 ] In the 1990s, feminists addressed the binary logic of "difference" versus "equality" and moved on from it, notably with postmodern and/or deconstructionist approaches that either dismantled or did not depend on that dichotomy.

[ 1 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] Some have argued that the thought of certain prominent second-wave feminists, like psychologist Carol Gilligan and radical feminist theologian Mary Daly , is essentialist. In philosophy, essentialism is the belief that "(at least some) objects have (at least some) essential properties".

[ 14 ] In the case of sexual politics, essentialism is taken to mean that "women" and "men" have fixed essences or essential properties (e.g. behavioral or personality traits) that cannot be changed. However, essentialist interpretations of Daly and Gilligan have been questioned by some feminist scholars, who argue that charges of "essentialism" are often used more as terms of abuse than as theoretical critiques based on evidence, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] and do not accurately reflect Gilligan or Daly's views.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] In France [ edit ] Further information: French feminist theory Commonly labeled "French feminism", [ 18 ] the work of Hélène Cixous , Luce Irigaray and Julia Kristeva has been considered a form of difference feminism.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Their psychoanalytic approach to sexual difference perceived the search for equality as a phallocentric erasure of the specificities of the female body.

[ 18 ] Like the American differentialist authors, "French feminists are regularly accused of essentialism." [ 18 ] : 101 See also [ edit ] Complementarianism Cultural feminism Écriture féminine Equality feminism Ethics of care Radical feminism Neofeminism New feminism References [ edit ] ^ a b Scott, Joan (1988). "Deconstructing Equality-Versus-Difference: Or, the Uses of Post-structuralist Theory for Feminism".

Feminist Studies .

14 (1): 33– 50.

doi : 10.2307/3177997 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0014.104 .

JSTOR 3177997 .

^ "Carol Gilligan" .

Psychology's Feminist Voices . Archived from the original on 2020-02-22 . Retrieved 2017-05-10 .

^ a b Schiebinger, Londa (2000). "Has Feminism Changed Science?".

Signs .

25 (4): 1171– 1175.

doi : 10.1086/495540 .

PMID 17089478 .

S2CID 225088475 .

^ Grande Jensen, Pamela.

Finding a New Feminism: Rethinking the Woman Question for Liberal Democracy . p. 2 footnote 4.

^ a b Tandon, Neeru.

Feminism: A Paradigm Shift . p. 68.

^ Fowler, Robert Booth (1999).

Enduring Liberalism: American Political Thought Since the 1960s . University Press of Kansas. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-70-060974-1 .

^ Ford, Lynne E. (2008).

Encyclopedia of Women and American Politics . New York: Facts on File. p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-81-605491-6 .

^ a b Sandilands, Catriona (1999).

The Good-Natured Feminist Ecofeminism and the Quest for Democracy . pp. chapter 5: "Cyborgs and Queers".

^ Hoagland, Sarah Lucia; Frye, Marilyn, eds. (2000).

Feminist interpretations of Mary Daly . Re-reading the canon. University Park, Pa: Pennsylvania State University.

ISBN 978-0-271-02018-1 .

^ Voet, Rian (1998).

Feminism and Citizenship . SAGE Publications Ltd.

^ Grande Jensen, Pamela.

Finding a New Feminism: Rethinking the Woman Question for Liberal Democracy . p. 3.

^ Bock, Gisela; James, Susan (1992).

Beyond Equality and Difference . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415079891 .

^ Voet, Rian (1998).

Feminism and Citizenship . London: SAGE Publications Ltd.

ISBN 9781446228043 .

^ "Accidental vs Essential Properties" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

^ a b Heyes, Cressida J. (1997). "Anti-Essentialism in Practice: Carol Gilligan and Feminist Philosophy".

Hypatia .

13 (3): 142– 163.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1997.tb00009.x .

S2CID 143747304 .

^ Braidotti, Rosi (1992).

"Essentialism" in Feminism and Psychoanalysis: A Critical Dictionary .

^ Suhonen, Marja (2000).

"Toward Biophilic Be-ing: Mary Daly's Feminist Metaethics and the Question of Essentialism" in Feminist Interpretations of Mary Daly . Penn State University Press. p. 112.

^ a b c d Gambaudo, Sylvie A. (May 2007).

"French Feminism vs Anglo-American Feminism: A Reconstruction" .

European Journal of Women's Studies .

14 (2): 93– 108.

doi : 10.1177/1350506807075816 .

hdl : 2262/52030 .

ISSN 1350-5068 .

^ Valpione, Giulia (December 2022).

"Philosophy and its Institutions: Politics at the Heart of the Canon" .

Hegel Bulletin .

43 (3): 353– 370.

doi : 10.1017/hgl.2022.32 .

ISSN 2051-5367 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Difference_feminism&oldid=1294776970 " Categories : Feminist theory Feminism and spirituality Feminist movements and ideologies Comparisons Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 19:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Difference feminism 23 languages Add topic

