Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Coursework 2 Professional degrees Toggle Professional degrees subsection 2.1 Bachelor's degree 2.2 Master's degree 3 Programs and accreditation Toggle Programs and accreditation subsection 3.1 Canada 3.2 India 3.3 United Kingdom 3.4 United States 4 Rankings 5 Youth education Toggle Youth education subsection 5.1 1960s and 1970s 5.2 Since 2010 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Urban planning education 1 language বাংলা Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of urban planning education The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Urban planning education is a practice of teaching and learning urban theory, studies, and professional practices. The interaction between public officials, professional planners and the public involves a continuous education on planning process. Community members often serve on a city planning commission, council or board. As a result, education outreach is effectively an ongoing cycle. Formal education is offered as an academic degree in urban , city , rural , and/or regional planning, and more often awarded as a master's degree specifically accredited by an urban planning association in addition to the university's university-wide primary accreditation, although some universities offer bachelor's degrees and doctoral degrees also accredited in the same fashion; although most (but not all) bachelor's degrees in urban planning do not have the secondary-layer of urban planning association accreditation required for most positions, relying solely on the university's primary accreditation as a legitimate institution of higher education . At some universities, urban studies , also known as pre-urban planning, is the paraprofessional version of urban and regional planning education, mostly taken as a bachelor's degree prior to taking up post-graduate education in urban planning or as a master's or graduate certificate program for public administration professionals to get an understanding of public policy implications created by urban planning decisions or techniques.

Since planning programs are usually small, they tend not to be housed in distinct "planning schools" but rather, as part of an architecture school , a design school , a geography department, or a public policy school since these are cognate fields. Generally speaking, planning programs in architecture schools focus primarily on physical planning and design, while those in policy schools tend to focus on policy and administration. For instance, in Finland there is no separate degree program for "urban planning", but rather is considered as a specialty within the Finnish schools of architecture, and which students opt for towards the end of their studies and when choosing a diploma thesis, but officially graduating with a degree in architecture; and even post-graduate studies and doctoral theses in urban and regional planning are within the purview of architecture education.

[ 1 ] Coursework [ edit ] As urban planning is such a broad and interdisciplinary field, a typical planning degree program emphasizes breadth over depth, with core coursework that provides background for all areas of planning. Core courses typically include coursework in history , theory of urban planning, urban design , statistics , land use , planning law, zoning law , public policy and administration , urban economics , and planning practice. Many planning degree programs also allow a student to "concentrate" in a specific area of interest within planning, such as land use , environmental planning , housing , community development , economic development , historic preservation , international development , urban design , transportation planning , or geographic information systems (GIS). Some programs permit a student to concentrate in real estate , however, graduate real estate education has changed giving rise to specialized real estate programs.

Professional degrees [ edit ] The most common planning degree is at a graduate level (per Planetizen 's global program directory); [ 2 ] there is not one standard naming convention for the degree and each generally reflects the geographic focus of the specific program (e.g. regional, urban, city, and/or town planning). There are fewer bachelor's degree programs in urban planning. Research degrees are commonly only offered as part of a doctorate program. The United States has the highest concentration of programs in planning, followed by the United Kingdom, Australia, and Canada. However, there are also a growing number of offerings in countries including South Africa, Brazil, and India.

[ 2 ] Bachelor's degree [ edit ] An undergraduate academic degree is designed to train applicants in various aspects of designing, engineering, managing and resolving challenges related to urban human settlements. It is awarded for a course of study that lasts up to four years and contextual to modern challenges of urbanisation . It goes into the techniques and theories related to settlement design starting at the site planning level of a neighbourhood and moving up to the regional city planning context. Understanding relations between built forms and the citizens in cities and rural areas, and their implications on local environment, supporting utilities, transport networks, and physical infrastructure forms the core of the planning course. With an engineering orientation, the graduates emerging as urban planners are equipped with not only tools for rational comprehensive planning but also participatory and social development.

The degree may be awarded as a Bachelor of Arts in Geography with an emphasis in urban planning , Bachelor of Arts in Urban Planning, or Bachelor of Science in Urban and Regional Planning, among others. The distinction reflects university policies, or some universities may have greater course offerings in urban planning , design , sociology, or a related degree.

Master's degree [ edit ] The Master of Urban Planning (MUP) is a two-year academic/professional master's degree that qualifies graduates to work as urban planners . Some schools offer the degree as a Master of City Planning (MCP), Master of Community Planning, Master of Regional Planning (MRP), Master of Town Planning (MTP), Master of Planning (MPlan), Master of Environmental Planning (MEP) or in some combination of the aforementioned (e.g., Master of Urban and Regional Planning), depending on the program's specific focus. Some schools offer a Master of Arts or Master of Science in Planning. Regardless of the name, the degree remains generally the same.

A thesis, final project or capstone project is usually required to graduate. Additionally, an internship component is almost always mandatory due to the high value placed on work experience by prospective employers in the field.

Like most professional master's degree programs, the MUP is a terminal degree. However, some graduates choose to continue on to doctoral studies in urban planning or cognate fields. The Ph.D. is a research degree, as opposed to the professional MUP, and thus focuses on training planners to engage in scholarly activity directed towards providing greater insight into the discipline and underlying issues related to urban development.

Programs and accreditation [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] The primary body for accrediting educational institutions that offer urban planning programs in Canada is the Professional Standards Board for the Planning Profession in Canada (PSB). Established in 2012, the PSB is responsible for certification of urban planners across Canada and "administering accreditation reviews of university planning degree programs based on the accreditation program principles, policies and administrative arrangements".

[ 3 ] The PSB accredits programs that offer undergraduate and masters level degrees.

Canadian institutions may apply to the PSB for accreditation for a period of five years, following a successful initial accreditation.

[ 4 ] Programs are evaluated annually to ensure compliance with accreditation standards. For new programs, or after the five-year period has elapsed, an intensive review takes place that ensure programs meet criteria for accreditation. To be eligible for accreditation institutions must meet the following criteria: The university offering the program must be recognized by a province in Canada The degree must be in the field of planning as defined by the Canadian Institute of Planners :  “the scientific, aesthetic and orderly disposition of land resources, facilities and services with a view to securing the physical, economic and social efficiency, health and well-being of urban and rural communities.” Undergraduate degrees must be four years of full-time studies. Graduate degrees should require two years of full-time study.

The word “Planning” or the French equivalent must appear in the title of the degree or parenthetically to define the discipline.

The program offering the degree shall be a recognized administrative unit within the university, in the direct charge of an individual whose primary area of activity is planning and a department chair or similar.

The administrative unit must have appropriate administrative capacity and academic independence.

The faculty shall include at least four (4) academic members whose major appointments are in the planning program.

A program must have a minimum number of certified full-time members on faculty.

For a program with 7 or fewer faculty, at least three must be certified members of a PTIA; For a program with 8 or more full-time, at least four must be certified members of a PTIA.

Faculty members shall have educational and professional backgrounds appropriate for the program level, with a relevant mix of credentials (i.e. degrees in planning, significant experience in planning, PhDs in planning, degrees and experience in related fields).

The course must provide sufficient coverage of the functional and enabling competencies to allow students to enter the planning profession with a broad base of understanding of the profession and with the ability to continue to develop, gain knowledge, and specialize.

[ 4 ] Graduation from a PSB accredited program allows a graduate to apply for certification as a planner, and for candidate membership in their Provincial or Territorial Association. Following a two-year period of supervised work experience, candidates then write their professional exams. Upon successful completion of the exams, work experience, and a mentorship program, candidates are granted full certification as Register Professional Planner by their Provincial or Territorial Association and the Canadian Institute of Planners .

[ 5 ] The PSB also recognizes degrees conferred by institutions accredited by the American Planning Accreditation Board in the United States, and the Planning Institute of Australia as eligible for the certification process.

[ 6 ] Accredited programs School City Province/Territory Undergraduate [ 7 ] Since [ 8 ] Graduate [ 7 ] Since [ 8 ] Accreditation Through [ 7 ] Université de Montréal Montréal Quebec Baccalauréat Spécialisé en Urbanisme 1984 Maîtrise en Urbanisme 1968 2016 University of British Columbia Vancouver British Columbia Not Offered Master of Arts in Planning, Master of Science in Planning, and Master of Community and Regional Planning 1952 MA and Msc: 2016 MCRP: 2021 University of Guelph Guelph Ontario Not Offered Master of Science in Rural Planning and Development 1983 2022 McGill University Montreal Quebec Not Offered Master of Urban Planning 1974 2021 Université du Québec à Montréal Montreal Quebec Baccalauréat ès sciences spécialisé en urbanisme 1984 Not Offered 2016 Queen's University Kingston Ontario Not Offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning 1973 2021 Toronto Metropolitan University (formerly Ryerson University) Toronto Ontario Bachelor of Urban and Regional Planning, Post Degree Bachelor of Urban and Regional Planning, and Post Diploma Bachelor of Urban and Regional Planning 1973 Master of Urban & Regional Planning 2009 2019 University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon Saskatchewan Bachelor of Arts in Regional and Urban Planning 2009 Not Offered 2021 Simon Fraser University Burnaby British Columbia Not Offered Master of Resource Management (Planning) 2004 2021 University of Toronto Toronto Ontario Not Offered Master of Science in Planning 1963 2022 University of Waterloo Waterloo Ontario Bachelor of Environmental Studies in Planning, Co-Op 1968 Master of Arts in Planning, Master of Environmental Studies in Planning, and Master of Planning (MPlan) 1968 2019 York University Toronto Ontario Not Offered Masters in Environmental Studies (Planning) 1970 2022 University of Northern British Columbia Prince George British Columbia Bachelor of Planning 2005 Not Offered 2021 University of Manitoba Winnipeg Manitoba Not Offered Master of City Planning 1952 2020 Université Laval Quebec City Quebec Not Offered Maîtrise en aménagement du territoire et développement régional 1984 2016 Dalhousie University Halifax Nova Scotia Bachelor of Community Design with majors in; Environmental Planning, Urban Design and Planning, and Sustainability 2003 Master of Planning 2003 2021 University of Calgary Calgary Alberta Not Offered Master of Planning 2011 2022 Vancouver Island University Nanaimo British Columbia Not Offered Master of Community Planning 2015 2020 University of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Bachelor of Arts in Planning, and Bachelor of Science in Planning 2012 Master of Science in Urban and Regional Planning 2018 BA: 2021 Msc: 2023 (** candidate for accreditation) India [ edit ] Though planning is not a recognized profession under Indian law, the profession was started long back with School of Planning and Architecture in 1941 as a Department of Architecture of Delhi College of Engineering now the Delhi Technological University . It was later integrated with the School of Town and Country Planning which was established in 1955 by the Government of India to provide facilities for rural, urban and regional planning. On integration, the School was renamed as school of planning and architecture in 1959. Today it is one of the premier schools of pursuing planning studies at bachelor, masters and post doctorate levels.
The Institute of Town Planners, India set up on the lines of the [Royal Town Planning Institute, London] is the body representing planning professionals in India. A small group formed itself into an Indian Board of Town Planners which after three years of continuous work formed the Institute of Town Planners, India. The Institute which was established in July 1951, Today, has a membership of over 2,800, apart from a sizable number of student members, many of whom have qualified Associateship Examination (AITP) conducted by ITPI . Institutes under ITPI offers a 4-year undergraduate degree in Planning.

Accredited programs School Location Undergraduate Graduate The Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda vadodara, Gujarat not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning School of Planning & Architecture, Delhi (SPA-D) (Autonomous institution established by Ministry of Human Resource Development (India) ) New Delhi Bachelor of Planning Master of Planning School of Planning and Architecture, Vijayawada (SPA-V) (Autonomous institution established by Ministry of Human Resource Development (India) ) Vijayawada , AP Bachelor of Planning Master of Planning School of Planning and Architecture, Bhopal (SPA-B) (Autonomous institution established by Ministry of Human Resource Development (India) ) Bhopal, MP Bachelor of Planning Master of Planning School of Planning, Bhaikaka Centre for Human Settlements, APIED Vallabh Vidhyanagar, Anand, Gujarat not offered Master of Urban Planning Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal Bhopal, MP Bachelor of Planning Master of Urban Development & Planning Sardar Vallabhbhai National Institute of Technology, Surat Surat, Gujarat not offered Master of Technology in Urban Planning Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur Kharagpur, WB not offered Master of City Planning (MCP) Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee Roorkee, UK not offered Master of Urban & Rural Planning (MURP) College of Engineering, Pune (COEP) (Autonomous Institution established by Maharashtra State Government ((India)) Shivaji Nagar, Pune, MH B.Tech. (Planning) Master of Technology in Town and Country Planning Centre for Environmental Planning and Technology Ahmadabad, GJ Bachelor of Planning Master of Planning Guru Nanak Dev University Amritsar, PB Bachelor of Technology (Planning) Master of Urban Planning Anna University Chennai, TN not offered Master of Planning University of Mysore Mysore, KN not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning Bengal Engineering and Science University Howrah, WB not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur (Rajasthan) not offered Master of Planning College of Engineering, Thiruvananthapuram (Kerala) not offered M. Plan (Housing) Birla Institute of Technology Ranchi (MESRA), Jharkhand not offered Master of Urban Planning (Town Planning) Jawaharlal Nehru Technology University Hyderabad, AP Bachelor of Planning Master of Planning University Of Allahabad Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh PG Diploma in town country Planning Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology Nagpur, Maharashtra Not Offered Master of Technology in Urban Planning United Kingdom [ edit ] Planning is a complex issue in UK law, therefore there are several regulatory bodies that exist. The bulk of degrees are accredited by the Royal Town Planning Institute , often abbreviated to RTPI. Degrees accredited by this professional body are generally four years and are therefore master's degrees – the majority of these degrees are prefixed MPlan.

Some degrees, such as the University of Sheffield Planning School 's "MPlan Urban Studies and Planning" are accredited by both the RTPI and RICS – the Royal Institute for Chartered Surveyors.

[ 9 ] United States [ edit ] The Planning Accreditation Board is the sole accreditor of planning programs in the United States.

[ citation needed ] The Planning Accreditation Board (PAB) accredits graduate and undergraduate planning programs in the United States and Canada.

As of 1 January 2023 [update] , PAB accredits 16 undergraduate programs and 78 graduate programs at 82 North America Universities.

[ 7 ] Graduation from a PAB accredited program allows a graduate to sit for the American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) Certification Exam earlier in their career than a student with a degree from a non-accredited program or school.

Programs that desire accreditation through the PAB must apply for candidacy status. The program seeking candidacy must demonstrate that they meet the five preconditions to accreditation.

[ 10 ] The five preconditions are: [ 11 ] Program graduation of at least 25 students in the degree.

Program's parent institution must be accredited by an institutional accrediting body recognized by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA).

Formal title of program and degree offered must include the term "Planning".

Undergraduate programs must offer 4 full-time years of study or equivalent, while graduate programs must be 2 full-time years of study or equivalent.

Program's primary goal is to educate students to become practicing planning professionals.

Once the preconditions have successfully been met by the program, the program must complete and submit a Self-Study Report.

[ 12 ] Through the Self-Study Report, the program assesses their performance and compliance with PAB's accreditation standards. This report serves as the basis of review for the Planning Accreditation Board, along with a formal meeting with the Program Administrator at the Board meeting.

[ 10 ] If candidacy is awarded, the Planning Accreditation Board will send a three-member team to visit and formally review the program during a semester. The three member team will meet with faculty, staff, students, and members of the local planning community. The team will then submit a Site Visit Report to the Planning Accreditation Board. During the meeting of the Planning Accreditation Board, the board will review the Self-Study Report, Site Visit Report and other documentation and meet with the Program Administrator. At the conclusion of the meeting, the Board decides if the program is awarded accreditation and the length of accreditation.

[ 10 ] Accreditation length is dependent on the extent the program complies with requirements of the Planning Accreditation Board, with the maximum length awarded is 7 years.

[ 13 ] Programs must re-apply for accreditation in the year their accreditation term expires.

PAB Accredited Programs School City State Undergraduate [ 7 ] Graduate [ 7 ] Accreditation Through [ 7 ] Alabama A&M University Normal AL Bachelor of Science in Urban Planning Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2023 Arizona State University Tempe AZ accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Environmental Planning December 31, 2023 University of Arizona Tucson AZ accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban Planning December 31, 2029 California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo San Luis Obispo CA Bachelor of Science in City & Regional Planning Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 California State Polytechnic University, Pomona Pomona CA Bachelor of Science in Urban & Regional Planning Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 San Diego State University San Diego CA accredited program not offered Master of City Planning December 31, 2026 San Jose State University San Jose CA accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2025 University of California, Berkeley Berkeley CA accredited program not offered Master of City Planning December 31, 2023 University of California, Irvine Irvine CA accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 University of California, Los Angeles Los Angeles CA accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Southern California Los Angeles CA accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2028 University of Colorado, Denver Denver CO accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2023 Florida Atlantic University Boca Raton FL accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 Florida State University Tallahassee FL accredited program not offered Master of Science in Planning December 31, 2024 University of Central Florida Orlando FL accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 University of Florida Gainesville FL accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of South Florida Tampa FL accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 Georgia Institute of Technology Atlanta GA accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Georgia Athens GA accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning & Design December 31, 2026 University of Hawaii Honolulu HI accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign Champaign IL Bachelor of Arts in Urban Studies & Planning Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2026 University of Illinois Chicago Chicago IL accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning & Policy December 31, 2026 Ball State University Muncie IN Bachelor of Urban Planning & Development Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 Iowa State University Ames IA Bachelor of Science in Community & Regional Planning Master of Community & Regional Planning December 31, 2024 University of Iowa Iowa City IA accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 Kansas State University Manhattan KS accredited program not offered Master of Regional & Community Planning December 31, 2027 University of Kansas Lawrence KS accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2024 University of Louisville Louisville KY accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2023 University of New Orleans New Orleans LA Bachelor of Science in Planning & Urban Studies Master of Urban & Regional Planning Additional Certificates in
GIS, Historic Preservation, and Hazard Mitigation & Resilience are available to add to the base degree December 31, 2025 Morgan State University Baltimore MD accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 University of Maryland at College Park College Park MD accredited program not offered Master of Community Planning December 31, 2027 Harvard University Cambridge MA accredited program not offered Master in Urban Planning December 31, 2026 Massachusetts Institute of Technology Cambridge MA accredited program not offered Master in City Planning December 31, 2025 Tufts University Medford MA accredited program not offered Master of Arts/Science in Urban and Environmental Policy & Planning December 31, 2025 University of Massachusetts Amherst Amherst MA accredited program not offered Master of Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Massachusetts Boston Boston MA accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Community Development December 31, 2028 Michigan State University East Lansing MI Bachelor of Science in Urban & Regional Planning Master in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Michigan Ann Arbor MI accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 Wayne State University Detroit MI accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2026 University of Minnesota Minneapolis MN accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 Jackson State University Jackson MS accredited program not offered Master of Arts in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 University of Missouri-Kansas City Kansas City MO Bachelor of Arts in Urban Planning & Design accredited program not offered December 31, 2024 University of Nebraska–Lincoln Lincoln NE accredited program not offered Master of Community & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey New Brunswick NJ accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 University of New Mexico Albuquerque NM accredited program not offered Master of Community & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 Columbia University New York NY accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban Planning December 31, 2028 Cornell University Ithaca NY accredited program not offered Master of Regional Planning December 31, 2028 Hunter College, City University of New York New York NY accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2024 New York University New York NY accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2026 Pratt Institute Brooklyn NY accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Community Planning December 31, 2025 University at Albany, State University of New York Albany NY accredited program not offered Master of Regional Planning in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 University at Buffalo, State University of New York Buffalo NY accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2028 East Carolina University Greenville NC Bachelor of Science in Community & Regional Planning accredited program not offered December 31, 2026 The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill Chapel Hill NC accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 Cleveland State University Cleveland OH accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning & Development December 31, 2028 The Ohio State University Columbus OH Bachelor of Science in City and Regional Planning Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 University of Cincinnati Cincinnati OH Bachelor of Urban Planning Master of Community Planning December 31, 2028 University of Oklahoma Norman OK accredited program not offered Master of Regional & City Planning December 31, 2029 Portland State University Portland OR accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 University of Oregon Eugene OR accredited program not offered Master of Community & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 Indiana University of Pennsylvania Indiana PA Bachelor of Science in Regional Planning accredited program not offered December 31, 2023 Temple University Philadelphia PA accredited program not offered Master of Science in City & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Pennsylvania Philadelphia PA accredited program not offered Master of City Planning December 31, 2026 West Chester University West Chester PA Bachelor of Science in Urban and Environmental Planning accredited program not offered December 31, 2027 Clemson University Clemson SC accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2023 University of Memphis Memphis TN accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 Texas A&M University College Station TX accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2028 Texas Southern University Houston TX accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning & Environmental Policy December 31, 2026 The University of Texas at Arlington Arlington TX accredited program not offered Master of City & Regional Planning December 31, 2025 The University of Texas at Austin Austin TX accredited program not offered Master of Science in Community & Regional Planning December 31, 2024 The University of Texas at San Antonio San Antonio TX accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Regional Planning Candidacy Status through December 31, 2024 University of Utah Salt Lake City UT accredited program not offered Master of City & Metropolitan Planning December 31, 2026 University of Virginia Charlottesville VA Bachelor of Urban & Environmental Planning Master of Urban & Environmental Planning December 31, 2025 Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond VA accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2028 Virginia Polytechnic Institute & State University Blacksburg/Arlington VA accredited program not offered Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 Eastern Washington University Cheney/Spokane WA Bachelor of Arts in Urban & Regional Planning Master of Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2026 University of Washington Seattle WA accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2029 Western Washington University Bellingham WA Bachelor of Arts in Urban Planning & Sustainable Development accredited program not offered December 31, 2025 University of Wisconsin–Madison Madison WI accredited program not offered Master of Science in Urban & Regional Planning December 31, 2027 University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Milwaukee WI accredited program not offered Master of Urban Planning December 31, 2025 Universidad de Puerto Rico San Juan Puerto Rico accredited program not offered Master in Planning December 31, 2024 Rankings [ edit ] United States While there is no official ranking of the graduate programs for planning, planning-community site Planetizen publishes a periodical guide titled "Planetizen Guide to Graduate Urban Planning Programs." [ 14 ] The guide is compiled of data collection from participating planning schools, educators, and past buyers across the nation. Moreover, the guide includes the overall top 25 graduate programs, top 25 programs according to educators, rankings by geography, other additional rankings, and in-depth directory on each of the participating planning programs.

Planetizen Top 10 Graduate Urban Planning Programs Ranked, 7th edition (2023).

University 2023 Rank [ 14 ] 2019 Rank [ 15 ] University of California, Los Angeles 1 4 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 1 Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey 3 3 University of California, Berkeley 4 2 University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 5 5 Georgia Institute of Technology 6 10 Harvard University 7 6 University of Southern California 8 8 University of Texas at Austin 9 11 Tufts University 10 16 Youth education [ edit ] Involving youth in urban planning requires an educational model and curriculum.

[ 16 ] Historically, youth have not been given much political power in the usual top-down urban planning. In the past centuries there have been very minimal efforts to include youth in urban planning decision processes. In recent years, however, there has been an increasing effort to expose youth to urban planning as a profession. In doing so, youth are able to be involved and lead planning processes. Most efforts have emphasized the importance of including youth from marginalized neighborhoods.

[ 16 ] 1960s and 1970s [ edit ] One of the first attempts to involve children in urban planning in the United States was through an initiative, “Growing Up in Cities” created by urban designer Kevin Lynch via the United Nations. This program's mission was to expose urban planning to children and teenagers and give them the tools to evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of their own neighborhoods.

[ 17 ] This program was not successful because it lacked city government support. However, it paved the way for another initiative, “Child Friendly Cities Initiative” in 1989. This program shared a similar agenda in letting children conceptualize an ideal city that meets their needs.

[ 18 ] Jane Jacobs , a prominent urban activist and author of The Death and Life of Great American Cities was one of the first to analyze the needs of children in the built environment.

[ 19 ] When thinking about participatory planning, there is debate on whether children and teenagers should participate in city planning decisions. Jacobs argues that sidewalks should not ignore the needs of children to play and be safe at the same time.

Since 2010 [ edit ] Since 2010, there have been many non-profit efforts to expose students to urban planning as a profession and field of study. For example, The Center for Understanding the Built Environment, otherwise known as, CUBE, brings together teachers and urban planners to create an accessible urban planning curriculum for children. The non-profit's innovative educational model promotes many learning results for students, including responsible action.

[ 20 ] Urban planning professors at the University of California, Berkeley also created an influential academic model named Y-PLAN, or, Youth–Plan, Learn, Act Now. This model engages UC Berkeley urban studies students with high school students from Richmond, California in efforts to transform their neighborhood and expose students to the urban planning process.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Graduate real estate education Indigenous planning MBA References [ edit ] ^ Pekka Korvenmaa (ed.), The Work of Architects: The Finnish Association of Architects 1892-1992 , Finnish Building Centre, Helsinki, 1992. Minna Chudoba and Gareth Griffiths (ed.), Curious Pedagogy: Reflections on Urban Planning Education . Datutop, Tampere, 2023.

[1] ^ a b "Urban Planning Schools Directory" .

www.planetizen.com . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

^ "About PSB - Professional Standards Board Planning Profession" .

Professional Standards Board . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ a b "University Accreditation" .

Professional Standards Board . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ "Candidate Process" .

Professional Standards Board . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ "Accredited Degree" .

Professional Standards Board . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g "Accredited Planning Programs" . Planning Accreditation Board. 2023 . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ a b "History of Accredited Programs" . Planning Accreditation Board. 2010 . Retrieved November 27, 2013 .

^ "University of Sheffield MPlan Urban Studies and Planning" . University of Sheffield. October 2021.

^ a b c "Candidacy Information" . Planning Accreditation Board. 2010 . Retrieved November 27, 2013 .

^ Application for Candidacy Status ^ Self-Study Report Manual ^ The Accreditation Document, Pg. 38 ^ a b "The Top Schools For Urban Planners" .

www.planetizen.com . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ "The Top Schools For Urban Planners - 2019" .

www.planetizen.com . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ a b c Deborah McKoy; Jessie Stewart; Shirl Buss (2015).

"Engaging Students in Transforming Their Built Environment via Y-PLAN: Lessons from Richmond, California" .

Children, Youth and Environments .

25 (2): 229.

doi : 10.7721/chilyoutenvi.25.2.0229 .

ISSN 1546-2250 .

S2CID 114665427 .

^ Derr, Victoria; Chawla, Louise; Mintzer, Mara; Cushing, Debra; Van Vliet, Willem (July 23, 2013).

"A City for All Citizens: Integrating Children and Youth from Marginalized Populations into City Planning" .

Buildings .

3 (3): 482– 505.

doi : 10.3390/buildings3030482 .

ISSN 2075-5309 .

^ Cheney, Kristen (2008).

"Really Including Children: The Benefits of Participatory Research with African AIDS Orphans" .

PsycEXTRA Dataset .

doi : 10.1037/e618052011-017 . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

^ Jacobs, Jane (2020).

Death and life of Great American Cities . The Bodley Head.

ISBN 978-1-84792-618-0 .

OCLC 1198765098 .

^ "Cube" .

Cube . Retrieved May 11, 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Association of Collegiate Schools of Planning Archived November 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Canadian Institute of Planners Royal Town Planning Institute Association of European Schools of Planning Planning Institute of Australia Planning Accreditation Board INTBAU guide to tertiary institutions Archived April 2, 2015, at the Wayback Machine Institute of Town Planners, India Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urban_planning_education&oldid=1306175807 " Categories : Master's degrees Urban planning Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2022 Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from January 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 09:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urban planning education 1 language Add topic

