Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 From National Party of Carniola to Democratic Party 1.2 From ZSMS-Liberal Party to Liberal Democracy of Slovenia 1.3 From Slovenian Democratic League to Democratic Party 1.4 Zares, Positive Slovenia and Alliance of Alenka Bratušek 1.5 Civic List 1.6 Modern Centre Party, Concretely and Freedom Movement 1.7 List of Marjan Šarec 2 Liberal leaders 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Slovenia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Liberalism in Slovenia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Slovenia . It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament. The sign ⇒ means a reference to another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it isn't necessary so that parties labeled themselves as a liberal party.

History [ edit ] After the independence of Slovenia former young socialists claim to have restarted the liberal tradition of former Austria-Hungary . Their organized liberalism became a major political force. The Liberal Democracy of Slovenia ( Liberalna demokracija Slovenije , becomes a  member of the LI and the ELDR ) and profiles itself as a left of center liberal party. Others argue [ who?

] that there have been no liberal parties in Slovenia since independence in 1991. They say that claims of the former communist youth (ZSMS) and LDS that they represent liberal parties with liberal doctrines are political propaganda and that facts demonstrate that both ZSMS and LDS followed socialist and anti liberal policies.

[ citation needed ] From National Party of Carniola to Democratic Party [ edit ] 1894: Ivan Tavčar led the Young Slovenes to establish the National Party of Carniola ( Narodna stranka za Krajnsko ). In Gorizia related groups formed the National Progressive  Party in 1900 1905: The Carniolan party is renamed National Progressive Party ( Narodno napredna stranka ). In Upper Styria related groups formed the National Party of Styria ( Narodna stranka za Štajersko ) [ citation needed ] 1918: The three party merged into the Yugoslav Democratic Party ( Jugoslovanska demokratska stranka ) 1919: The party merged with Serbian and Croatian into the pan- Yugoslav more or less liberal State Party of Serbian, Croatian and Slovene Democrats ( Državnotvorna stranka demokrata Srba, Hrvata i Slovenaca ). Some of the Slovene liberals did not join JDS and founded Independent Agrarian Party ( Samostojna kmetijska stranka ) and National-Socialist Party ( Narodno-socialistična stranka ). Except the name, the latter did not have much in common with German Nazis and could have been described as a social liberal party.

1919: The party is renamed into the Democratic Community ( Demokratska zajednica ) 1920: The party is renamed into the Democratic Party ( Demokratska stranka ). Leader is Ljubomir Davidović 1924: A faction, including the majority of prominent Slovene liberals [ citation needed ] formed the Independent Democratic Party ( Samostojna demokratska stranka ), mainly active in Croatia , Bosnia , Vojvodina and Slovenia 1929: After the royal coup, all parties were banned.

1931: Slovene liberals leaders [ who?

] joined the government party ( Yugoslav Radical-Peasant Democracy - Jugoslovenska radikalno-kmečka demokracija ), from 1934 Yugoslav National Party [ citation needed ] ( Jugoslovenska nacionalna stranka ). *1935-1941: JNS was in opposition.

1941-1945: Following the Axis occupation of Yugoslavia , political parties were dissolved but continued activities in underground. Facing the communist insurgence, Slovene liberals co-founded the underground national organization Slovene Covenant ( Slovenska zaveza ).

[ citation needed ] 1945: All democratic parties were dissolved and banned.

From ZSMS-Liberal Party to Liberal Democracy of Slovenia [ edit ] 1989: The Socialist Youth League of Slovenia (abbreviated ZSMS) changes its name into Za Svobodo Mislecega Sveta (For the Freedom of a Thinking World) and is shortly after reorganised into the Liberal Party ( ZSMS - Liberalna stranka ) [ citation needed ] 1990: The party is renamed into the Liberal Democratic Party ( Liberalno demokratska stranka ) 1994: The party merged with the ⇒ Democratic Party, a faction of the Slovenian Greens' and the Socialist Party of Slovenia into the Liberal Democracy of Slovenia ( Liberalna demokracija Slovenije ), led by Janez Drnovšek From Slovenian Democratic League to Democratic Party [ edit ] 1989: Oppositionals established the Slovenian Democratic League ( Slovenska demokratična zveza ) 1991: The party is renamed Democratic Party ( Demokratska Stranka ), led by Dimitrij Rupel 1994: Most of the party merged into the ⇒ Liberal Democracy of Slovenia. A faction continued under the label Democratic Party of Slovenia ( Demokratska stranka Slovenije ) Zares, Positive Slovenia and Alliance of Alenka Bratušek [ edit ] 2004: Active Slovenia ( Aktivna Slovenija ) split from Youth Party of Slovenia .

2006: Zoran Janković founded Zoran Janković List ( Lista Zorana Jankovića ).

2007: Zares split from ⇒ LDS and merged with Active Slovenia.

2011: Zoran Janković founded Positive Slovenia ( Pozitivna Slovenija ) which also join LDS and Zares members 2014: Alenka Bratušek split from PS and founded Alliance of Alenka Bratušek ( Zavezništvo Alenke Bratušek ) 2015: Zares dissolved 2016: ZaAB is renamed Alliance of Social Liberal Democrats ( Zavezništvo socialno-liberalnih demokratov ) 2017: ZaSLD is renamed Party of Alenka Bratušek ( Stranka Alenke Bratušek ) 2022: SAB merged into ⇒ the Freedom Movement.

Civic List [ edit ] 2011: Gregor Virant founded Gregor Virant's Civic List ( Državljanska lista Gregorja Viranta ) 2012: LGV is renamed Civic List ( Državljanska lista ) Modern Centre Party, Concretely and Freedom Movement [ edit ] 2014: Miro Cerar founded Party of Miro Cerar ( Stranka Mira Cerarja ) [ 1 ] 2016: This party is renamed Modern Centre Party ( Stranka modernega centra ) 2018: Miro Cerar left the SMC after joining the 14th Government of Slovenia 2021: Former SMC member Jure Leben founded Green Actions Party ( Stranka zelenih dejanj ).

2021: The party merged with the ⇒ Economic Active Party into the Concretely ( Konkretno ).

2021: Igor Zorčič split from SMC and founded Liberal Democrats ( Liberalni demokrati ).

2022: Green Actions is renamed Freedom Movement ( Gibanje Svoboda ).

List of Marjan Šarec [ edit ] 2014: Marjan Šarec founded List of Marjan Šarec ( Lista Marjana Šarca ) 2022: The party merged into ⇒ the Freedom Movement.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Janez Drnovšek - Anton Rop Alenka Bratušek Miro Cerar Marjan Šarec Robert Golob See also [ edit ] Free Society Institute History of Slovenia Politics of Slovenia List of political parties in Slovenia References [ edit ] ^ "Cerar: Razdeljeno ljudstvo je šibko, kar vladajoči vedno izrabijo: Prvi interaktivni multimedijski portal" . Rtvslo.si . Retrieved 8 July 2014 .

v t e Liberalism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Slovenia&oldid=1235655562 " Categories : Liberalism in Slovenia Liberalism by country Politics of Slovenia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2024 Articles with excerpts All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2010 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2010 This page was last edited on 20 July 2024, at 13:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Slovenia Add languages Add topic

