Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 3.1 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Marshal's Cabin 3 languages Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 60°43′02″N 24°12′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 60.71722°N 24.21306°E ﻿ / 60.71722; 24.21306 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Museum and restaurant in Loppi, Finland Mannerheim 's hunting cabin The Marshal's Cabin (or Marski's Lodge ; Finnish : Marskin Maja ) is a current museum and restaurant at the shores of Lake Punelia [ fi ] in Loppi , Finland , near the Räyskälä village. Originally, the cabin with its courtyards was built as a 14th division birthday present for Marshal C. G. E. Mannerheim in 1942 and was originally located in Rugozero , East Karelia . It also includes a log-built summer house , a banqueting hall and a sauna .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The Marshal's Cabin was built during the Continuation War in 1942 and was originally a gift from the soldiers of the 14th Division, commanded by Major General Erkki Raappana , to Marshal Mannerheim, the 75-year-old Commander-in-Chief of the Finnish Defence Forces .

[ 2 ] The original location was on the shores of Lake Leksozero in Keihäsniemi in Rugozero in Finnish-occupied East Karelia .

[ 2 ] The house was designed by an architect, Lieutenant Eino Pitkänen.

[ 3 ] Pitkänen also designed the interior of the cabin, with the exception of textiles. The house was handed over to Mannerheim on June 5, 1942, with a gift certificate.

At the end of the Continuation War, the cabin was demolished and a new place was sought for it on the west side of the future state border.

[ 3 ] The original builders of the cabin re-erected the building on the shores of Lake Punelia in Loppi during May and June 1945.

[ 2 ] Mannerheim first arrived at the cabin on June 21, 1945, when Major General Raappana solemnly handed over the keys to the cabin to its owner. Due to his duties as President of the Republic and his deteriorating health, the Marshal reportedly visited the inn at its new location only eight times, the last time in September 1948.

[ 2 ] In 1948, Mannerheim donated the cabin that had become redundant to the Finnish Hunters' Association , [ 4 ] which, however, had no use for it. Ironically, despite the name of the place as a hunting lodge , Mannerheim never used the place for hunting .

[ 5 ] Eventually, four officers' organizations co-founded an association called "Marshal Mannerheim's Hunting Lodge Association", which acquired the cabin with its estates and renovated it into a museum.

[ 6 ] The Marshal's Cabin has been open to the public during the summer since 1959.

[ 4 ] The cabin has an open porch, a large living room with fireplaces, a kitchen, a Marshal's bedroom and rooms for adjutants and missionaries. The cabin originally had a peat roof, which was later replaced by the current firewood roof.

See also [ edit ] Mannerheim Museum Sources [ edit ] Tauno Oksanen, Jukka Partanen & Pasi Tuunainen (2009).

Mannerheim Rukajärvellä (in Finnish). Helsinki: Gummerus .

ISBN 978-951-20-7938-4 .

References [ edit ] ^ “Marskin Maja” lodge - Häme Lake Uplands - Visit Loppi ^ a b c d Sotahistorialliset kohteet - Mannerheimin metsästysmaja Lieksajärvi Keihäsniemi (in Finnish) ^ a b MANNERHEIM - Special Topics - Marshal's Cabin ^ a b Hirsi hirreltä Lieksajärveltä Lopelle: Marskin Maja (in Finnish) ^ YLE: Tarinoita Marskin majalta (in Finnish) ^ YLE: Marskin maja juhlii: sodasta pelastetun kelohuvilan toisista harjakaisista 70 vuotta (in Finnish) External links [ edit ] Marskin Maja (in Finnish) Marskin Maja at Visit Häme (in Finnish) History about the Marshal's Cabin 60°43′02″N 24°12′47″E ﻿ / ﻿ 60.71722°N 24.21306°E ﻿ / 60.71722; 24.21306 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marshal%27s_Cabin&oldid=1299334106 " Categories : Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim Tourist attractions in Kanta-Häme Museums in Finland Loppi Buildings and structures in Kanta-Häme Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Finnish-language text CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 20:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marshal's Cabin 3 languages Add topic

