Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Integral video 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Integral imaging 2 languages Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 3D imaging technique Integral imaging is a three-dimensional imaging technique that captures and reproduces a light field by using a two-dimensional array of microlenses (or lenslets ), sometimes called a fly's-eye lens, normally without the aid of a larger overall objective or viewing lens. In capture mode, in which a film or detector is coupled to the microlens array, each microlens allows an image of the subject as seen from the viewpoint of that lens's location to be acquired. In reproduction mode, in which an object or source array is coupled to the microlens array, each microlens allows each observing eye to see only the area of the associated micro-image containing the portion of the subject that would have been visible through that space from that eye's location. The optical geometry can perhaps be visualized more easily by substituting pinholes for the microlenses, as has actually been done for some demonstrations and special applications.

A display using integral imaging is a type of light field display .

The result is a visual reproduction complete with all significant depth cues , including parallax in all directions, perspective that changes with the position and distance of the observer, and, if the lenses are small enough and the images of sufficient quality, the cue of accommodation — the adjustments of eye focus required to clearly see objects at different distances. Unlike the voxels in a true volumetric display , the image points perceived through the microlens array are virtual and have only a subjective location in space, allowing a scene of infinite depth to be displayed without resorting to an auxiliary large magnifying lens or mirror.

Integral imaging was partly inspired by barrier grid autostereograms and in turn partly inspired lenticular printing .

Etymology [ edit ] Inventor Gabriel Lippmann called the technique "photographie intégrale" (in French). It is usually translated literally as "integral photography", which suggests the integration of a whole image from parts of many small ones. However, a more usual meaning of the French word "intégrale" is "complete" or "unabridged", so that "complete photography" is another valid translation of Lippmann's perhaps deliberately ambiguous name for it.

History [ edit ] On March 2, 1908 Nobel prize winning French physicist Gabriel Lippmann presented his ideas for "Photographie intégrale", based on insect eyes. He was probably also inspired by the barrier grid autostereograms of Frederic Ives and Eugène Estanave, representing Estanave at several presentations of Estanave's works at the French Academy of Sciences. Lippmann suggested to use a screen of tiny lenses. Spherical segments should be pressed into a sort of film with photographic emulsion on the other side. The screen would be placed inside a lightproof holder and on a tripod for stability. When exposed each tiny lens would function as a camera and record the surroundings from a slightly different angle than neighboring lenses. When developed and lit from behind the lenses should project the life-size image of the recorded subject in space. He could not yet present concrete results in March 1908, but by the end of 1908 he claimed to have exposed some Integral photography plates and to have seen the "resulting single, full-sized image". However, the technique remained experimental since no material or technique seemed to deliver the optical quality desired. At the time of his death in 1921 Lippmann reportedly had a system with only twelve lenses.

[ 1 ] Eugène Estanave performed further experiments with Lippmann's technique. He exhibited an integral photograph in 1925 and published about his findings in La Nature . In 1930 he had 432 lenses in a 6.5 x 9 cm plate with viewable results, but then abandoned the lenticular screen and continued his integral photography experiments with pinholes.

[ 1 ] Louis Lumière worked on integral photography and corresponded with Lippman about the technique. Lumière patented a system a few years after Lippmann's death, but never seems to have actually manufactured lenticular screens.

[ 1 ] Integral video [ edit ] 2010 Japan's NHK broadcasting company and Toshiba each showed a demo featuring a prototype display view-able with a 25 degree window.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] 2015 "Looking glass factory" started work on their multiscopic display, the latest is based around an 8k screen showing 45 different possible angles simultaneously See also [ edit ] Autostereoscopy Lenticular printing Focus stacking Plenoptic camera 3D display Stereoscopy References [ edit ] ^ a b c Timby, Kim (31 July 2015).

3D and Animated Lenticular Photography .

ISBN 9783110448061 .

^ Zyga, Lisa (August 27, 2010).

"Integral 3D TV system projects a promising future (w/ Video)" .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Integral 3D TV - Creating Autostereoscopic Content from Multi-perspective Videos #DigInfo" .

YouTube .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Glasses-Free 3D Display Using Integral Imaging - Toshiba : DigInfo" .

YouTube .

External links [ edit ] The History of Integral Print Methods — Comprehensive history of integral imaging Diffraction Influence on the Field of View and Resolution of Three-Dimensional Integral Imaging v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integral_imaging&oldid=1257873498 " Categories : 3D imaging French inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 November 2024, at 01:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Integral imaging 2 languages Add topic

