Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Activities 2 Funding and support Toggle Funding and support subsection 2.1 U.S. federal support 2.2 U.S. state support 2.3 U.S. county support 3 History of the field 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Youth services Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Community support activity Youth services is a field of practices within the social services sector in North America . Defined as "programs, activities, and services aimed at providing a range of opportunities for school-aged children, including mentoring, recreation, education, training, community service, or supervision in a safe environment," [ 1 ] youth services are a comprehensive series of strategies, activities, programs and organizations spread across the United States and Canada today.

[ 2 ] In North America, youth services are generally viewed as more organized and systemized than youth work . The term "youth services" is used in international contexts as well.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Activities [ edit ] Youth services are varied and disparate, often emerging from the needs of their local context or from the mandate of external funding sources. "Best practices in youth services include the provision of safety, appropriate supervision, supportive relationships, opportunities to belong, positive social norms, support for efficacy and skill building, and integration of community, school, and family efforts." [ 5 ] Specific activities, projects, programs and organizations within the realm of youth services address a variety of issues. According to Fletcher (2024), they include: Prevention Intervention Out-of-school time education Personal identities Civics and democracy Culture and society Rights and freedoms Youth-specific issues Public health Personal health (including mental health) [ 6 ] The economy Crisis support Nature and the outdoors Recreation The arts Personal development Empowerment [ 7 ] Within each of those categories are more specific practices. For instance, the practice of "youth services librarianship" "encompasses all library services to youth (children and young adults, ages zero to eighteen) in school and public library settings." According to one author, it "has long been considered the classic success story of American libraries." [ 8 ] Funding and support [ edit ] There are various sources of funding for youth services across North America. They include government and philanthropic foundations, as well as corporate and private donors. In the U.S., the current thrust of youth services emphasizes positive youth development .

[ 9 ] In Contra Costa County, youth services "receives funding from the California Department of Education, the Contra Costa County Workforce Development Board, Contra Costa County Employment and Human Services, the Department of Rehabilitation, as well as other funding sources." [ 10 ] In addition to local variations, there has been a wide variety of political, fiscal and public support for youth services throughout time. For instance, the New York City Youth Board existed from 1947 until 1976 "when most of the program services were redistributed to several other city agencies." From that dispersion, many activities, projects and services were defunded and forgotten about for several years.

[ 11 ] U.S. federal support [ edit ] The U.S. federal government supports a variety of youth services. For instance, the United States Department of Labor houses the Employment and Training Administration Division of Youth Services. This division "primarily serve[s] young adults ages 16-24 that face a variety of barriers to employment. We provide leadership to the workforce system and our grantees, policy direction and guidance, support for program administration, and technical assistance." Some of their youth services programs include Workforce Innovation and Opportunity Act Youth Formula, YouthBuild , and Reentry Employment Opportunities.

[ 12 ] The United States Department of Health & Human Services Office of the Administration for Children & Families extensively addresses youth services. Many issues are served by this agency, including: Adolescent pregnancy prevention: These services "educate adolescents on both abstinence and contraception for the prevention of pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections... and exclusively implement[s] sexual risk avoidance education that teaches youth how to voluntarily refrain from non-marital sexual activity, empower youth to make healthy decisions, and provide tools and resources to prevent youth engagement in other risky behaviors." Runaway and homeless youth: These programs "serve and protect runaway and homeless youth" through street outreach , transitional living skills education, and maternity group homes" for youth.

Foster care and successful transitions to adulthood: The agency "provides funding to support youth and young adults in or formerly in foster care in their transition to adulthood." Unaccompanied refugee minors programs: "Services provided include arranging foster care, group homes, independent living situations, or reunification with relatives in the U.S., as well as other child welfare services to promote their well-being." The agency also researches and evaluates each of these program areas.

[ 13 ] U.S. state support [ edit ] Similarly, many U.S. states, counties and local municipalities support youth services as well. In Utah , the Department of Health and Human Services houses a division called juvenile justice and youth services whose goal is to "prevent delinquent behaviors through positive youth and family development." The stated goals of this division include, "Keep[ing] youth safely in their homes, schools and communities; Early screening of a youth and family strength and needs; Connect youth and families to appropriate services in the community." [ 14 ] In Massachusetts, the Massachusetts Department of Youth Services is the "Juvenile Justice agency for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts" and "promotes positive change in the youth in our care and custody." [ 15 ] In Illinois, the Department of Human Services Office of Community and Positive Youth Development offers youth services for "youth who are in trouble with the legal system" and "runaways/lock-outs/homeless youth," as well as for youth employment, teen pregnancy prevention, substance abuse prevention, community initiatives, and other areas.

[ 16 ] U.S. county support [ edit ] In Yamhill County, Oregon , the county government has a youth services division that focuses on children and youths' mental health , with their website stating they provide "an array of mental health professionals who have advanced education and training in counseling and various specialties. Our approach matches the best practices developed by research and national experts. We focus on helping children, teens and parents improve skills, health and well-being." [ 17 ] Youth services offered by Contra Costa County, California are offered by the county's Office of Education and include "provides a broad range of coordinated services for youth who are in foster care, experiencing homelessness or other barriers and need support to finish school, find a job or pursue a career path." [ 18 ] The Baltimore County, Maryland government "Youth Services Unit provides support for programs that engage eligible young people between the ages of 14 and 24 who are in school, have graduated or dropped out of high school, by providing valuable education, training, counseling and work-based learning opportunities." [ 19 ] History of the field [ edit ] Having started in the 1860s, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts counts their youth services as the "first in the nation." [ 20 ] A comprehensive timeline from the University of North Carolina shows that library youth services began in the 17th century.

[ 21 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critical perspectives of youth services are as broad as the number of practices throughout the field. For instance, Anthony Bernier , a professor at San Jose State University , wrote "The overarching assessment of youth services rendered by Leslie Edmonds in 1987 remains largely true today: that its most influential force remains not research, or evidence, or constant professional improvement or addressing field-based challenges, but 'superstition.'" [ 22 ] There are also concerns about continuity of care in youth services, [ 23 ] " aging out " (the process of becoming an adult), the effects of austerity of the field, [ 24 ] among others.

See also [ edit ] Family and Youth Services Bureau Children and Youth Services Review List of youth organizations Sequel Youth and Family Services National Council for Voluntary Youth Services Ohio Department of Youth Services Youth intervention References [ edit ] ^ Elizabeth T. Gershoff (June 11, 2013) "Youth Services" , Encyclopedia of Social Work. National Association of Social Workers Press and Oxford University Press. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Adam F.C. Fletcher (2024) "Understanding the breadth of youth services" , Fletcher Engagement Services. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Youdell, D. and McGimpsey, I.

"Assembling, disassembling and reassembling ‘youth services’ in Austerity Britain" in Education Policy Analysis for a Complex World (2017) Routledge.

^ Vyas, N.S. and Singh, S.P. (2014) "Youth services: meeting the mental health needs of adolescents," Cambridge University Press. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Gershoff, 2013.

^ Vyas, N.S. and Singh, S.P. (2014) "Youth services: meeting the mental health needs of adolescents," Cambridge University Press. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Fletcher, 2024.

^ Jenkins, Christine A. (2000) "The History of Youth Services Librarianship: A Review of the Research Literature," Libraries & Culture, Vol. 35, No. 1, Winter. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Gershoff, 2013.

^ "Youth Services," Contra Costa County official website. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Sonnenfeld, Kurt. (1995) Changing perspectives on youth services as seen through the historical development of the New York City Youth Board.

Columbia University Teachers College. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "About Youth Services," U.S. Department of Labor Employment and Training Administration. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services," United States Department of Health & Human Services Office of the Administration for Children & Families official website. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services," Utah Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Department of Youth Services," Commonwealth of Massachusetts. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services," Illinois Department of Human Services. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services" , Yamhill County Oregon official website. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services," Contra Costa County official website. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "Youth Services," Baltimore County Government official website. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "DYS - History of Youth Services," , Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of Youth Services Programs and Services. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ "History of Youth Services Timeline," University of North Carolina. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Bernier, Anthony.

"Isn’t It Time for Youth Services Instruction to Grow Up? From Superstition to Scholarship," Journal of Education for Library and Information Science.

Vol. 60, No. 2.

DOI: 10.3138/jelis.2018-0055 .

^ Naert, J. et al (2017) "Continuity of care in youth services: A systematic review," Children and Youth Services Review Volume 75, pages 116-126. Retrieved July 5, 2024.

^ Youdell and McGimpsey, 2017.

v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons v t e Public policy Fields Agricultural Climate change Cultural Domestic Drug reform Economic Fiscal Incomes Industrial Investment Monetary Tax Trade Education Energy Nuclear energy Renewable energy Environmental Food Foreign Health Pharmaceutical Vaccination Housing Immigration Knowledge Language Military Science Stem cell Space Technology Social Other topics Evidence-based policy Public administration Public budgeting Public policy doctrine Public policy school Policy analysis Policy studies Regulation Youth services Public policy by country v t e Social work and related concepts Concepts Primary Social work Secondary Anti-oppressive practice Crisis intervention Community practice Community organization Critical social work Financial social work Gerontology Group development Leadership Management New Public Management Policy analysis Program evaluation Performance measurement Psychometrics Psychosocial assessment Cognitive behavioral therapy Recreational therapy Health psychology Solution focused brief therapy Strength-based practice Systems thinking Social justice Social actions Social medicine Social learning (social pedagogy) Types of social work Social case worker Child protection Forensic social worker Medical social worker Psychiatric social worker Rehabilitation worker School social worker Social work in the military Social group worker Social planning Welfare worker Licensed Clinical Social Worker (LCSW) Youth services Qualifications Qualifications for professional social work Bachelor of Social Work (BA, BSc or BSW) degree Socionom (Scandinavia) Master of Social Work degree (MA, MSc or MSW) Doctor of Social Work degree (Ph.D or DSW) International Association of Schools of Social Work Council on Social Work Education Schools of social work Social workers by nationality American Argentine Austrian Australian Bangladeshi Belgian British Canadian Dutch French German Guyanese Hong Kong Indian Indonesian Israeli Japanese Nepalese New Zealand Norwegian Pakistani Polish Swedish Trinidad and Tobago Ugandan Professional associations International Federation of Social Workers (IFSW) National Alliance of Professional Social Workers National Association of Social Workers (American) Australian Association of Social Workers British Association of Social Workers Institute of Medical Social Workers (British) Canadian Association of Social Workers Scottish Children's Reporter Administration Professional Social Workers' Association (PSWA) Biographies Jane Addams Amartya Sen Harry Hopkins Joyce Lishman v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Youth_services&oldid=1297353286 " Categories : Public services Public policy Progressivism Welfare state Social work Social sciences Social justice Social liberalism Youth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Youth services Add languages Add topic

