Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Storm spotting 2 Training Toggle Training subsection 2.1 Methods of participation 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Skywarn 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Program of the National Weather Service in the US Skywarn Formation 1965 Type Government organization Purpose Severe weather spotting Headquarters Silver Spring, Maryland Region served United States Membership Volunteer Official language English Staff >300,000 [ 1 ] Website NWS Skywarn Skywarn (sometimes stylized as SKYWARN ) is a program of the National Weather Service (NWS). Its mission is to collect reports of localized severe weather in the United States. These reports are used to aid forecasters in issuing and verifying severe weather watches and warnings and to improve the forecasting and warning processes and the tools used to collect meteorological data. Reports are also used by local emergency managers and public safety organizations .

Skywarn consists of a network of severe storm spotters who observe weather conditions and make reports of severe weather to their local NWS offices. These spotters are regularly trained by personnel from the local NWS offices. In many areas, classes are conducted each spring in advance of the coming severe weather season.

[ 2 ] Many Skywarn spotters use methods to communicate with one another during severe storm events. A notable example of this is through the use of amateur radio nets , which is still an important method since severe weather can significantly disrupt local telecommunications systems. The program began in 1965, and counts over 300,000 active trained spotters.

[ 1 ] Storm spotting [ edit ] Where severe storms are possible, storm spotting groups such as Skywarn in the United States coordinate amateur radio operators and localized spotters to keep track of severe thunderstorms and tornadoes . Reports from spotters and chasers are given to the National Weather Service so that they have ground truth information to warn the general public. Spotting provides ground information and localized conditions that the National Weather Service might not know the extent or might not otherwise be aware of. They typically report events, such as structures struck by lightning , rotating wall clouds , funnel clouds —or conditions that exceed specific thresholds, such as extremely strong winds , significant hail or very heavy rainfall. The exact reporting thresholds can vary by region and may even dynamically change during a severe weather event. Spotters also give reports during winter storms , floods , hurricanes , and wildfires . Some spotters also play a role in damage assessment after a disaster, by reporting or documenting areas of damage, and by helping to formulate preliminary damage estimates (such as for tornadoes ).

Other countries have similar programs, such as the Canadian spotting program Canwarn , the SkyWarnUK and the Tornado and Storm Research Organisation (TORRO) programs in the United Kingdom, and Skywarn Europe for several European countries.

Training [ edit ] A Skywarn Training presentation at Peterson Air Force Base The NWS sponsors Skywarn training sessions in the US. These sessions usually occupy two hours, and focus on hazard identification and communication along with spotter strategies and safety. NWS recommends attendance at refresher courses every two years.

[ 3 ] Methods of participation [ edit ] Skywarn has long been associated with ham radio . Many NWS offices maintain an amateur radio station that is manned by amateur radio operators during times of severe weather. This allows licensed amateur radio spotters to transmit their severe weather reports directly to the NWS and receive up-to-date severe weather updates even if regular communications are disrupted or overloaded by the weather emergency. It does, however, require 1) the cooperation of the local Weather Forecast Office (WFO), and 2) that the station be manned continuously during severe weather events. Ham radio nets can operate to gather and relay information via landline telephone or Internet. Automatic weather station observations and spotter positions can be provided by the Automatic Packet Reporting System (APRS), which can also accommodate text message. Participation in the Skywarn program does not require an amateur radio license. More than half of all Skywarn spotters are not licensed amateur radio operators.

[ citation needed ] Many Skywarn spotters are members of emergency services such as volunteer fire departments, rescue squads, ambulance units, or police or sheriff's departments.

The NWS encourages anyone with an interest in public service and access to some method of communication, such as amateur radio, telephone, the Internet, etc. to join the Skywarn program. Volunteers include police and fire personnel, dispatchers, EMS workers, public utility workers, truck drivers, mariners, aircraft pilots, and other concerned private citizens. Individuals affiliated with hospitals, schools, churches, nursing homes or who have a responsibility for protecting others are also strongly encouraged to become spotters.

[ 1 ] Those without radio communication capability can still make their reports via cell phone, landline telephone, or the Internet.

See also [ edit ] Amateur Radio Emergency Service (ARES) Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Cooperative Observer Program (COOP) Radio Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES) Radio Emergency Associated Communication Teams (REACT) Significant Weather Observing Program (SWOP) Safecast (organization) References [ edit ] ^ a b c "NOAA NWS SKYWARN® Weather Spotter Program" .

Federal Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Catalog . CitizenScience.gov. Archived from the original on August 17, 2015 . Retrieved July 8, 2018 .

^ "NWS Jackson, MS - SKYWARN: Spotter Information" . National Weather Service. March 3, 2006. Archived from the original on October 11, 2006 . Retrieved April 21, 2008 .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions about Storm Spotting" . NOAA . Retrieved May 18, 2010 .

Doswell, III, Charles A.

; A. R. Moller; H. E. Brooks (1999). "Storm Spotting and Public Awareness since the First Tornado Forecasts of 1948".

Wea. Forecasting .

14 (4): 544– 557.

Bibcode : 1999WtFor..14..544D .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.583.5732 .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0434(1999)014<0544:SSAPAS>2.0.CO;2 .

External links [ edit ] Skywarn Homepage Index of Skywarn Web Pages Building a Strong Local Spotter Network (NWSFO La Crosse) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skywarn&oldid=1294426938 " Categories : Emergency communication Disaster preparedness in the United States National Weather Service Meteorological data and networks Amateur radio emergency communications organizations 1965 establishments in Maryland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2019 Pages using infobox organization with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 17:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skywarn 1 language Add topic

