Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political background 2 Aesthetic standards 3 Family values 4 Literature 5 Furniture design and interior decorating 6 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 6.1 Architectural legacy 7 Visual arts 8 Music 9 Czech National Revival 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Biedermeier 47 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 19th-century art movement from Central Europe Biedermeier Der Sonntagsspaziergang painting by Carl Spitzweg , a typical representation of the Biedermeier period (1841) Years active 1815–1848 Location Central Europe Influences Empire style Influenced Świdermajer Austrian Biedermeier sofa, c. 1815–1825, mahogany, upholstery (not original), Montreal Museum of Fine Arts ( Montreal , Canada) The Biedermeier period was an era in Central European art and culture between 1815 and 1848 during which the middle classes grew in number and artists began producing works appealing to their sensibilities. The period began with the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 and ended with the onset of the Revolutions of 1848 . The term originated in popular literature, before spreading to architecture , interior design , and visual arts .

"Biedermeier" derives from the fictional mediocre poet Gottlieb Biedermaier [ sic ], who featured in the Munich magazine Fliegende Blätter ( Flying Leaves ).

[ 1 ] It is used mostly to denote the unchallenging artistic styles that flourished in the fields of literature, music, the visual arts and interior design. As is natural in cultural creative movements, Biedermeier has influenced later styles.

Political background [ edit ] Emperor Francis I of Austria in his study at the Hofburg Palace. The interior is in the Biedermeier style. The Concert of Europe , ensured by the Austrian chancellor and foreign minister Klemens von Metternich , enabled the period of peace in which Biedermeier sensibilities developed.

The Biedermeier period does not refer to the era as a whole, but to a particular mood and set of trends that grew out of the unique underpinnings of the time in Central Europe. There were two driving forces for the development of the period. One was the growing urbanization and industrialization leading to a new urban middle class, which created a new kind of audience for the arts. The other was the political stability prevalent under Klemens von Metternich following the end of the Napoleonic Wars [ 2 ] and the Congress of Vienna .

[ citation needed ] The effect was for artists and society in general to concentrate on the domestic and, at least in public, the non-political. Writers, painters, and musicians began to stay in safer territory, and the emphasis on home life for the growing middle class meant a blossoming of furniture design and interior decorating.

[ 3 ] Aesthetic standards [ edit ] The affluent middle class values that are associated with Biedermeier include affection, sensibility, moderation, and modesty.

Biedermeier Gemütlichkeit means, that one reaches a state of cosiness, as well as friendliness.

Family values [ edit ] Biedermeier family values reflected the bourgeois consensus and the housewife was responsible for furnishing and choosing the appropriate design . Middle class women were held responsible for family cohesion and children had to be socialized within the family.

[ 4 ] Literature [ edit ] The term Biedermeier appeared first in literary circles in the form of a pseudonym, Gottlieb Biedermaier, used by the country doctor Adolf Kussmaul and lawyer Ludwig Eichrodt in poems that the duo had published in the Munich satirical weekly Fliegende Blätter in 1850.

[ 5 ] The German word bieder translates into plain , while Maier is a common bourgeois surname.

The verses parodied the people of the era, namely Samuel Friedrich Sauter, a primary teacher and sort of amateurish poet, as depoliticized and petit-bourgeois .

[ 6 ] The name was constructed from the titles of two poems—"Biedermanns Abendgemütlichkeit" (Biedermann's Evening Comfort) and "Bummelmaiers Klage" (Bummelmaier's Complaint)—which Joseph Victor von Scheffel had published in 1848 in the same magazine.

[ citation needed ] As a label for the epoch, the term has been used since around 1900.

[ citation needed ] Due to the strict control of publication and official censorship , Biedermeier writers primarily concerned themselves with non-political subjects, like historical fiction and country life. Political discussion was usually confined to the home, in the presence of close friends.

[ citation needed ] Typical Biedermeier poets are Annette von Droste-Hülshoff , Friedrich Halm , Adelbert von Chamisso , Eduard Mörike , and Wilhelm Müller , the last three of whom have well-known musical settings by Robert Schumann , Hugo Wolf and Franz Schubert respectively.

Adalbert Stifter was a novelist and short story writer whose work also reflected the concerns of the Biedermeier movement, particularly with his novel Der Nachsommer . As historian Carl Emil Schorske put it, "To illustrate and propagate his concept of Bildung, compounded of Benedictine world piety, German humanism, and Biedermeier conventionality, Stifter gave to the world his novel Der Nachsommer".

[ 7 ] Jeremias Gotthelf published The Black Spider in 1842 as an allegorical work that uses Gothic themes. It is Gotthelf's best known work. At first little noticed, the story is now considered by many critics to be among the masterworks of Biedermeier era and sensibility.

[ citation needed ] Furniture design and interior decorating [ edit ] Biedermeier room in the museum of Chrzanów , Poland Zimmerbild (chamber painting) of a Biedermeier interior in Berlin: fitted carpets, unified window, and pier-mirror draperies, and framed engravings in a restrained classicising style, around 1825, by Leopold Zielcke (1791–1861) Biedermeier furniture is admired for quality craftsmanship and comfort. Original early 19th century Biedermeier furniture was manufactured to be publicly displayed, with less concern for convenience and private enjoyment.

Biedermeier upholstery makes extensive use of coil-springs.

Biedermeier furniture design was purchased or commissioned by the prosperous middle class to celebrate comfort and leisure.

[ 8 ] Middle to late- Biedermeier furniture design represented a heralding towards historicism and revival eras long sought for. Social forces originating in France would change the artisan-patron system that achieved this period of design, first in the German states, and then into Scandinavia. The middle class growth originated in the Industrial Revolution in Britain and many Biedermeier designs owe their simplicity to Georgian lines of the 19th century, as the proliferation of design publications reached the German states and the Austrian Empire .

[ 9 ] The Biedermeier style was a simplified interpretation of the influential French Empire style of Napoleon , which introduced the romance of ancient Roman Empire styles, adapting these to modern early 19th century households.

Biedermeier furniture used locally available materials such as cherry, ash, and oak woods rather than the expensive timbers such as fully imported mahogany.

Unique designs were created in Vienna . Furniture from the earlier period (1815–1830) was the most severe and neoclassical in inspiration. It also supplied the most fantastic forms which the second half of the period (1830–1848) lacked, being influenced by the many style publications from Britain.

Biedermeier furniture was the first style in the world that emanated from the growing middle class. It preceded Victoriana and influenced mainly German-speaking countries.

In Sweden, Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte , who was adopted by King Charles XIII (who was childless), became Sweden's new king in 1818 as Karl XIV Johan. The Swedish Karl Johan style, similar to Biedermeier , retained its elegant and blatantly Napoleonic style throughout the 19th century.

Biedermeier furniture and lifestyle was a focus on exhibitions at the Vienna applied arts museum in 1896. The many visitors to this exhibition were so influenced by this fantasy style and its elegance that a new resurgence or revival period became popular amongst European cabinetmakers. This revival period lasted up until the Art Deco style was taken up.

Biedermeier also influenced the various Bauhaus styles through their truth in material philosophy.

The original Biedermeier period changed with the political unrests of 1845–1848 (its end date). With the revolutions in European historicism , furniture of the later years of the period took on a distinct Wilhelminian or Victorian style .

The term Biedermeier is also used to refer to a style of clocks made in Vienna in the early 19th century. The clean and simple lines included a light and airy aesthetic, especially in Viennese regulators of the Laterndluhr and Dachluhr styles.

Globe-shaped work table; 1815–1820; maple veneer, bird's eye maple, fruitwoods, gilded and ebonized wood, mirror, brass; from Vienna ; Montreal Museum of Fine Arts ( Montreal , Canada) Footstool; 1820–1840; carpentry embroidery upolstery; height: 29 cm, width: 46.3 cm; National Museum of Warsaw ( Warsaw , Poland ) Console; 1825–1830; carpentry wood carving veneering; height: 86.6 cm, width: 104.2 cm; National Museum of Warsaw Chess table; 1825–1835; carpentry veneering inlay; height: 77 cm; National Museum of Warsaw Architecture [ edit ] The Geymüllerschlössel in Vienna constructed in 1808, it houses the Biedermeier collection The 19th century population growth and urbanization in Europe resulted in Biedermeier architecture marked by functionality and elegance.

[ 10 ] The Geymüllerschlössel in Vienna was constructed in 1808, it houses today the Biedermeier collection of the Museum of Applied Arts.

[ citation needed ] Architectural legacy [ edit ] In Wilhelmine Germany social reformers regarded Biedermeier architecture as the perfect example for middle class culture and domestic reform.

[ 11 ] During the Weimar Republic Germany faced another housing crisis.

Paul Schultze-Naumburg was among Germany's most respected neo- Biedermeier architects and in his mind, new housing should imitate the German Biedermeier architecture of around 1800.

Paul Mebes popularized the neo- Biedermeier style, which was widely endorsed by German architects. A modernist neo- Biedermeier architectural style was contrived by Adolf Behne , Bruno Taut , and Peter Behrens .

[ 12 ] Schultz-Naumburg and Heinrich Tessenow advocated for interpreting Biedermeier architecture liberally, allowing for little modernization.

[ 13 ] The Polish architectural style Świdermajer was named as a play on Biedermeier .

[ citation needed ] Visual arts [ edit ] Am Fronleichnamsmorgen , by Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller (1857) is an example of Biedermeier paintings evoking harmony, belief, and tradition.

In the visual arts, Biedermeier style is associated with sentimentality and dullness.

Biedermeier paintings are known for their preoccupation with the everyday world with few grand gestures.

[ 14 ] This formed an aesthetic is evidenced in the portraits (e.g., Portrait of the Arthaber Family , 1837, by Friedrich von Amerling), landscapes (e.g. see Waldmüller or Gauermann landscapes) and contemporary-reporting genre scenes (e.g., Controversy of the Coachmen , 1828, by Michael Neder). Reflecting the moderately conservative and generally apolitical ethos of the movement and its audience, Biedermeier painting actively shunned the radical commentary used in other circles, though later works like The Bookworm ( c.

1850 ) left space for some lighthearted satire.

[ 15 ] Clara Schumann , noted pianist, portrayed in 1838 by Andreas Staub Key painters of the Biedermeier movement were Carl Spitzweg (1808–1885), Ferdinand Georg Waldmüller (1795–1865), Henrik Weber (1818–1866), Josip Tominc (1780–1866), Friedrich von Amerling (1803–1887), Friedrich Gauermann (1807–1862), Johann Baptist Reiter (1813–1890), Peter Fendi (1796–1842), Michael Neder [ de ] (1807–1882), Josef Danhauser (1805–1845), and Edmund Wodick (1806–1886) among others.

[ citation needed ] The biggest collection of Viennese Biedermeier paintings in the world is currently hosted by the Belvedere Palace Museum in Vienna.

[ citation needed ] Music [ edit ] Biedermeier music was most evident in the numerous publications for in-home music making. Published arrangements of operatic excerpts, German Lieder , and some symphonic works that could be performed at the piano without professional musical training, illustrated the broadened reach of music in this period. Composers from this period include Beethoven , Schubert , Rossini , Weber , Mendelssohn , Chopin , Schumann and Liszt .

The so called Schubertiad were people who gathered around the composer Franz Schubert to provide a forum or meeting place for political secret societies. However, Biedermeier home music making was decidedly unpretentious and nonpolitical, the backdrop being politically explosive. Even the critical discussion of music itself was avoided.

[ 16 ] Czech National Revival [ edit ] The Biedermeier period coincided with the Czech National Revival movement in the Czech-speaking areas . The most famous writers of the period were Božena Němcová , Karel Hynek Mácha , František Ladislav Čelakovský , Václav Kliment Klicpera , and Josef Kajetán Tyl . Key painters of the Czech Biedermeier were Josef Navrátil , Antonín Machek , and Antonín Mánes . Landscapes, still lifes, courtyards, family scenes, and portraits were very popular.

Václav Tomášek composed lyric piano pieces and songs to the patriotic lyrics of Czech authors.

Biedermeier was also reflected in the applied arts: glass and porcelain, fashion, jewellery, and furniture.

References [ edit ] ^ "Biedermeier" .

Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Oxford University Press. January 2009.

ISBN 978-0-19-953294-0 . Retrieved 29 July 2023 .

^ Christopher John Murray (2004) Encyclopedia of the Romantic Era, 1760–1850 , Taylor & Francis, Volume 1, p. 89 ^ "Biedermeier – Elegant, Simple Interior Design" . Biedermeier.us . Retrieved 27 June 2013 .

^ Lisa Pine (2017).

The Family in Modern Germany . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 7.

ISBN 9781350047723 .

^ Barea, Ilsa (1992).

Vienna: legend and reality . Pimlico. p. 112.

ISBN 0-7126-5579-4 .

^ Ludwig Eichrodt 1827–1892 Renate Begemann Verlag der Badischen Landesbibliothek, 1992, p.115 ^ Carl E. Schorske (1981).

Fin-De-Siecle Vienna: Politics and Culture . Cambridge University Press. p. 283.

ISBN 0-521-28516-X .

^ David Raizman (2003).

History of Modern Design: Graphics and Products Since the Industrial Revolution . Laurence King. p. 37.

ISBN 9781856693486 .

^ Austria-Hungary did not exist until 1867 ^ Allison Lee Palmer (2020).

Historical Dictionary of Neoclassical Art and Architecture . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 43.

ISBN 9781538133590 .

^ David Bertolini; Donald Kunze; Simone Brott (2016).

Architecture Post Mortem: The Diastolic Architecture of Decline, Dystopia, and Death . Taylor & Francis. p. 209.

ISBN 9781317179085 .

^ Xiangnan Xiong (2021).

Mies at Home: From Am Karlsbad 24 to the Tugendhat House . Taylor & Francis. p. 77.

ISBN 9781000600810 .

^ Xiangnan Xiong (2021).

Mies at Home: From Am Karlsbad 24 to the Tugendhat House . Taylor & Francis. p. 78.

ISBN 9781000600810 .

^ Ian Chilvers (2015).

The Oxford Dictionary of Art and Artists . Oxford University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 9780199532940 .

^ Bernstein, Eckhard (2004).

Culture and Customs of Germany .

Greenwood Press . p. 163.

ISBN 0313322031 .

^ David Schroeder (2009).

Our Schubert: His Enduring Legacy . Scarecrow Press. p. 96.

ISBN 9780810869271 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ilsa Barea (1966, republished 1992), Vienna: Legend and Reality, London: Pimlico. Chapter 111, Biedermeier, pp. 111–188.

Jane K. Brown , in The Cambridge Companion to the Lied , James Parsons (ed.), 2004, Cambridge.

Martin Swales & Erika Swales, Adalbert Stifter: A Critical Study , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Biedermeier at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historicism and Revivalism in architecture and decorative arts International Art Deco Art Nouveau Arts and Crafts Baroque Revival Beaux-Arts Neo-Byzantine Carpenter Gothic Egyptian Revival French Provincial Gothic Revival Greek Revival / Neo-Grec Mayan Revival Moorish Revival Neoclassical New Classical Renaissance Revival Châteauesque Italianate Palazzo style Rococo Revival Romanesque Revival Second Empire French European North American Spanish Colonial Revival Swiss chalet style Vernacular France Henry II style Henry IV style Louis XIII style Louis XIV style Louis XV style Louis XVI style Neoclassicism Directoire style Empire style French Restoration style Louis Philippe style Second Empire style Belle Époque Germany, Austria-Hungary Biedermeier Gründerzeit Jugendstil Nazi architecture Resort style Rundbogenstil Great Britain Adamesque Bristol Byzantine Edwardian Baroque Egyptian Revival Georgian Revival Indo-Saracenic Revival British India Jacobethan Neo-Palladian Queen Anne Revival Regency Romanesque Revival Scottish Baronial Tudor Revival / Black-and-white Revival Greece Mycenaean Revival Italy Stile Umbertino Milan Netherlands Traditionalist School Nordic countries Dragon style National Romantic style Gustavian style Nordic Classicism Portugal Neo-Manueline Neo-Mudéjar Soft Portuguese style Poland Zakopane Style Romania Romanian Revival Russian Empire and USSR Neo-Byzantine Neoclassical Revival Russian Revival Stalinist Serbia Serbo-Byzantine Revival Spain Neo-Mudéjar United States American Renaissance Collegiate Gothic Colonial Revival Dutch Colonial Revival Federal style Greco Deco Jeffersonian Mediterranean Revival Mission Revival Pueblo Revival Polish cathedral style Queen Anne style Richardsonian Romanesque Territorial Revival other Neo-Chinese style Imperial Crown Style (Japan) Neo-Korean architecture v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biedermeier&oldid=1304230414 " Categories : Biedermeier Neoclassical architecture in Germany Neoclassical architecture in Austria Neoclassical architecture Architectural styles History of art in Austria History of art in Germany Architecture in Germany Architecture in Austria German literary movements German literature Austrian literature Design Decorative arts History of furniture German Confederation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 20:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biedermeier 47 languages Add topic

