Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Synopsis 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 4.1 Primary sources 4.2 Secondary sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Theages 12 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dialogue attributed to Plato Part of a series on Platonism Life Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Theages ( Greek : Θεάγης , also known as "On Wisdom: Obstetric" (H ΠΈΡΙ ΣΟΦΙΑΣ᾽ ΜΑΙΕΥΤΙΚΟΣ) [ 1 ] ) is a dialogue attributed to Plato , featuring Demodocus , Socrates and Theages.  There is debate over its authenticity; [ 2 ] W. R. M. Lamb draws this conclusion from his opinion that the work is inferior and un-Socratic, but acknowledges that it was universally regarded as authentic in antiquity.

[ 3 ] Background [ edit ] In the dialogue, Demodocus introduces Socrates with his son Theages, who wishes to study "how to become wise". In this dialogue, Socrates makes mention of his daemon , the inner voice he also mentions in the Apology and other works by Plato.

Reference to Theages is made in Plato's Republic (496b): [ 4 ] “there are some who are restrained by our friend Theages' bridle; for everything in the life of Theages conspired to divert him from philosophy”.

Theages 125e8–126a4 is quoted by Nietzsche in Will to Power §958: "In Plato's Theages it is written: 'Each one of us would like to be master over all men, if possible, and best of all God.' This attitude must exist again" (trans.

Walter Kaufmann ).

Synopsis [ edit ] Demodocus meets Socrates near the stoa of Zeus , and asks for his advice regarding his son, Theages, who desires "to become wise" ( sophos ), something that Demodocus considers dangerous. Socrates suggests that he should speak directly to Theages, who happens to be present, remarking how the boy has a "holy sounding" name (Theages, θεός+άγω , means “god-guided").

Socrates asks Theages what kind specialty is wisdom exactly, and the boy responds that it's the ability to govern men (123e). Socrates suggests to Theages that the art he is looking for is that of the despot, tyrant (τύραννος) in the original text (124e), a word that in Ancient Greek meant autocrat rather than violent oppressor as it does today.

[ 5 ] Socrates proceeds to tell Theages that this, like all other arts, are learned by associating with those who practice it, which in this case are despots. Theages adds that he does not wish to rule by force like some tyrants do, but by consent (126a), and Socrates, holding to his original position, suggests that someone like Pericles would be most appropriate. Theages however replies that he has actually heard Socrates say that even Pericles could not make his student virtuous (which was truly recorded in the Protagoras dialogue (320a-b)).

Page of the Codex Oxoniensis Clarkianus 39 (aka "the Clarke Plato") a 9th century CE Greek manuscript. Showing the beginning of the dialogue.

Finally Theages suggests that, as rumours will have it, Socrates himself might be the best of teachers, if he would have him as his student. Socrates begins by telling Theages of his daemon , a guiding spirit whose voice he's been hearing since childhood, always telling him what he should not do, rather than what he should. He continues by giving examples of "prophesies" he has made with the help of this spirit, and must therefore take his warning seriously. Theages suggests that he could start as Socrates' student, and if the daemon appears to disagree, they could terminate his tutelage, otherwise, continue. Socrates agrees.

References [ edit ] ^ Plato; Fowler, Harold North; Lamb, W. R. M. (Walter Rangeley Maitland); Bury, Robert Gregg (1914).

Plato, with an English translation . Pratt - University of Toronto. London : Heinemann; Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.

^ Richard Kraut, in The Cambridge Companion to Plato (Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press, 1992), 35.

^ Lamb, Introduction to the Theages , in Plato XII (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1927).

^ "Plato, Republic, Book 6, section 496b" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2023-02-22 .

^ Sansone, David.

Ancient Greek Civilization (John Wiley & Sons, Oct 31, 2016), p.96.

Further reading [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Mark Joyal, The Platonic Theages: An Introduction, Commentary and Critical Edition, F. Steiner (2000) Secondary sources [ edit ] Seth Benardete, The Daimonion of Socrates: A Study of Plato's 'Theages,' M.A. Thesis, University of Chicago (1953) William S. Cobb, "Plato's Theages," Ancient Philosophy , 12.2 (1992), pp. 267–284 Mark Joyal, "Problems and interpretation in the Platonic Theages," Wiener Studien , Vol. 129 (2016), pp. 93–154 Mark Joyal, "The "Theages" Papyri," Zeitschrift fur Papyrologie und Epigraphik , Bd. 139 (2002), pp. 43-45 Mark Joyal, "Notes on [Plato], 'Theages,'" Mnemosyne , Fourth Series, Vol. 44, Fasc. 3/4 (1991), pp. 419–425 Kurt Lampe, "Rationality, Eros, and Daemonic Influence in the Platonic 'Theages' and the Academy of Polemo and Crates," The American Journal of Philology , Vol. 134, No. 3 (Fall 2013), pp. 383–424 John M. Rist, "Plotinus and the "Daimonion" of Socrates," Phoenix, Vol. 17, No. 1 (Spring, 1963), pp. 13–24 External links [ edit ] Works related to Theages at Wikisource HTML Greek text available via Greco interattivo Translation of the text available via Perseus Project Loeb Classical Library Greek-English edition by W.R.M. Lamb via archive.org Free public domain audiobook version of Theages translated by George Burges Apocrypha public domain audiobook at LibriVox .

George Burges , translator (1855).

v t e Socrates Bibliography Cultural depictions Life Trial of Socrates Socratic problem Concepts Social gadfly Socratic dialogue Socratic intellectualism Socratic method Socratic paradox Socratic questioning Phrases " I know that I know nothing " " The unexamined life is not worth living " Family Sophroniscus (father) Phaenarete (mother) Xanthippe (wife) Lamprocles (son) Menexenus (son) Myrto (wife) Works that include Socrates Art Double Herm of Socrates and Seneca (3rd-century sculpture) The Death of Socrates (1787 painting) Socrates (1950 sculpture) Stage The Clouds (423 BC play) Der geduldige Socrates (1721 opera) Socrates (1759 play) Socrate (1919 oratorio) Socrates on Trial (2007 play) Literature De genio Socratis (1st-century essay) On the Concept of Irony with Continual Reference to Socrates (1841 thesis) The Plot to Save Socrates (2006 novel) Other Serenade after Plato's "Symposium" (1954 serenade) Barefoot in Athens (1966 film) Socrates (1970 film) Dialogues Plato Apology Axiochus Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Demodocus Epinomis Eryxias Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hipparchus Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Lysis Menexenus Meno Minos On Justice On Virtue Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Theages Timaeus Xenophon Apology Memorabilia Oeconomicus Symposium Other Halcyon Socratic Letters Related Euthyphro dilemma Form of the Good Peritrope Religious skepticism Category v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Greece Sweden Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theages&oldid=1286206166 " Category : Dialogues of Plato Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 11:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theages 12 languages Add topic

