Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Principal works 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Simon Foucher 6 languages Català Eesti Français Italiano Nederlands Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher (1644–1696) Simon Foucher (1 March 1644 – 27 April 1696) was a French polemic [ 1 ] philosopher . His philosophical standpoint was one of Academic skepticism : he did not agree with dogmatism , but didn't resort to Pyrrhonism , either.

Life [ edit ] He was  born in Dijon , the son of a merchant , and appears to have taken holy orders at a very early age. For some years he held the position of honorary canon at Dijon, but he resigned in order to take up his residence in Paris . He graduated at the Sorbonne , having studied theology , and spent the remainder of his life in literary work in Paris, where he died.

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] Traité des hygrometres (1686) In his day Foucher enjoyed considerable reputation as a keen opponent of Malebranche and Leibniz . He revived the old arguments of the Academy , and advanced them with much ingenuity against Malebranche's doctrine. Otherwise his skepticism is subordinate to orthodox belief, the fundamental dogmas of the church seeming to him intuitively evident. His object was to reconcile his religious with his philosophical creed, and to remain a Christian without ceasing to be an academician.

[ 3 ] In his 1673 publication, Dissertation on the Search for Truth , he brought to light people's psychological predilection for certainties. He wrote about the art of doubting—about positioning oneself between doubting and believing. He wrote, " One needs to exit doubt in order to produce science—but few people heed the importance of not exiting from it prematurely....It is a fact that one usually exits doubt without realizing it.

" He wrote further, " We are dogma-prone from our mother's wombs.

" [ 1 ] Principal works [ edit ] Foucher had the annoying habit of re-using the same titles for his works, making it necessary to cite the whole subtitle in order to specify which work is being referred to.

1673: Dissertations sur la recherche de la vérité, ou sur la logique des academiciens ( Dissertations on the search for truth, or on the logic of the Academics ) (Foucher did not publish this work but distributed it privately. It is now lost and known only from Foucher's own references to it in later writings.) 1675: Critique de la Recherche de la vérité, où l'on examine en méme temps une partie des principes de Mr Descartes ( Critique of the "Search for truth", in which some of the principles of Mr Descartes are examined at the same time ) (A critique of Malebranche's work of that title; Foucher believed that because Malebranche chose the same title as Foucher, he was deliberately replying to Foucher's work. Note that only the first volume of Malebranche's book had appeared at this stage, which Foucher took to be the complete work.) 1679: Nouvelle dissertation sur la recherche de la vérité, contenant la réponse à la Critique de la Critique de la Recherche de la Verité ( New dissertation on the search for the truth, containing the response to the Critique of the Critique of the Search for truth ) ( Robert Desgabets had replied to Foucher's attack on Malebranche; this was Foucher's reply. Written in 1676, but published in 1679, as publishers were reluctant to take it on.) 1687: Dissertation sur la recherche de la vérité, contenant l'apologie des academiciens, où l'on fait voir que leur maniere de philosopher est la plus utile pour la religion, et la plus conforme au bon sense, pour servir de réponse à la Critique de la Critique, etc.; avec plusiers remarques sur les erreurs des sens et sur l'origine de la philosophie de Monsieur Descartes ( Dissertation on the search for truth, containing the defence of the Academics, in which is shown that their manner of philosophising is the most useful for religion and the closest to good sense, to serve as a response to the Critique of the Critique, etc.; with several remarks on the errors of the senses and on the origins of Mr Descartes' philosophy ) 1688: Lettre sur la morale de Confucius, philosophe de la Chine ( Letter on the morals of Confucius, Chinese philosopher ) (Foucher argues that, despite not being Christian, Chinese morality is admirable.) 1693: Dissertations sur la recherche de la vérité, contenant l'histoire et les principes de la philosophie des académiciens. Avec plusieurs réflexions sur les sentimens de M. Descartes ( Dissertations on the search for truth, containing the history and principles of the philosophy of the Academics; with several reflections on the views of Mr Descartes ) (Intended as a summary of Foucher's views in his previous writings, with some new material.) Traité des hygrometres ou machines pour mesurer la secheresse et l'humidité de l'air. Par m. Foucher chanoine de Dijon . A Paris: chez Estienne Michallet, ruà« saint Jacques à l'image saint Paul prés la fontaine saint Severin. 1686.

In addition to these works, Foucher published two long poems, and a few shorter philosophical pieces. He also conducted an important correspondence with Leibniz and wrote, but never published, a play.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2007). "The Ludic Fallacy, or The Uncertainty of the Nerd".

The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable .

Random House . p.

129 .

ISBN 978-1-4000-6351-2 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 736.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 736–737.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Foucher, Simon ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 10 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

736– 737.

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simon_Foucher&oldid=1300655752 " Categories : 1644 births 1696 deaths 17th-century French philosophers French sceptics Writers from Dijon French male non-fiction writers Skeptic philosophers People from the Province of Burgundy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 16:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simon Foucher 6 languages Add topic

