Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of backfeeding Toggle Types of backfeeding subsection 1.1 Intentional backfeeding 1.2 Unintentional backfeeding 1.3 Intrinsic backfeeding 2 Grid design considerations 3 Safety and operational hazards 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Backfeeding 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Backfeed ) Reversed flow of electricity This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Backfeeding" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Backfeeding is the flow of electric power in the direction reverse to that of the generally understood or typical flow of power. Depending on the source of the power, this reverse flow may be intentional or unintentional. If not prevented (in the case of unintentional backfeeding) or properly performed (in cases of intentional backfeeding), backfeeding may present unanticipated hazards to electrical grid equipment and service personnel.

Types of backfeeding [ edit ] Intentional backfeeding [ edit ] Development and economization of consumer power generation equipment such as wind turbines and photovoltaic systems has led to an increase in the number of consumers that may produce more electrical power than they consume during peak generating conditions. If supported by the consumer's electric utility provider, the excess power generated may be fed back into the electrical grid. This process makes the typical consumer a temporary producer while the flow of electrical power remains reversed. When backfeeding is performed this way, electric utility providers will install a specially engineered electrical meter that is capable of net metering .

Unintentional backfeeding [ edit ] A common source of unintentional backfeeding is an electrical generator (typically a portable generator ) that is improperly connected to a building electrical system. A properly installed electrical generator incorporates the use of a transfer switch or generator interlock kit to ensure the incoming electrical service line is disconnected when the generator is providing power to the building. In the absence (or improper usage) of a transfer switch, unintentional backfeeding may occur when the power provided by the electrical generator is able to flow over the electrical service line. Because an electrical transformer is capable of operating in both directions, electrical power generated from equipment on the consumer's premises can backfeed through the transformer and energize the distribution line to which the transformer is connected.

[ 1 ] Intrinsic backfeeding [ edit ] Backfeeding also exists in other instances where a location that is typically a generator becomes a consumer. This is commonly seen when an electrical generation plant is shut down or operating at such a reduced capacity that its parasitic load becomes greater than its generated power.

[ 2 ] The parasitic power load is the result of the usage of: pumps, facility lighting, HVAC equipment, and other control equipment that must remain active regardless of actual electrical power production. Electrical utilities often take steps to decrease their overall parasitic load to minimize this type of backfeeding and improve efficiency.

[ 3 ] Grid design considerations [ edit ] For manufacturing cost and operational simplicity reasons, most circuit (overcurrent) protection and power quality control (voltage regulation) devices used by electric utility companies are designed with the assumption that power always flows in one direction. An interconnection agreement can be arranged for equipment designed to backfeed from the consumer's equipment to the electrical utility provider's distribution system. This type of interconnection can involve nontrivial engineering and usage of costly specialized equipment designed to keep distribution circuits and equipment properly protected. Such costs may be minimized by limiting distributed generation capacity to less than that which is consumed locally, and guaranteeing this condition by installing a reverse-power cutoff relay that opens if backfeeding occurs.

[ 4 ] Safety and operational hazards [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Because it involves transfer of significant amounts of energy, backfeeding must be carefully controlled and monitored. Personnel working on equipment subject to backfeeding must be aware of all possible power sources, and follow systematic protocols to ensure that equipment is fully de-energized before commencing work, or use special equipment and techniques suitable for working on live equipment.

When working on de-energized power conductors, lineworkers attach temporary protective grounding assemblies or "protective ground sets", which short all conductors to each other and to an earth ground. This ensures that no wires can become energized, whether by accidental switching or by unintentional backfeeding.

Because of the hazards presented by unintentional backfeeding, the usage of equipment that defeats engineered or standardized safety mechanisms such as double-ended power cords (an electrical cord that has a male electrical plug on both ends) is illegal and against the United States National Electrical Code .

See also [ edit ] Islanding , a similar phenomenon involving local generators.

Transfer switch References [ edit ] ^ J.W.

"What is Backfeeding" .

Electrician's Library . Archived from the original on 2020-07-26.

^ J.W.

"What is Backfeeding" .

Electrician's Library . Archived from the original on 2020-07-26.

^ Vesel, Richard.

"Utilities Can Improve Power Plant Efficiency, Become Emission-Compliant in Short Term" .

Power Grid International .

^ Ram, Badri; Vishwakarma, D.N. (April 2001).

Power system protection and switchgear . Tata McGraw-Hill. p. 456.

ISBN 0074623508 .

v t e Electricity delivery Concepts Automatic generation control Backfeeding Base load Demand factor Droop speed control Electric power Electric power quality Electrical fault Energy demand management Energy return on investment Grid code Grid energy storage Grid strength Home energy storage Load-following Merit order Nameplate capacity Peak demand Power factor Power-flow study Power system reliability Repowering Utility frequency Variability Vehicle-to-grid Sources Non-renewable Fossil fuel power station Coal Natural gas Oil shale Petroleum Nuclear Renewable Biofuel Biogas Biomass Geothermal Hydro Marine Current Osmotic Thermal Tidal Wave Solar Sustainable biofuel Wind Generation AC power Cogeneration Combined cycle Cooling tower Dispatchable Energy storage Battery Induction generator Inertial response Inverter-based resource Micro CHP Microgeneration Rankine cycle Three-phase electric power Virtual power plant Transmission and distribution Ancillary services Balancing authority Contingency (electrical grid) Demand response Distributed generation Dynamic demand Electric power distribution Electric power system Electric power transmission Electrical busbar system Electrical grid Electricity retailing Grid balancing High-voltage direct current High-voltage shore connection Interconnector Load management Mains electricity by country Overhead power line Conductor gallop Power station Pumped hydro Single-wire earth return Smart grid Substation Super grid Transformer Transmission system operator (TSO) Transmission tower Utility pole Voltage control and reactive power management Failure modes Black start Brownout Cascading failure Islanding Power outage List Rolling blackout Protective devices Arc-fault circuit interrupter Circuit breaker Earth-leakage Sulfur hexafluoride Generator interlock kit Numerical relay Power system protection Protective relay Residual-current device (GFI) Economics and policies Availability factor Capacity factor Carbon offsets and credits Cost of electricity by source Energy subsidies Environmental tax Feed-in tariff Fossil fuel phase-out Load factor Net metering Pigouvian tax Renewable Energy Certificates Renewable energy commercialization Renewable Energy Payments Spark/Dark/Quark/Bark spread Statistics and production Electric energy consumption List of electricity sectors Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐nbqsg
Cached time: 20250812042336
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.266 seconds
Real time usage: 0.351 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 784/1000000
Revision size: 6165/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 48338/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1419/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25830/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.180/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4688615/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  303.890      1 -total
 29.76%   90.429      1 Template:Reflist
 25.69%   78.083      1 Template:Electricity_delivery
 25.45%   77.332      2 Template:Navbox
 23.96%   72.800      3 Template:Cite_web
 22.48%   68.328      1 Template:Short_description
 19.39%   58.936      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 18.75%   56.994      2 Template:Ambox
 13.42%   40.770      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.25%   15.949      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1291730:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812042336 and revision id 1140877392. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Backfeeding&oldid=1140877392 " Category : Electric power distribution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from June 2022 This page was last edited on 22 February 2023, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Backfeeding 1 language Add topic

