Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Flora 2 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 2.1 Mammals 2.2 Birds 2.3 Reptiles 2.4 Amphibians 2.5 Coral 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Flora and fauna of Honduras 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Honduras ) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards .

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( June 2016 ) This article contains translated text and the factual accuracy of the translation should be checked by someone fluent in Spanish and English.

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A whale shark near of the Island of Útila in Honduras The flora and fauna of Honduras reflects the country's geographical location inside the tropics . This has allowed for diverse species of plants and animals to be adapted, but some of them are now in danger of extinction . This has posed the Honduran government, offices and nature organizations to look after the protection of the local environment, like the creation of nature reserves .

[ 1 ] Flora [ edit ] The flora of Honduras is varied.
Pluvioselva, classified a tropical rain forest , is one of its most impressive vegetal populations. Ecologists designated it "Hygrophilous Megatherm Type", for corresponding to regions of high humidity and constant high temperatures, with a single dominant species, like pines or firs, covering big areas.

The eastern part of the country, La Mosquitia , has many creeper and climbing plants, such as lianas. There is a great variety of epiphytes, most strikingly the orchids. Adapted to the humid environment, trees are enormous and do not possess deep roots, but are supported thanks to large buttress roots, while the leaves are large and many. The tree trunks are straight and smooth and their first branches are high above the forest floor. The rainforest corresponds to parts of the northern region below 600 meters in elevation where there is no fully defined dry season, and covers 29% of the total area of the country. Among the more typical plant species in this biogeographical region: Spanish cedar ( Cedrela odorata ), American mahogany ( Swietenia mahagoni ), St Mary's tree ( Calophyllum brasiliense ), guayacan ( Tabebuia guayacan ), wild cashew ( Anacardium excelsum ), guayabo ( Terminalia amazonia ) and many others.

Numerous palm trees exist near the coasts, as well as tropical fruit trees and multicolored flowering plants . It is very common to find textile plants like cotton or the pacaya palm ( Chamaedorea tepejilote ). Also there are many medicinal plants like chicory , Mexican-tea and tolu balsam . Used as producing trees of rubber ( Ficus elastica ) and resin , the white hawthorn, and the castor oil plant ( Ricinus communis ).

Fauna [ edit ] Honduras fauna is very rich and varied, the most common of those being arboreal, or living in flowing rivers and lake waters. Big animals are not very numerous but there are hundreds of species of reptiles, amphibians and birds; lizards and many varieties of fish in the rivers. Monkeys, bats and numerous birds abound in the trees. Since there is no cold season, thousands of species of insects swarm constantly: wasps, ants, mosquitoes, gnats and others.

Among the mammals, Baird's tapir ( Tapirus bairdii ), white-lipped peccary ( Tayassu pecari ), collared peccary ( Dicotyles tajacu ), jaguar ( Pathera onca ), cougar ( Puma concolor ), ocelot ( Leopardus pardalis ), margay ( Leopardus wiedii ), jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yaguaroundi ), spectral bat ( Vampyrum spectrum ), Wagner's bonneted bat ( Eumops glaucinus ), white-nosed coati ( Nasua narica ), raccoon ( Procyon lotor ), giant anteater ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla ) can be found.

Bird species are also varied and abundant. Some of them are: hummingbirds (more than 20 species); black-throated trogon ( Trogon rufus ), pale-billed woodpecker ( Campephilus guatemalensis ), spectacled owl ( Pulsatrix perspicillata ), mottled owl ( Strix virgata ), keel-billed toucan ( Ramphastos sulfuratus ), collared aracari ( Pteroglossus torquatus ), yellow-crowned amazon ( Amazona ochrocephala ), Finsch's parakeet ( Aratinga finschi ) and king vulture ( Sarcoramphus papa ).

Among the reptiles are the terciopelo (aka yellow-beard, Bothrops asper ), rainforest hognosed pitviper ( Porthidium nasutum ), northern boa ( Boa imperator ), Middle American rattlesnake ( Crotalus simus ), green sea turtle ( Chelonia mydas ), spectacled caiman ( Caiman crocodilus ), American crocodile ( Crocodylus acutus ), coral snakes ( Micrurus species) and the brown basilisk ( Basiliscus vittatus ). Other reptiles are the iguanas which mimic the varied tones of the forest and freshwater turtles. Among the abundant amphibians are toads and tree-climbing frogs of varied species.

The coasts of Honduras are bathed to the north and east by the Caribbean Sea and in the south by the Pacific Ocean at the Gulf of Fonseca . The turquoise waters of the Caribbean can be appreciated by means of diving on coral reefs with a big diversity of calcareous seaweeds, red seaweeds ( Rhodophyta ), and marine meadows, among other aquatic plants that form a natural ecosystem.

Among the fauna can be found along Honduran coasts, whale shark ( Rhyncodon typus ), dolphins , and a big variety of tropical fish, shrimps ( Caridea ) and many more can be found Mammals [ edit ] Among the mammals : Baird's tapir ( Tapirus bairdii ) White-lipped peccary ( Tayassu pecari ) Collared peccary ( Dicotyles tajacu ) Jaguar ( Panthera onca ) Cougar ( Puma concolor ) Ocelot ( Leopardus pardalis ) Margay ( Leopardus wiedii ) Jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yagouaroundi ) Spectral bat ( Vampyrum spectrum ) Wagner's bonneted bat ( Eumops glaucinus ) White-nosed coati ( Nasua narica ) Raccoon ( Procyon lotor ) Giant anteater ( Myrmecophaga tridactyla ) Birds [ edit ] Honduran emerald ( Amazilia luciae ) Birds are varied and very abundant, among which: More than 20 species of hummingbirds including the Honduran emerald ( Amazilia luciae ), an endemic species .

The black-throated trogon ( Trogon rufus ) The bird carpenter ( Campephilus guatemalensis ) The spectacled owl ( Pulsatrix perspicillata ) The mottled owl ( Strix virgata ) The keel-billed toucan ( Ramphastos sulfuratus and collared aracari ( Pteroglossus torquatus ) The yellow-crowned amazon ( Amazona ochrocephala ) The Finsch's parakeet ( Aratinga finschi ) The king vulture ( Sarcoramphus papa ) Reptiles [ edit ] There are 264 species of reptiles known from Honduras, including 59 species that are endemic to the country. These include crocodilians (two species, the spectacled caiman Caiman crocodilus and the American crocodile Crocodylus acutus ), lizards (103 species), snakes (142 species), and turtles (17 species).

[ 2 ] The reptiles include the following: Terciopela (Central American lancehead), Bothrops asper Rainforest hognosed pitviper, Porthidium nasutum Northern boa, Boa imperator Middle American rattlesnake, Crotalus simus Brown basilisk , Basiliscus vittatus Green sea turtle , Chelonia mydas See also: Category:Reptiles of Honduras Amphibians [ edit ] There are 137 species of amphibians (frogs, toads, salamanders, and caecilians) known from Honduras, including 52 species that are endemic to the country.

Anurans are the most species-rich group (97 species), followed by salamanders (38 species) and caecilians (2 species).

[ 2 ] While new species are still expected to be discovered, chytridiomycosis and deforestation are threats to the amphibian fauna.

[ 2 ] At least one species, the frog Craugastor chrysozetetes , is believed to be extinct .

[ 3 ] See also: Category:Amphibians of Honduras Coral [ edit ] The coasts of Honduras, to the north and east are on the Caribbean and in the south by the Gulf of Fonseca . In the turquoise waters of the Caribbean Sea can appreciate by means of diving the coral reefs with their diversity of calcareous seaweeds , red seaweeds , (Rhodophyta), like marine meadows , among other aquatic plants that tackle a natural ecosystem .

Among the fauna that can be found on the Honduran coasts, are the whale shark , dolphins , a variety of tropical fish, shrimp (Caridea) and many other species.

Gallery [ edit ] Biodiversity of Honduras Agave Tillandsia flabellata Anthurium Liquidambar Dolphin Jaguar White-headed capuchin Collared peccary Iguana Boa constrictor Loggerhead sea turtle Cephalopholis fulva Toucan Great green macaw Harpy eagle White-crowned parrot See also [ edit ] Category:National parks of Honduras Agriculture of Honduras Reservation of the Biosphere of River Banana National park The Tigra Botanic garden Lancetilla Ecology of Honduras Geography of Honduras Climate of Honduras Geography of Honduras List of national parks of Honduras Education in Honduras References [ edit ] ^ Decree 104-93 (PDF) (in Spanish). Sovereign National Congress of Honduras . 8 June 1993.

^ a b c McCranie, James R. (2015). "A checklist of the amphibians and reptiles of Honduras, with additions, comments on taxonomy, some recent taxonomic decisions, and areas of further studies needed".

Zootaxa .

3931 (3): 352– 386.

doi : 10.11646/zootaxa.3931.3.2 .

PMID 25781832 .

^ Cruz, G.; Wilson, L.D.; McCranie, R. (2004).

" Craugastor chrysozetetes " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2004 : e.T56513A11488131.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2004.RLTS.T56513A11488131.en .

Bibliography [ edit ] Database biodiversity in Honduras Wild Honduras  (consulted 2012).

[1] Archived 2010-03-15 at the Wayback Machine v t e Flora and fauna of the Americas Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Falkland Islands French Guiana Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saba Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands U.S. Virgin Islands North America Central America Caribbean South America NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐d5btn
Cached time: 20250812122512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.348 seconds
Real time usage: 0.712 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1655/1000000
Revision size: 13536/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 57196/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9812/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28972/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.187/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5265966/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  329.198      1 -total
 30.27%   99.648      1 Template:Reflist
 25.16%   82.834      1 Template:Americas_topic
 24.10%   79.327      1 Template:Navbox
 22.10%   72.757      1 Template:Cite_act
 18.98%   62.468      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.84%   55.445      1 Template:Short_description
 10.82%   35.623      1 Template:More_footnotes
 10.75%   35.390      3 Template:Ambox
  8.92%   29.363      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:50802177:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812122512 and revision id 1234584881. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flora_and_fauna_of_Honduras&oldid=1234584881#Fauna " Categories : Fauna of Honduras Flora of Honduras Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from June 2016 All articles needing rewrite Wikipedia articles to be checked after translation Wikipedia articles to be checked after translation from Spanish Articles with multiple maintenance issues Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2024, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flora and fauna of Honduras 1 language Add topic

