Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 1.1 Soviet Union 1.2 China 1.3 Judaism and Zionism 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Bourgeois nationalism 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Esperanto Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nationalism of the ruling class under capitalism In Marxist theory , bourgeois nationalism is the ideology of the ruling capitalist class which aims to overcome class antagonism between proletariat and bourgeoisie by appealing to national unity . It is seen as a distraction from engaging in class struggle and an attempt to impose interests of capitalists on the proletariat by constructing capitalist interests as "national interests". Internationally, it aims to create antagonism between workers of different nations and serves as a divide-and-conquer strategy . The bourgeois nationalism is contrasted with left-wing nationalism and proletarian internationalism .

Usage [ edit ] Soviet Union [ edit ] See also: Soviet anti-Zionism and Ukrainian nationalism Leonid Brezhnev After the October Revolution , the Bolshevik government based its nationalities policy ( korenization ) on the principles of Marxism . According to these principles, all nations should disappear with time, and nationalism was considered a bourgeois ideology.

[ 1 ] By the mid-1930s these policies were replaced with more extreme assimilationist and Russification policies.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term was used indiscriminately to smear national groups opposed to Russian centralism.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 5 ] In his Report on the 50th anniversary of the formation of the USSR , Leonid Brezhnev emphasized: "That is why Communists and all fighters for socialism believe that the main aspect of the national question is unification of the working people, regardless of their national origin, in the common battle against every type of oppression, and for a new social system which rules out exploitation of the working people." [ 6 ] In the Soviet Union throughout its existence, the term generally referred to Ukrainian , Estonian , Latvian , Armenian , Kazakh and other types of nationalism that were propagated by the Soviet Union's non-Russian minorities. The Soviet leadership saw their struggle for independence as a threat to the entire existence of the USSR's communist regime.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] China [ edit ] Liu Shaoqi Bourgeois nationalism as a concept was discussed by China's president, Liu Shaoqi as follows: The exploitation of wage labour, competition, the squeezing out, suppressing and swallowing of rivals among the capitalists themselves, the resorting to war and even world war, the utilisation of all means to secure a monopoly position in its own country and throughout the world - such is the inherent character of the profit-seeking bourgeoisie. This is the class basis of bourgeois nationalism and of all bourgeois ideologies. [...]
The most vicious manifestations of the development of bourgeois nationalism include the enslavement of the colonial and semi-colonial countries by the imperialist powers, the First World War, the aggression of Hitler and Mussolini and the Japanese warlords during the Second World War, and the schemes for the enslavement of the whole world undertaken by the international imperialist camp, headed by American imperialism .

[ 10 ] Judaism and Zionism [ edit ] In 1949, the Communist Party USA declared the Zionist movement to be a form of "Jewish bourgeois nationalism".

[ 11 ] Writing for People's World in 2003, the leftist activist John Gilman referred to Jewish bourgeoisie nationalism as having multiple varieties, including Jewish assimilationism and Zionism.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Class collaboration Liberal nationalism Social patriotism Socialist patriotism Sovietization Civic nationalism References [ edit ] ^ Khiterer, V.

(2004).

"Nationalism in the Soviet Union" .

Encyclopedia of Russian History . Macmillan Reference USA.

^ Nicolaïdis, Kalypso; Sebe, Berny; Maas, Gabrielle (2014-12-23).

Echoes of Empire: Memory, Identity and Colonial Legacies .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-85773-896-7 – via Google Books .

Elsewhere in the USSR, the late 1930s and the outbreak of World War II also saw some significant changes: elements of korenizatsiya were phased out... the Russians were officially anointed as the 'elder brothers' of the Soviet family of nations, whilst among historians Tsarist imperialism was rehabilitated as having had a 'progressive significance' ^ Chang, Jon K.

"Tsarist continuities in Soviet nationalities policy: A case of Korean territorial autonomy in the Soviet Far East, 1923-1937" .

Eurasia Studies Society of Great Britain & Europe Journal .

^ Nikolayets, K. (2011).

"Vplyv uyavlenʹ pro sotsialistychnyy sposib zhyttya na spryamuvannya suspilʹno-politychnoyi aktyvnosti naselennya Ukrayiny: istoriohrafiya" Вплив уявлень про соціалістичний спосіб життя на спрямування суспільно-політичної активності населення України: історіографія [The influence of ideas about the socialist way of life on the direction of social and political activity of the population of Ukraine: historiography].

Naukovi Zapysky Z Ukrayinsʹkoyi Istoriyi: Zbirnyk Naukovykh Pratsʹ Наукові записки з української історії: Збірник наукових праць [ Scientific notes on Ukrainian history: Collection of scientific papers ] (in Ukrainian).

26 : 293. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2012.

^ "Nationalism" . Retrieved 1 June 2023 .

^ Brezhnev, L. I.

(1972).

The 50th Anniversary of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics . Moscow. p. 10.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Khiterer, В. (2004), " Націоналізм в Радянському Союзі " , в Енциклопедії російської історії, М. довідник США ^ Фролов М. О.

Сталін і Україна: особливості стосунків між кремлівським диктатором, українським народом, керівництвом УСРР і КП(Б)У в 1920-х рр. ст.

/ Наукові праці історичного факультету Запорізького національного університету.

— Запоріжжя: ЗНУ, Історія України 20–30-х рр. XX, 2011. — Вип. XXX.

— 368 с.

ISSN 2076-8982 ^ Науковий і культурно-просвітній краєзнавчий часопис “Галичина” Науковий журнал / Василь Жупник « Протистояння ОУН і УПА та радянських органів влади на території Волині і Галичини (1944–1953 рр.) в радянській історіографії », 2008, Ч.14 ^ Shaoqi, Liu . "I. The Bourgeois-Nationalist Concept of the Nation".

Internationalism and Nationalism . Retrieved 5 April 2015 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Schwartz, Harry (31 March 1949).

"COMMUNISTS HERE TO FIGHT ZIONISM; Freiheit Association Apologizes for Not Embracing Stand of Ehrenburg Earlier" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2023-05-06 .

^ "Zionism what it does and does not mean" .

People's World . 16 January 2003 . Retrieved 2023-05-06 .

Further reading [ edit ] Internationalism and Nationalism by Liu Shaoqi Marxism and Nationalism Archived 2006-07-13 at the Wayback Machine by Tom Lewis v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Nationalism Development Nationalism in Antiquity Nationalism in the Middle Ages Anthem Colours Flag Epic God Identity Language Music Myth Religion Sport Symbol Animal Emblem Flower Treasure By type African Anarchist Blind Bourgeois Business Welfare Civic Constitutional patriotism Corporate- Cyber- Ecological Economic Ethnic European Expansionist Palingenetic ultranationalism Homo- Integral Left-wing Communist Linguistic Mystic Neo-/New Pan- Queer Right-wing Racial Arab Berber Black Korean White Zionism Religious Christian Catholic Clerico- Mormon Hindu Hindutva Islamic Resource Revolutionary Ethnocacerism National syndicalist Falangism Fascism List of fascist movements Romantic Technological Territorial Terrorism Trans- Ultra- Japan Organizations List of nationalist organizations Nationalist Clubs Related concepts Anarchism and nationalism Anationalism Anti-nationalism Banal nationalism Cultural nationalism Diaspora politics Eliminationism Exceptionalism Gastronationalism Gender and nationalism Historiography and nationalism Internationalism Irredentism Jingoism Nation-building National indifference National question National revival Nation state Nationalism studies Natural border Plurinationalism Principle of nationalities [ fr ] Revanchism State-building Wars of national liberation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bourgeois_nationalism&oldid=1298286516 " Categories : Anti-Zionism Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Soviet phraseology Marxist terminology Political science terminology Nationalism in the Soviet Union Nationalism Anti-nationalism Diversionary tactics Conflict (process) Power (social and political) concepts Bourgeoisie Propaganda in the Soviet Union Hidden categories: CS1 uses Ukrainian-language script (uk) CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 15:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bourgeois nationalism 12 languages Add topic

