Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Modern revival 3 Description 4 Flowers associated with Mary 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Mary garden 3 languages Español 한국어 Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Garden with statue of Virgin Mary For the opera singer, see Mary Garden .

Garden at Saint Mary's University of Minnesota A Mary garden is a small sacred garden enclosing a statue or shrine of the Virgin Mary , who is known to many Christians as the Blessed Virgin , Our Lady , or the Mother of God .

[ 1 ] In the New Testament , Mary is the mother of Jesus of Nazareth . Mary gardens are most common to those Christian denominations which hold the Virgin Mary in special esteem, particularly Roman Catholics and Anglicans .

History [ edit ] Part of a series on the Mariology of the Catholic Church Immaculate Conception by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo ( c.

1675 ) Overview Prayers Antiphons Titles Hymns to Mary Devotional practices Saints Societies Consecrations and entrustments Veneration Titles of Mary Theotokos (Mother of God) Mediatrix Mother of the Church Our Lady of Good Counsel Our Lady of Mount Carmel Our Lady of Peace Our Lady of Sorrows Our Lady of Victory Our Lady, Star of the Sea Queen of Heaven Queen of Poland Refugium Peccatorum (Refuge of Sinners) Untier of Knots Virgin of Mercy Prayers and hymns Angelus Fátima prayers Flos Carmeli Hail Mary Hail Mary of Gold Immaculata prayer Magnificat Mary, Mother of Grace Memorare Sub tuum praesidium Marian hymns Devotional practices Acts of Reparation Consecration to Mary First Saturdays Rosary Seven Joys of the Virgin Seven Sorrows of Mary Three Hail Marys Movements and societies Sodality of Our Lady Congregation of Marian Fathers Company of Mary (Montfort) Marianists (Society of Mary) Marist Fathers Marist Brothers Schoenstatt Movement Legion of Mary World Apostolate of Fátima (Blue Army) Mariological Society Our Lady's Rosary Makers Marian Movement of Priests Fatima Family Apostolate Queen of Angels Foundation Apparitions Approved, with widespread liturgical veneration endorsed by the Holy See : Fátima Three Secrets of Fátima Guadalupe Knock La Salette Lourdes Miraculous Medal Walsingham Dowry of Mary Key Marian feast days Mother of God (1 January) Candlemas (2 February) Annunciation (25 March) Assumption (15 August) Nativity (8 September) Holy Name (12 September) Presentation (21 November) Immaculate Conception (8 December) Catholic Church portal v t e The practice originated among monasteries and convents in medieval Europe . During the Middle Ages, people saw reminders of Mary in the flowers and herbs growing around them.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Modern revival [ edit ] The first such garden open to the public in the United States was founded in 1932 at St. Joseph's Church, Woods Hole , Cape Cod , Massachusetts .

[ 5 ] This garden was founded by Frances Crane Lillie, a summer resident of Woods Hole.

[ 6 ] Inspired by the St. Joseph's Mary Garden in Woods Hole, Edward A. G. McTague and John S. Stokes, Jr. founded "Mary's Gardens" of Philadelphia in 1951 as a project to research flowers identified with Mary, and make available seeds and plant source information for starting Mary gardens. They also initiated a series of articles in religious publications to encourage the planting of Mary gardens.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Description [ edit ] The statue of Mary, sometimes holding the Infant Christ , is central to the garden. Select flowers, shrubs, and trees associated with the legends about Mary are planted in the garden. Such plants may include laurel trees , strawberries, ladyslippers , lilies of the valley , peonies , violets , irises and roses, all of which are identified as symbolic and significant in the story of Mary as recounted in the Bible and other Christian stories. Gardens may have benches and a facility for lighting votive candles .

It demonstrates devotional commitment through the spiritual practice of designing, building and maintaining the garden and for the attendance, contemplation , and prayers of visitors. Mary gardens are similar to the Zen meditation gardens found in the Buddhist tradition, with the exception that a Mary Garden pays homage to a person, the Virgin Mary, whereas a meditation garden in the East Asian traditions does not focus on a person.

[ 9 ] [ 2 ] Flowers associated with Mary [ edit ] More than 30 flowers and herbs are connected to legends about Mary's life.

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Lily [ 12 ] Columbine [ 13 ] Lavender [ 14 ] Madonna lily [ 8 ] Marigold [ 12 ] Violet [ 12 ] Irises were used in Mary gardens. The blade-shaped foliage denotes the sorrows which 'pierced her heart.' An effort has been made by the Saint Kateri Conservation Center as well as by the Marianist Environmental Education Center (MEEC) to identify plants indigenous to the Eastern and Midwestern US that can be used in a Mary Garden.

Gallery [ edit ] Mary garden at the Basilica of St. Lawrence in Asheville, North Carolina Mary garden at St. Michael's College School in Toronto, Ontario , Canada Mary garden at Chapel of the Most Holy Trinity at the West Point Military Academy in New York See also [ edit ] Catholic devotions Anglican devotions Sacramentals Hortus conclusus References [ edit ] ^ Ann Ball, 2003 Encyclopedia of Catholic Devotions and Practices ISBN 0-87973-910-X page 341 ^ a b c "Krymow, Vincenzina and Frisk, M. Jean. "Honoring Mary in Your Garden", St. Anthony Messenger" .

Archived from the original on 2018-01-05 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ " "Herbs and Flowers of the Virgin Mary", Marian Library, University of Dayton" .

Archived from the original on 2016-12-07 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ "Stokes Jr., John S., "Mary Gardens Historical Perspective", 1991" .

Archived from the original on 2012-06-14 . Retrieved 2013-05-02 .

^ " "Mary's Gardens", Marian Library, University of Dayton" .

Archived from the original on 2017-02-06 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ " "The Herbs and Flowers of the Virgin Mary", Marian Library, University of Dayton" .

Archived from the original on 2016-12-07 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ "Stokes Jr., John S., "Mary Gardens in Historical Perspective", 1991" .

Archived from the original on 2017-06-30 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ a b "Filby, Julie. "Mary garden: a flower-enhanced tranquil spot to reflect on the Blessed Mother", Denver Catholic Register , April 22,2009" . Archived from the original on 2012-06-25 . Retrieved 2013-05-02 .

^ "Create a Mary Garden" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-08 . Retrieved 2009-06-01 .

^ " "May flowers", Marian Library, University of Dayton" .

Archived from the original on 2016-09-21 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ "Filby, Julie. "Mary garden: a flower-enhanced tranquil spot to reflect on the Blessed Mother", Denver Catholic Register , April 22,2009" . Archived from the original on 2012-06-25 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ a b c " "May flowers", Marian Library, University of Dayton" .

Archived from the original on 2016-09-21 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ "Krymow, Vincenzina and Frisk, M. Jean. "Honoring Mary in Your Garden", St. Anthony Messenger" .

Archived from the original on 2018-01-05 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

^ "Filby, Julie. "Mary garden: a flower-enhanced tranquil spot to reflect on the Blessed Mother", Denver Catholic Register , April 22,2009" . Archived from the original on 2012-06-25 . Retrieved 2016-12-05 .

External links [ edit ] John Stokes and Mary's Gardens Collection , select digitized records of John Stokes' organization, Mary Gardens. University of Dayton Libraries.

John Stokes and Mary's Gardens Collection Finding Aid , finding aid for the John Stokes and Mary's Gardens collection. Marian Library. University of Dayton Libraries.

v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mary_garden&oldid=1233285103 " Categories : Anglican Mariology Gardens in religion Marian devotions Shrines to the Virgin Mary Catholic Mariology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2024, at 08:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mary garden 3 languages Add topic

