Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early history and warfare Toggle Early history and warfare subsection 1.1 Formalization of life saving treatments 2 Common emergences that require first aid in humans Toggle Common emergences that require first aid in humans subsection 2.1 Bleeding 2.2 Cardiac arrest (total stop of heartbeat) 2.3 Choking 2.4 Diabetes, hyperglycemia 2.5 Diabetes, hypoglycemia 2.6 Drowning 2.7 Infarction of the heart 2.8 Stroke 3 Aims of first aid 4 Setting the priorities Toggle Setting the priorities subsection 4.1 ABCDE and csABCDE general protocol 4.2 ABC and CABD cardiopulmonary resuscitation protocol 4.3 Wider protocols 4.3.1 European protocol 4.4 Other mentionable protocols 4.4.1 Check, Call and Care protocol 4.4.2 SAFE-POINT protocol 5 Key basic skills Toggle Key basic skills subsection 5.1 Displacement skills 5.2 Checking skills 5.3 Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) 5.4 Airway, Breathing, and Circulation skills 5.4.1 Preserving life 6 First aid kits Toggle First aid kits subsection 6.1 Contents 7 Training principles Toggle Training principles subsection 7.1 Types of first aid which require training 8 First aid services 9 Symbols 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents First aid 78 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Emergency first response medical treatment This article is about general first aid for humans. For other uses, see First aid (disambiguation) .

This article contains instructions or advice .

Wikipedia is not a guidebook; please help rewrite the content to make it more encyclopedic or move it to Wikiversity , Wikibooks , or Wikivoyage .

( June 2022 ) The universal first aid symbol A US Navy corpsman gives first aid to an injured Iraqi citizen.

Medical portal First aid is the first and immediate assistance given to any person with a medical emergency , [ 1 ] with care provided to preserve life, prevent the condition from worsening, or to promote recovery until medical services arrive. First aid is generally performed by someone with basic medical or first response training.

Mental health first aid is an extension of the concept of first aid to cover mental health, [ 2 ] while psychological first aid is used as early treatment of people who are at risk for developing PTSD .

[ 3 ] Conflict first aid, focused on preservation and recovery of an individual's social or relationship well-being, is being piloted in Canada .

There are many situations that may require first aid, and many countries have legislation, regulation, or guidance, which specifies a minimum level of first aid provision in certain circumstances. This can include specific training or equipment to be available in the workplace (such as an automated external defibrillator ), the provision of specialist first aid cover at public gatherings, or mandatory first aid training within schools. Generally, five steps are associated with first aid: Assess the surrounding areas.

Move to a safe surrounding (if not already; for example, road accidents are unsafe to be dealt with on roads).

Call for help: both professional medical help and people nearby who might help in first aid such as the compressions of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).

Perform suitable first aid depending on the injury suffered by the casualty.

Evaluate the casualty for any fatal signs of danger, or possibility of performing the first aid again.

Early history and warfare [ edit ] Skills of what is now known as first aid have been recorded throughout history, especially in relation to warfare , where the care of both traumatic and medical cases is required in particularly large numbers. The bandaging of battle wounds is shown on Classical Greek pottery from c.

500 BC , whilst the parable of the Good Samaritan includes references to binding or dressing wounds.

[ 4 ] There are numerous references to first aid performed within the Roman army , with a system of first aid supported by surgeons, field ambulances, and hospitals.

[ 5 ] Roman legions had the specific role of capsarii, who were responsible for first aid such as bandaging, and are the forerunners of the modern combat medic .

[ 6 ] Further examples occur through history, still mostly related to battle, with examples such as the Knights Hospitaller in the 11th century AD, providing care to pilgrims and knights in the Holy Land .

[ 7 ] Formalization of life saving treatments [ edit ] During the late 18th century, drowning as a cause of death was a major concern amongst the population. In 1767, a society for the preservation of life from accidents in water was started in Amsterdam , and in 1773, physician William Hawes began publicizing the power of artificial respiration as means of resuscitation of those who appeared drowned. This led to the formation, in 1774, of the Society for the Recovery of Persons Apparently Drowned , later the Royal Humane Society , who did much to promote resuscitation.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Napoleon 's surgeon, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey , is credited with creating an ambulance corps, the ambulance volantes , which included medical assistants, tasked to administer first aid in battle.

[ 10 ] In 1859, Swiss businessman Jean-Henri Dunant witnessed the aftermath of the Battle of Solferino , and his work led to the formation of the Red Cross , with a key stated aim of "aid to sick and wounded soldiers in the field".

[ 7 ] The Red Cross and Red Crescent are still the largest provider of first aid worldwide.

[ 11 ] Esmarch bandage showing soldiers how to perform first aid In 1870, Prussian military surgeon Friedrich von Esmarch introduced formalized first aid to the military, and first coined the term "erste hilfe" (translating to 'first aid'), including training for soldiers in the Franco-Prussian War on care for wounded comrades using pre-learnt bandaging and splinting skills, and making use of the Esmarch bandage which he designed.

[ 4 ] The bandage was issued as standard to the Prussian combatants, and also included aide-memoire pictures showing common uses.

In 1872, the Order of Saint John of Jerusalem in England changed its focus from hospice care, and set out to start a system of practical medical help, starting with making a grant towards the establishment of the UK's first ambulance service. This was followed by creating its own wheeled transport litter in 1875 (the St John Ambulance), and in 1877 established the St John Ambulance Association (the forerunner of modern-day St John Ambulance ) "to train men and women for the benefit of the sick and wounded".

[ 12 ] Also in the UK, Surgeon-Major Peter Shepherd had seen the advantages of von Esmarch's new teaching of first aid, and introduced an equivalent programme for the British Army, and so being the first user of "first aid for the injured" in English, disseminating information through a series of lectures. Following this, in 1878, Shepherd and Colonel Francis Duncan took advantage of the newly charitable focus of St John, [ 4 ] and established the concept of teaching first aid skills to civilians. The first classes were conducted in the hall of the Presbyterian school in Woolwich (near Woolwich barracks where Shepherd was based) using a comprehensive first aid curriculum.

First aid training began to spread through the British Empire through organisations such as St John, often starting, as in the UK, with high risk activities such as ports and railways.

[ 13 ] The first recorded first aid training in the United States took place in Jermyn, Pennsylvania in 1899.

[ 14 ] Common emergences that require first aid in humans [ edit ] List of common situations that require first aid, and information about them (in alphabetical order): Bleeding [ edit ] "Get first aid at once" prevention poster (New Zealand, 1950s).

Main article: Emergency bleeding control § Wound management Bleeding or hemorrhage is the escape of blood from veins or arteries.

Cardiac arrest (total stop of heartbeat) [ edit ] For the proper sequence of first aid reactions to a cardiac arrest, see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation § Order of CPR in a first aid sequence .

For the cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) practice itself, see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation § Compressions with rescue breaths .

Cardiac arrest is the complete stop of heart function.

Choking [ edit ] Main article: Choking § Basic treatment (first aid) Choking is the obstruction of breathing caused by a blockage in the respiratory tract.

Diabetes, hyperglycemia [ edit ] Main article: Hyperglycemia § Treatment Hyperglycemia or hyperglycaemia is a condition in which an excessive level of glucose is present in the blood.

Diabetes, hypoglycemia [ edit ] Main article: Diabetic hypoglycemia § Treatment Hypoglycemia or hypoglycaemia is a condition in which an excessively low level of glucose is present in the blood.

It typically occurs due to complications with medication used to reduce blood sugar levels in diabetic patients.

Drowning [ edit ] For first aid in a victim of drowning, see Drowning § First aid .

For the possible reactions when a victim is drowning, see Drowning § Rescue .

Drowning in humans is a type of suffocation caused by both the nose and mouth being submerged in liquid.

The first aid for drowning is very similar to that of cardiorespiratory arrest.

Infarction of the heart [ edit ] Main article: Management of acute coronary syndrome § Patient-dependent initial measures A myocardial infarction , commonly known as a heart attack , is the sudden reduction in or lack of blood flow in one of the coronary arteries in the heart, causing infarction (tissue death due to inadequate blood supply). Risk factors for myocardial infarctions include living a sedentary lifestyle, age (being over 45 for men and 55 for women), tobacco and alcohol use, stress, obesity, high chelesterol, family history, and diabetes.

[ 15 ] Stroke [ edit ] Main article: FAST (stroke) A stroke is a sudden lack of blood supply to the brain caused by a burst or blocked artery.

[ 16 ] Aims of first aid [ edit ] The primary goal of first aid is to prevent death or serious injury from worsening. The key aims of first aid can be summarized with the acronym of 'the three Ps': [ 17 ] Preserve life: The overriding aim of all medical care which includes first aid, is to save lives and minimize the threat of death.  First aid done correctly should help reduce the patient's level of pain and calm them down during the evaluation and treatment process.

Prevent further harm: Prevention of further harm includes addressing both external factors, such as moving a patient away from any cause of harm, and applying first aid techniques to prevent worsening of the condition, such as applying pressure to stop a bleed from becoming dangerous.

Promote recovery: First aid also involves trying to start the recovery process from the illness or injury, and in some cases might involve completing a treatment, such as in the case of applying a plaster to a small wound.

First aid is not medical treatment, and cannot be compared with what a trained medical professional provides. First aid involves making common sense decisions in the best interest of an injured person.

Setting the priorities [ edit ] A first aid intervention would follow an order, which would try to attend in the best manner the main threats for the life and mobility of the victim.

There are some first aid protocols (such as ATLS, BATLS and SAFE-POINT) that define which are the priorities and the correct execution of the steps for saving human life. A major benefit of the use of official protocols is that they require minimum resources, time and skills, and have a great degree of success.

ABCDE and csABCDE general protocol [ edit ] The ABCDE method is the general protocol of first aid and implies a quite general view.

[ 18 ] It was initially developed by Dr Peter Safar in the 1950s. But it has received some modifications, improvements and variations that were intended for more specific contexts. For example: it has been completed with improvements from the ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) version of the American College of Surgeons [ 19 ] and the BATLS (Battlefield Advanced Trauma Life Support) version of the British Army.

[ 20 ] As a result, the mnemonic of the steps of this protocol is ABCDE , or its improved version (cs)ABCDE (sometimes called xABCDE , the words in the mnemonic may vary), which represent: [ 21 ] [ 22 ] —An attached first part (named as "cs" or "x", or in any other way) that will always mention stopping the critical losses of blood and managing with a special and careful treatment to patients with serious damages at the spine that threaten their future mobility: catastrophic-bleeding (stopping urgently the massive external bleedings, as it is marked in the BATLS version).

spine-protection (previous examination of the spine, and careful preventive treatment for its damages, as it is marked in the ATLS version).

—The ABCDE protocol itself: Airway (clearing airways).

Breathing (ensuring respiration).

Circulation (ensuring effective cardiac output).

Any Defibrillation process for a cardiac arrest (total stop of heartbeat) would be included here, or in 'Disability' (as a double mnemonic 'D').

Disability (neurological condition, level of glucose can also be examined).

Exposure (or 'Evaluate': other questions in an overall examination of the patient, environment).

ABC and CABD cardiopulmonary resuscitation protocol [ edit ] This protocol (originally named as ABC ) is a simplified version or concrete application of the previous csABCDE (or ABCDE) protocol, that focuses in the use of cardio-pulmonary resuscitation . The American Heart Association and the International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation teach it as a reference.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Its current mnemonic is CABD (an improvement in the sequence for most of the cases): Circulation or Chest Compressions.

Airway : attempt to open the airway (using a head-tilt and chin-lift technique; not in the case of babies, which require avoid tilting the head).

Breathing or Rescue Breaths .

Defibrillation : use of an automated external defibrillator to recover heart function.

Wider protocols [ edit ] These are the protocols that do not only deal with direct care to the victim but they also mention other complementary tasks (before and later).

European protocol [ edit ] This method has been studied and employed for a long time in many European countries, as France.

[ 25 ] It is a reference, of a certain reputation, that could be applied solely or to a certain degree, usually combining it with the common csABCDE (ABCDE) method or its simplified CABD (ABC) variant about cardio-pulmonary resuscitation . The European method has a wider range than them, and their steps include tasks that are previous to the first aid techniques themselves.

These are its steps (with no official mnemonic that helps to remember them): Protection for patients and rescuers. If dangers are present, the patient would be moved to a safer place with a careful management of any detected spinal injury.

Evaluation of the patient (looking for priorities as critical bleeding and cardiac arrest).

Alerting to medical services and bystanders.

Performing the first aid practices. The CABD (or ABC) method for cardio-pulmonary resuscitation and many details of the wider csABCDE (or ABCDE) method would be included in this step.

Other mentionable protocols [ edit ] Some other known protocols that could be mentioned in many contexts (in alphabetical order): AMEGA protocol It is similar to the European protocol, because it also has a wider range [ 26 ] than the common csABCDE (or ABCDE) protocol, and includes other tasks that are previous to the first aid techniques themselves. The order of the steps is changed, and the experience with it is lesser, but it adds the idea of a posterior 'aftermath' phase.

The mnemonic AMEGA refers to: Assess the situation, looking for risks.

Make safe the situation, after having identified the risks.

Emergency aid . Performing the first aid practices.

Get help . Asking for emergency help to medical services and bystanders.

Aftermath . The aftermath tasks include recording and reporting, continued care of patients and the welfare of responders and the replacement of used first aid kit elements.

ATLS and BATLS protocols See also: Advanced trauma life support and BATLS They are basically the common ABCDE and csABCDE protocol , but focusing in particular aspects.

The ATLS (Advanced Trauma Life Support) version [ 19 ] was developed by the American College of Surgeons, focusing in the particular needs of trauma and specifically in the spinal injuries. And the BATLS (Battlefield Advanced Trauma Life Support) version [ 20 ] is an improvement for the British Army that added the concept of 'catastrophic bleeding'.

The preference for one or another among all these protocols can depend on the context and the audience.

Check, Call and Care protocol [ edit ] It comes from Red Cross [ 27 ] and, as the European protocol, has a wider range than the common csABCDE (ABCDE) method. So it could be seen as a simplification of the European protocol, and, especially, easier to remember as a guide for most of cases.

It mentions the following steps: Check the scene for safety of the rescuer and others, and check the patient's condition.

Call to emergency medical services.

Care the patient.

SAFE-POINT protocol [ edit ] Another European protocol, which appeared in the field of construction of Czech Republic to react to any emergence .

[ 28 ] Their steps (which have not any mnemonic) are: Safety of the rescuers.

Calling to emergency telephone number.

Bleeding : treating the massive bleedings.

Freeing the airways .

Resuscitation : applying cardiopulmonary resuscitation.

Keeping warm to the patient.

Key basic skills [ edit ] Certain skills are considered essential to the provision of first aid and are taught ubiquitously.

Displacement skills [ edit ] If there are dangers around (such as fire, electric dangers or others) the patient has to be moved to a safe place, [ 29 ] [ 30 ] (if it is safe for the first aid provider to do so), where providing the required first aid procedures is possible.

— In case of a possible severe spinal injury: when a patient seems to have a possible serious injury in the spinal cord (in the backbone, either at the neck part or the back part), that patient must not be moved except if that is necessary, and, when necessary, it must be done as little as possible and very carefully (see mentions about this type of injury in the gallery of drawings below). These precautions avoid many risks of causing further damages for the patient's mobility in the future.

Usually, the patient needs to end up lying down, in a face-up position, on a sufficiently firm surface (for example, on the floor, which allows to perform the chest compressions of cardiopulmonary resuscitation).

Displacement of victims to a safe place —A victim with a serious injury in the spine (in the back or the neck), which indicates a risk to the future mobility, can be carefully transferred by several rescuers that work coordinately.

The victim’s head and back would be held in the same position they were.

—When there is a victim with a serious injury in the spine (in the back or the neck) and a rescuer without instruments, the rescuer can try to carry the victim carefully through the Rautek maneuver (as in the picture), trying to keep victim’s head and back in the same position they were.

The victim's head can be supported on the rescuer to try to soften the movements.

A second rescuer can hold the legs.

—A victim without a serious injury in the spine (in the back or the neck) can be pulled through the floor, which is easier on a blanket, carpet or another tissue located under most of the body.

—Carrying on a base to victims with a suspected spinal injury would require to place them carefully, while keeping their head and back in the same position they were, on a higher or much thicker base (as a litter or mattress), for a better displacement.

Checking skills [ edit ] They evaluate the condition of the victim, [ 29 ] first attending to the main threats for life.

The preferred initial way of checking consist of asking, commonly by touching the patient in one of his shoulders and shouting something, such as: "can you hear me?" In some cases, the victim has a wound that bleeds abundantly, which requires its own additional treatment to stop the blood loss (usually, it would begin by keeping the wound pressed).

If the patient does not react, the heartbeats can be checked in the carotid pulse: placing two fingers on any side of the neck (on the left or the right side), near his head. In cases where checking the carotid pulse is impossible, heartbeats can be perceived in the radial pulse: placing two fingers on a wrist, under the part of the thumb, and applying moderate pressure. Breathing can also be checked additionally, placing an ear on the mouth and, at the same time, watching the chest rising by the effect of the air. It is recommended not to waste too much time of first aid in checking (professional rescuers are taught to take 10 seconds in it).

Check of patient's condition Checking of heartbeats in the carotid pulse.

This is usually the fastest method of checking the patient's condition.

Verification of heartbeats in the radial pulse, pressing moderately on a wrist, under the part of the thumb.

Check of patient's breathing, listening the air inside of the mouth and watching the chest swelling.

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) [ edit ] For the proper sequence of first aid reactions to a cardiac arrest, see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation § Order of CPR in a first aid sequence .

For cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) practice, see Cardiopulmonary resuscitation § Compressions with rescue breaths .

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the method of first aid for treating victims of cardiac arrest (complete stop of heartbeat).

Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Traditional maneuvers of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) have included in the present the use of automatic defibrillators.

Airway, Breathing, and Circulation skills [ edit ] In case of tongue fallen backwards, blocking the airway, it is necessary to hyperextend the head and pull up the chin, so that the tongue lifts and clears the airway.

ABC method stands for Airway , Breathing , and Circulation .

[ 31 ] The same mnemonic is used by emergency health professionals .

It is focused on critical life-saving intervention, and it must be rendered before treatment of less serious injuries.

Attention must first be brought to the airway to ensure it is clear . An obstruction (choking) is a life-threatening emergency. If an object blocks the airway, it requires anti-choking procedures . Following any evaluation of the airway, a first aid attendant would determine adequacy of breathing and provide rescue breathing if safe to do so.

Assessment of circulation is now not usually carried out for patients who are not breathing, with first aiders now trained to go straight to chest compressions (and thus providing artificial circulation) but pulse checks may be done on less serious patients.

Some organizations add a fourth step of "D" for Deadly bleeding or Defibrillation , while others consider this as part of the Circulation step simply referred as Disability. Variations on techniques to evaluate and maintain the ABCs depend on the skill level of the first aider. Once the ABCs are secured, first aiders can begin additional treatments or examination, as required if they possess the proper training (such as measuring pupil dilation).

[ 32 ] Some organizations teach the same order of priority using the "3Bs": Breathing , Bleeding , and Bones (or "4Bs": Breathing , Bleeding , Burns , and Bones ). While the ABCs and 3Bs are taught to be performed sequentially, certain conditions may require the consideration of two steps simultaneously. This includes the provision of both artificial respiration and chest compressions to someone who is not breathing and has no pulse, and the consideration of cervical spine injuries when ensuring an open airway.

Preserving life [ edit ] The patient must have an open airway—that is, an unobstructed passage that allows air to travel from the open mouth or uncongested nose , down through the pharynx and into the lungs.

Conscious people maintain their own airway automatically, but those who are unconscious (with a GCS of less than 8) may be unable to do so, as the part of the brain that manages spontaneous breathing may not be functioning.

Whether conscious or not, the patient may be placed in the recovery position , laying on their side. In addition to relaxing the patient, this can have the effect of clearing the tongue from the pharynx . It also avoids a common cause of death in unconscious patients, which is choking on regurgitated stomach contents.

The airway can also become blocked by a foreign object. To dislodge the object and solve the choking case, the first aider may use anti-choking methods (such as 'back slaps, 'chest thrusts' or 'abdominal thrusts').

Once the airway has been opened, the first aider would reassess the patient's breathing. If there is no breathing, or the patient is not breathing normally (e.g., agonal breathing ), the first aider would initiate CPR , which attempts to restart the patient's breathing by forcing air into the lungs. They may also manually massage the heart to promote blood flow around the body.

If the choking person is an infant, the first aider may use anti-choking methods for babies.

During that procedure, series of five strong blows are delivered on the infant's upper back after placing the infant's face in the aider's forearm. If the infant is able to cough or cry, no breathing assistance should be given. Chest thrusts can also be applied with two fingers on the lower half of the middle of the chest. Coughing and crying indicate the airway is open and the foreign object will likely to come out from the force the coughing or crying produces.

[ 33 ] A first responder should know how to use an Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) in the case of a person having a sudden cardiac arrest. The survival rate of those who have a cardiac arrest outside of the hospital is low. Permanent brain damage sets in after five minutes of no oxygen delivery, so rapid action on the part of the rescuer is necessary. An AED is a device that can examine a heartbeat and produce electric shocks to restart the heart.

[ 34 ] A first aider should be prepared to quickly deal with less severe problems such as cuts , grazes or bone fracture . They may be able to completely resolve a situation if they have the proper training and equipment. For situations that are more severe, complex or dangerous, a first aider might need to do the best they can with the equipment they have, and wait for an ambulance to arrive at the scene.

First aid kits [ edit ] A first aid box A first aid kit consists of a strong, durable bag or transparent plastic box. They are commonly identified with a white cross on a green background. A first aid kit does not have to be bought ready-made. The advantage of ready-made first aid kits are that they have well organized compartments and familiar layouts.

Contents [ edit ] There is no universal agreement upon the list for the contents of a first aid kit. The UK Health and Safety Executive stress that the contents of workplace first aid kits will vary according to the nature of the work activities.

[ 35 ] As an example of possible contents of a kit, British Standard BS 8599 First Aid Kits for the Workplace [ 36 ] lists the following items: Information leaflet Medium sterile dressings Large sterile dressings Bandages Triangular dressings Safety pins Adhesive dressings Sterile wet wipes Microporous tape Nitrile gloves Face shield Foil blanket Burn dressings Clothing shears Conforming bandages Finger dressing Antiseptic cream Scissors Tweezers Cotton Training principles [ edit ] First aid scenario training in progress Basic principles, such as knowing the use of adhesive bandage or applying direct pressure on a bleed, are often acquired passively through life experiences. However, to provide effective, life-saving first aid interventions requires instruction and practical training. This is especially true where it relates to potentially fatal illnesses and injuries, such as those that require CPR; these procedures may be invasive, and carry a risk of further injury to the patient and the provider. As with any training, it is more useful if it occurs before an actual emergency . And, in many countries, calling emergency medical services allows listening basic first aid instructions over the phone while the ambulance is on the way.

Training is generally provided by attending a course, typically leading to certification. Due to regular changes in procedures and protocols, based on updated clinical knowledge, and to maintain skill, attendance at regular refresher courses or re-certification is often necessary. First aid training is often available through community organizations such as the Red Cross and St. John Ambulance , or through commercial providers, who will train people for a fee. This commercial training is most common for training of employees to perform first aid in their workplace. Many community organizations also provide a commercial service, which complements their community programmes.

1.Junior level certificate Basic Life Support 2.Senior level certificate 3.Special certificate Types of first aid which require training [ edit ] Shown here is an example of a way for people to practice CPR in a safe and reliable manner.

There are several types of first aid (and first aider) that require specific additional training. These are usually undertaken to fulfill the demands of the work or activity undertaken.

Aquatic/Marine first aid is usually practiced by professionals such as lifeguards , professional mariners or in diver rescue , and covers the specific problems which may be faced after water-based rescue or delayed MedEvac .

Battlefield first aid takes into account the specific needs of treating wounded combatants and non-combatants during armed conflict .

Conflict First Aid focuses on support for stability and recovery of personal, social, group or system well-being and to address circumstantial safety needs.

Hyperbaric first aid may be practiced by underwater diving professionals, who need to treat conditions such as decompression sickness .

Oxygen first aid is the providing of oxygen to casualties with conditions resulting in hypoxia . It is also a standard first aid procedure for underwater diving incidents where gas bubble formation in the tissues is possible.

Wilderness first aid is the provision of first aid under conditions where the arrival of emergency responders or the evacuation of an injured person may be delayed due to constraints of terrain, weather, and available persons or equipment. It may be necessary to care for an injured person for several hours or days.

Mental health first aid is taught independently of physical first aid. How to support someone experiencing a mental health problem or in a crisis situation. Also how to identify the first signs of someone developing mental ill health and guide people towards appropriate help.

First aider of the British Red Cross accompanies parade of morris dancers at the Knutsford Royal May Day, Knutsford, Cheshire, England, 2012 First aid services [ edit ] Some people undertake specific training in order to provide first aid at public or private events, during filming, or other places where people gather. They may be designated as a first aider , or use some other title. This role may be undertaken on a voluntary basis, with organisations such as the Red Cross society and St. John Ambulance , [ 37 ] or as paid employment with a medical contractor.

People performing a first aid role, whether in a professional or voluntary capacity, are often expected to have a high level of first aid training and are often uniformed.

Symbols [ edit ] Further information: Emblems of the Red Cross § Use of the emblems Although commonly associated with first aid, the symbol of a red cross is an official protective symbol of the Red Cross . According to the Geneva Conventions and other international laws, the use of this and similar symbols is reserved for official agencies of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent , and as a protective emblem for medical personnel and facilities in combat situations. Use by any other person or organization is illegal, and may lead to prosecution.

The internationally accepted symbol for first aid is the white cross on a green background shown below.

Some organizations may make use of the Star of Life , although this is usually reserved for use by ambulance services, or may use symbols such as the Maltese Cross , like the Order of Malta Ambulance Corps and St John Ambulance . Other symbols may also be used.

Star of Life Civil defense Emblem of the Red Crystal Emblem of the Red Crescent Emblem of the Red Cross ISO First Aid Symbol ( Crescent variant ) ISO First Aid Symbol Maltese or Amalfi Cross References [ edit ] ^ First aid manual: 9th edition . Dorling Kindersley. 2009.

ISBN 978-1-4053-3537-9 .

^ "Mental Health First Aid USA" .

Mental Health First Aid . October 10, 2013 . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ Peterson, Sarah (January 30, 2018).

"About PFA" .

The National Child Traumatic Stress Network . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

^ a b c Pearn , John (1994).

"The earliest days of first aid" .

The British Medical Journal .

309 (6970): 1718– 1720.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.309.6970.1718 .

PMC 2542683 .

PMID 7820000 .

^ Eastman, A Brent (1992). "Blood in Our Streets: The Status and Evolution of Trauma Care Systems".

JAMA Surgery .

127 (6): 677– 681.

doi : 10.1001/archsurg.1992.01420060043008 .

PMID 1596168 .

^ Efstathis, Vlas (November 1999).

"A history of first aid and its role in armed forces" (PDF) .

ADF Health .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 30, 2014.

^ a b "First Aid: From Witchdoctors & Religious Knights to Modern Doctors" .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved March 23, 2011 .

^ New Scientist, Vol. 193 No. 2586 (13–19 Jan 2007), p. 50 ^ Price, John (2014).

Everyday Heroism: Victorian Constructions of the Heroic Civilian . Bloomsbury: London. p. 203.

ISBN 978-1-4411066-5-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Baker, David; Cazalaà, Jean-Bernard; Carli, Pierre (September 2005). "Resuscitation great. Larrey and Percy--a tale of two barons".

Resuscitation .

66 (3): 259– 262.

doi : 10.1016/j.resuscitation.2005.03.009 .

ISSN 0300-9572 .

PMID 15990216 .

^ "Event first aid and ambulance support" . British Red Cross.

Archived from the original on September 8, 2014.

^ Fletcher NC, The St John Ambulance Association: its history and its past in the ambulance movement. London: St John Ambulance Association, 1929:12–3.

^ Industrial Revolution: St. John Ambulance Archived 2007-02-20 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved December 10, 2006.

^ "Jermyn Pennsylvania - History" .

jermynpa.com . Retrieved September 10, 2024 .

^ "Heart attack-Heart attack - Symptoms & causes" .

Mayo Clinic . Retrieved May 7, 2025 .

^ "What is a stroke?" .

Stroke Foundation - Australia . Retrieved May 7, 2025 .

^ "Accidents and first aid" .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2008 . Retrieved October 4, 2008 .

^ Thim, Troels; Krarup, Niels Henrik Vinther; Grove, Erik Lerkevang; Rohde, Claus Valter; Løfgren, Bo (January 31, 2012).

"Initial assessment and treatment with the Airway, Breathing, Circulation, Disability, Exposure (ABCDE) approach" .

International Journal of General Medicine .

5 : 117– 121.

doi : 10.2147/IJGM.S28478 .

PMC 3273374 .

PMID 22319249 .

^ a b Schmidt, Oliver I.; Gahr, Ralf H.; Gosse, Andreas; Heyde, Christoph E. (March 3, 2009).

"ATLS(R) and damage control in spine trauma" .

World Journal of Emergency Surgery .

4 : 9.

doi : 10.1186/1749-7922-4-9 .

ISSN 1749-7922 .

PMC 2660300 .

PMID 19257904 .

^ a b Hodgetts, T. J.; Mahoney, P. F.; Russell, M. Q.; Byers, M. (October 2006).

"ABC to ABC: redefining the military trauma paradigm" .

Emergency Medicine Journal .

23 (10): 745– 746.

doi : 10.1136/emj.2006.039610 .

ISSN 1472-0213 .

PMC 2579588 .

PMID 16988297 .

^ NotSan.

"xABCDE untersuchung Rettungsdienst" .

notsan.info (in German). Archived from the original on November 20, 2024.

^ Certain, Lucas; Rostirola, João Vitor Cerávolo; Pereira, Juliana Silva; Rostirola, Gabriela Cerávolo; Estevam, Barbara Canto; Vieira, Carla Caroline Aguiar; da Silva, Israel; da Silva, Jussara Aparecida Rodrigues; Schevenin, Juliana de Cássia; de Oliveira, Ana Barbara Regiani; Franceli, Amanda Bonamichi; Lisboa, Camila Emanuele Camargo; Benites, Bruno Deltreggia (July 1, 2023).

"First immediate transfusion at a prehospital environment in Latin America: A case report" .

Hematology, Transfusion and Cell Therapy . Diversity in Classical Hematology Research.

45 (Suppl 2): S153 – S156 .

doi : 10.1016/j.htct.2021.08.007 .

ISSN 2531-1379 .

PMC 10433293 .

PMID 34862155 .

^ American Heart Association (AHA) (2015).

"Highlights of the Guidelines for CPR and ECC" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2019 . Retrieved December 1, 2024 .

^ Field, John M.; Hazinski, Mary Fran; Sayre, Michael R.; Chameides, Leon; Schexnayder, Stephen M.; Hemphill, Robin; Samson, Ricardo A.; Kattwinkel, John; Berg, Robert A.; Bhanji, Farhan; Cave, Diana M.; Jauch, Edward C.; Kudenchuk, Peter J.; Neumar, Robert W.; Peberdy, Mary Ann (November 2, 2010).

"Part 1: Executive Summary: 2010 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care" .

Circulation .

122 (18 Suppl 3): S640-56.

doi : 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.970889 .

ISSN 0009-7322 .

PMID 20956217 .

^ Croix-Rouge francaise.

"Les 4 étapes pour porter secours" (in French). Archived from the original on May 22, 2023 . Retrieved October 30, 2024 .

^ Furst, J., What does AMEGA stand for in first aid?

, updated 12 July 2019, accessed 24 January 2022 ^ American Red Cross.

"Check, Call, Care: 3 Emergency Actions Steps to Take to Save Lives" . Archived from the original on November 11, 2024.

^ safe-point.cz.

"SAFE-Point: 6 steps to save life" (in Czech).

^ a b American Red Cross (2016).

CPR/AED for Professional Rescuers (2nd ed.).

^ Community Emergency Response Team of L.A. (October 31, 2024).

"Lifts and carries" .

CERTLA .

^ Eisenburger, Philip; Safar, Peter (1999). "Life supporting first aid training of the public—review and recommendations".

Resuscitation .

41 (1): 3– 18.

doi : 10.1016/S0300-9572(99)00034-9 .

PMID 10459587 .

^ "Guidelines and Guidance: The ABCDE approach" .

Resuscitation Council (UK) .

Archived from the original on August 12, 2005 . Retrieved May 2, 2019 .

^ "Choking - infant under 1 year: MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia" .

medlineplus.gov .

^ Nessel, Edward H. (2012).

"Treating Sudden Cardiac Arrest and the Use of Automated External Defibrillators in the Community Setting" .

AAMA Journal .

25 : 9.

^ First aid at work: The Health and Safety (First-Aid) Regulations 1981. Guidance on Regulations L74 ^ BS 8599-1:2011 BSI 2011 ^ "Role of a First Aider - First Aid - St John Ambulance" .

www.sja.org.uk . Retrieved November 20, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Look up first aid in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: First Aid Wikivoyage has a travel guide for First aid kit for travellers .

First Aid Guide at the Mayo Clinic First aid from the British Red Cross – including first aid tips and first aid training information First aid from St John Ambulance – first aid information and advice v t e First aid Techniques Abdominal thrusts Airway management Basic Advanced Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Emergency bleeding control Equipment Automated external defibrillator Bag valve mask Bandage Dressing First aid kit Nasopharyngeal airway Oropharyngeal airway Mnemonics ABC OPQRST RICE SAMPLE SOAP Certifications Certified first responder Emergency medical technician Wilderness emergency medical technician Topics Bleeding Golden hour Good Samaritan law Wilderness medicine v t e Emergency medicine Emergency medicine Emergency department Emergency medical services Emergency nursing Emergency psychiatry Golden hour Medical emergency International emergency medicine Pediatric emergency medicine Pre-hospital emergency medicine Major trauma Trauma center Triage Equipment Bag valve mask (BVM) Chest tube Defibrillation ( AED ICD ) Electrocardiogram (ECG/EKG) Intraosseous infusion (IO) Intravenous therapy (IV) Tracheal intubation Laryngeal tube Combitube Nasopharyngeal airway (NPA) Oropharyngeal airway (OPA) Pocket mask Drugs Adenosine Amiodarone Atropine Dopamine Epinephrine / Adrenaline Naloxone Magnesium sulfate Sodium bicarbonate Organisations International Federation for Emergency Medicine ( International Conference on Emergency Medicine ) American College of Emergency Physicians Australasian College for Emergency Medicine Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians Royal College of Emergency Medicine European Society for Emergency Medicine Asian Society for Emergency Medicine American Academy of Emergency Medicine Courses / Life support First aid Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) Mouth-to-mouth resuscitation Basic life support (BLS) Advanced cardiac life support (ACLS) Advanced trauma life support (ATLS) Neonatal Resuscitation Program (NRP) Acute Care of at-Risk Newborns (ACoRN) Pediatric basic life support (PBLS) Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) Advanced Life Support in Obstetrics (ALSO) Care of the Critically Ill Surgical Patient (CCrISP) Scoring systems NACA score Injury Severity Score Category Outline v t e Lifesaving and lifeguarding International standards bodies International Lifesaving Federation International Liaison Committee on Resuscitation National societies DLRG Lifesaving South Africa Royal Life Saving Society Commonwealth Australia Canada United Kingdom Surf Life Saving Australia Surf Life Saving New Zealand United States Lifesaving Association RFESS - Royal Spanish Lifesaving Association Wasserwacht Sub-national societies The Hong Kong Life Saving Society Topics Lifesaving Lifesaving (sport) Lifeguard Surf lifesaving First aid Cardiopulmonary resuscitation Drowning chain Rip current Awards Lifesaving Medal Albert Medal for lifesaving Bronze Medallion Canada United Kingdom Bronze Cross National Lifeguard Life-saving appliances Lifebuoy Rescue buoy Throw bag Life saving reel IRB Surf ski Paddle board v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Civil defence History Citizens! During shelling this side of the street is the most dangerous Civil Defence Corps Civil Defence Service Luftschutzpolizei Osoaviakhim Reichsluftschutzbund Swedish Civil Defence Board Technische Nothilfe Tonarigumi Unione Nazionale Protezione Antiaerea Equipment and fortifications Air raid shelter Bunker Blast shelter Bomb shelter Geiger counter Civil defense siren List Emergency population warning Fallout shelter Merkhav Mugan Safe room Storm cellar Strategic reserve Strategic steam reserve Volcano observatory Activities Decontamination Contamination control Human decontamination Mass decontamination First aid Nonviolent resistance Sabotage Search and rescue Surveillance Organizations Algerian Civil Defence Civil Air Defense Bureau (China) Civil Defense Directorate Civil Defence Ireland Civil Protection in Switzerland Committee of Emergency Situations and Civil Defense of Tajikistan Chōnaikai Dubai Civil Defence Directorate General of Civil Defence (Pakistan) Forward Alliance Home Front Command Kuma Academy Lebanese Civil Defense Ministry of Emergency Situations (Russia) Norwegian Civil Defence Office of Civil Defense (Philippines) Palestinian Civil Defence Protezione Civile Republic of Korea Civil Defense Corps Saudi Civil Defense Sécurité Civile Syrian Civil Defence State Emergency Service of Ukraine Singapore Civil Defence Force Worker-Peasant Red Guards By country Finland Germany East Germany Israel Russia Taiwan United States Publications Beneath the City Streets In case of crisis or war Making Europe Unconquerable Interdisciplinary Homeland defense Infrastructure security Total defence Transarmament Other All clear Civil conscription Emergency service List of civil defense ranks Operation Red Dragon Radio silence United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐462xt
Cached time: 20250815234737
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.979 seconds
Real time usage: 1.169 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5112/1000000
Revision size: 48464/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 626231/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1879/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 200809/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.491/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8879492/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  725.344      1 -total
 34.02%  246.771      1 Template:Reflist
 21.98%  159.457     39 Template:Navbox
 11.88%   86.144      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 11.45%   83.061      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.13%   73.472     11 Template:Cite_journal
  9.89%   71.706     17 Template:Cite_web
  9.37%   67.965      3 Template:Cite_book
  8.20%   59.490      1 Template:First_aid
  6.59%   47.795      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11296:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815234737 and revision id 1294482906. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=First_aid&oldid=1294482906 " Categories : First aid Emergency medical services Lifesaving Scoutcraft Self-care Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Czech-language sources (cs) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from June 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles containing how-to sections Use mdy dates from August 2021 This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 00:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents First aid 78 languages Add topic

