Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Processing levels Toggle Processing levels subsection 1.1 Primary food processing 1.2 Secondary food processing 1.3 Tertiary food processing 2 History 3 Benefits and drawbacks Toggle Benefits and drawbacks subsection 3.1 Benefits 3.2 Drawbacks 4 Added sodium 5 Added sugars 6 Nutrient losses 7 Trans fats 8 Other potential disadvantages 9 Performance parameters for food processing 10 Industries 11 See also 12 Notes and references 13 Bibliography 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Food processing 36 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Português Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transformation of raw ingredients into a food like product, or of food into other forms Not to be confused with Food processor .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Food processing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Industrial cheese production Food processing is the transformation of agricultural products into food , or of one form of food into other forms. Food processing takes many forms, from grinding grain into raw flour to home cooking and complex industrial methods used in the making of convenience foods .  Some food processing methods play important roles in reducing food waste and improving food preservation , thus reducing the total environmental impact of agriculture and improving food security .

The Nova classification groups food according to different food processing techniques.

Primary food processing is necessary to make most foods edible while secondary food processing turns ingredients into familiar foods, such as bread . Tertiary food processing results in ultra-processed foods and has been widely criticized for promoting overnutrition and obesity , containing too much sugar and salt , too little fiber , and otherwise being unhealthful in respect to dietary needs of humans and farm animals.

Processing levels [ edit ] Primary food processing [ edit ] These whole, dried bananas in Thailand are an example of primary food processing.

Primary food processing turns agricultural products, such as raw wheat kernels or livestock, into something that can eventually be eaten. This category includes ingredients that are produced by ancient processes such as drying , threshing , winnowing and milling grain, shelling nuts , and butchering animals for meat.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It also includes deboning and cutting meat, freezing and smoking fish and meat, extracting and filtering oils, canning food, preserving food through food irradiation , and candling eggs , as well as homogenizing and pasteurizing milk .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Contamination and spoilage problems in primary food processing can lead to significant public health threats, as the resulting foods are used so widely.

[ 2 ] However, many forms of processing contribute to improved food safety and longer shelf life before the food spoils.

[ 3 ] Commercial food processing uses control systems such as hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) and failure mode and effects analysis (FMEA) to reduce the risk of harm.

[ 2 ] Secondary food processing [ edit ] Baking bread is an example of secondary food processing.

Secondary food processing is the everyday process of creating food from ingredients that are ready to use.

Baking bread , regardless of whether it is made at home, in a small bakery, or in a large factory, is an example of secondary food processing.

[ 2 ] Fermenting fish and making wine , beer , and other alcoholic products are traditional forms of secondary food processing.

[ 4 ] Sausages are a common form of secondary processed meat, formed by comminution (grinding) of meat that has already undergone primary processing.

[ 5 ] Most of the secondary food processing methods known to humankind are commonly described as cooking methods .

Tertiary food processing [ edit ] Tertiary food processing is the commercial production of what is commonly called processed food .

[ 2 ] These are ready-to-eat or heat-and-serve foods, such as frozen meals and re-heated airline meals .

History [ edit ] Food processing dates back to the prehistoric ages when crude processing incorporated fermenting, sun drying, preserving with salt , and various types of cooking (such as roasting, smoking, steaming, and oven baking), Such basic food processing involved chemical enzymatic changes to the basic structure of food in its natural form, as well served to build a barrier against surface microbial activity that caused rapid decay. Salt-preservation was especially common for foods that constituted warrior and sailors' diets until the introduction of canning methods . Evidence for the existence of these methods can be found in the writings of the ancient Greek , Chaldean , Egyptian and Roman civilizations as well as archaeological evidence from Europe , North and South America and Asia. These tried and tested processing techniques remained essentially the same until the advent of the Industrial Revolution . Examples of ready-meals also date back to before the preindustrial revolution, and include dishes such as Cornish pasty and Haggis . Both during ancient times and today in modern society these are considered processed foods.

Michael Foods egg -processing plant in Wakefield, Nebraska Modern food processing technology developed in the 19th and 20th centuries was developed in a large part to serve military needs. In 1809, Nicolas Appert invented a hermetic bottling technique that would preserve food for French troops which ultimately contributed to the development of tinning, and subsequently canning by Peter Durand in 1810. Although initially expensive and somewhat hazardous due to the lead used in cans, canned goods would later become a staple around the world.

[ 6 ] Pasteurization , discovered by Louis Pasteur in 1864, improved the quality and safety of preserved foods and introduced the wine, beer, and milk preservation.

A form of pre-made split-pea soup that has become traditional In the 20th century, World War II , the space race and the rising consumer society in developed countries contributed to the growth of food processing with such advances as spray drying , evaporation , juice concentrates, freeze drying and the introduction of artificial sweeteners, colouring agents, and such preservatives as sodium benzoate . In the late 20th century, products such as dried instant soups, reconstituted fruits and juices, and self cooking meals such as MRE food ration were developed. By the 20th century, automatic appliances like microwave oven , blender , and rotimatic paved way for convenience cooking .

In western Europe and North America, the second half of the 20th century witnessed a rise in the pursuit of convenience. Food processing companies marketed their products especially towards middle-class working wives and mothers. Frozen foods (often credited to Clarence Birdseye ) found their success in sales of juice concentrates and " TV dinners ".

[ 7 ] Processors utilised the perceived value of time to appeal to the postwar population, and this same appeal contributes to the success of convenience foods today.

Also in the late 20th century, food manufacturers began changing their product model from a single "platonic dish", such as one version of jarred spaghetti sauce, to offering multiple variations, such as a plain version, a spicy version, and a chunky version.

[ 8 ] Benefits and drawbacks [ edit ] Benefits [ edit ] Processed seafood – fish , squid , prawn balls and simulated crab sticks ( surimi ) Benefits of food processing include toxin removal, preservation, easing marketing and distribution tasks, and increasing food consistency. In addition, it increases yearly availability of many foods, enables transportation of delicate perishable foods across long distances and makes many kinds of foods safe to eat by de-activating spoilage and pathogenic micro-organisms. Modern supermarkets would not exist without modern food processing techniques, and long voyages would not be possible.

Processed foods are usually less susceptible to early spoilage than fresh foods and are better suited for long-distance transportation from the source to the consumer .

[ 3 ] When they were first introduced, some processed foods helped to alleviate food shortages and improved the overall nutrition of populations as it made many new foods available to the masses.

[ 9 ] Processing can also reduce the incidence of food-borne disease. Fresh materials, such as fresh produce and raw meats, are more likely to harbour pathogenic micro-organisms (e.g. Salmonella) capable of causing serious illnesses.

[ 10 ] The extremely varied modern diet is only truly possible on a wide scale because of food processing. Transportation of more exotic foods, as well as the elimination of much hard labor gives the modern eater easy access to a wide variety of food unimaginable to their ancestors.

[ 11 ] The act of processing can often improve the taste of food significantly.

[ 12 ] Mass production of food is much cheaper overall than individual production of meals from raw ingredients. Therefore, a large profit potential exists for the manufacturers and suppliers of processed food products. Individuals may see a benefit in convenience , but rarely see any direct financial cost benefit in using processed food as compared to home preparation.

[ 13 ] Processed food freed people from the large amount of time involved in preparing and cooking "natural" unprocessed foods.

[ 14 ] The increase in free time allows people much more choice in life style than previously allowed. In many families the adults are working away from home and therefore there is little time for the preparation of food based on fresh ingredients. The food industry offers products that fulfill many different needs: e.g. fully prepared ready meals that can be heated up in the microwave oven within a few minutes.

Modern food processing also improves the quality of life for people with allergies, diabetics , and other people who cannot consume some common food elements.

[ 10 ] Food processing can also add extra nutrients such as vitamins .

Drawbacks [ edit ] Meat packages in a Roman supermarket Processing of food can decrease its nutritional density. The amount of nutrients lost depends on the food and processing method. For example, heat destroys vitamin C . Therefore, canned fruits possess less vitamin C than their fresh alternatives. The USDA conducted a study of nutrient retention in 2004, creating a table of foods, levels of preparation, and nutrition.

[ 15 ] New research highlighting the importance to human health of a rich microbial environment in the intestine indicates that abundant food processing (not fermentation of foods) endangers that environment.

[ 16 ] Added sodium [ edit ] One of the main sources for sodium in the diet is processed foods. Sodium, mostly in the form of sodium chloride , i.e. salt, is added to prevent spoilage, add flavor and enhance the texture of these foods. Americans consume an average of 3436 milligrams of sodium per day, which is higher than the recommended limit of 2300 milligrams per day for healthy people, and more than twice the limit of 1500 milligrams per day for those at increased risk for heart disease.

Added sugars [ edit ] While it is not necessary to limit the sugars found naturally in whole, unprocessed foods like fresh fruit, eating too much added sugar found in many processed foods increases the risk of heart disease, obesity, cavities and Type 2 diabetes. The American Heart Association recommends women limit added sugars to no more than 420 kilojoules (100 kilocalories), or 25 grams, and men limit added sugars to no more than 650 kJ (155 kcal), or about 38.75 grams, per day. Currently, Americans consume an average of 1,490 kJ (355 kcal) from added sugars each day.

Nutrient losses [ edit ] Processing foods often involves nutrient losses, which can make it harder to meet the body's needs if these nutrients are not added back through fortification or enrichment. For example, using high heat during processing can cause vitamin C losses. Another example is refined grains, which have less fiber, vitamins and minerals than whole grains. Eating refined grains, such as those found in many processed foods, instead of whole grains may increase the risk for high cholesterol , diabetes and obesity, according to a study published in " The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition " in December 2007.

[ 17 ] Trans fats [ edit ] Foods that have undergone processing, including some commercial baked goods, desserts, margarine, frozen pizza, microwave popcorn and coffee creamers, sometimes contain trans fats . This is the most unhealthy type of fat, and may increase risk for high cholesterol, heart disease and stroke. The 2010 Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends keeping trans fat intake as low as possible.

Other potential disadvantages [ edit ] Processed foods may actually take less energy to digest than whole foods, according to a study published in " Food & Nutrition Research " in 2010, meaning more of their food energy content is retained within the body. Processed foods also tend to be more allergenic than whole foods, according to a June 2004 "Current Opinion in Allergy and Clinical Immunology" article. Although the preservatives and other food additives used in many processed foods are generally recognized as safe, a few may cause problems for some individuals, including sulfites, artificial sweeteners, artificial colors and flavors, sodium nitrate, BHA and BHT, olestra, caffeine and monosodium glutamate — a flavor enhancer.

[ 18 ] Performance parameters for food processing [ edit ] Factory automation - robotics palettizing bread When designing processes for the food industry the following performance parameters may be taken into account: Hygiene , e.g. measured by number of micro-organisms per mL of finished product.

Energy efficiency measured e.g. by "ton of steam per ton of sugar produced".

Minimization of waste , measured e.g. by "percentage of peeling loss during the peeling of potatoes".

Labour used, measured e.g. by "number of working hours per ton of finished product".

Minimization of cleaning stops measured e.g. by "number of hours between cleaning stops".

Women working in a cannery Industries [ edit ] Food processing industries and practices include the following: Cannery Fish processing Food packaging plant Industrial rendering Meat packing plant Potato processing industry Slaughterhouse Sugar industry See also [ edit ] Food portal Cooking portal Technology portal Brewery Canning Clean-in-place Dietary supplement Enzyme Flavoring Food additive Food and Bioprocess Technology Food coloring Food extrusion Food fortification Food quality Food rheology Food safety Food science Food storage Genetically modified food Good manufacturing practice List of cooking techniques Material handling Nutraceutical Pasteurization Pink slime Shelf life Snap freezing Ultra-high temperature processing Ultra-processed food Washdown Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Grumezescu, Alexandru Mihai; Holban, Alina Maria (2018-04-08).

Food Processing for Increased Quality and Consumption . Academic Press. p. 430.

ISBN 9780128114995 .

^ a b c d e f Hitzmann, Bernd (2017-08-11).

Measurement, Modeling and Automation in Advanced Food Processing . Springer. pp.

30– 32.

ISBN 9783319601113 .

^ a b c Ionescu, Gabriela (2016-05-25).

Sustainable Food and Beverage Industries: Assessments and Methodologies . CRC Press. p. 21.

ISBN 9781771884112 .

^ a b US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment (June 1987).

"Chapter 8, Technologies Supporting Agricultural, Aquacultural, and Fisheries Development" .

Integrated Renewable Resource Management for U.S. Insular Areas: Summary . Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. pp.

278– 281.

ISBN 9781428922792 .

^ Hui, Y. H. (2012-01-11).

Handbook of Meat and Meat Processing, Second Edition . CRC Press. p. 599.

ISBN 9781439836835 .

^ Martin Bruegel, "How the French Learned to Eat Canned Food," in W. Belasco, P. Scranton, ed., Food Nations: Selling Taste in Consumer Societies (New York, Routledge, 2001) ^ Levenstein, H: "Paradox of Plenty", pages 106–107. University of California Press, 2003 ^ Gladwell, Malcolm (2004-08-29).

"The Ketchup Conundrum" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2025-01-28 .

^ Laudan, Rachel (September–October 2010).

"In Praise of Fast Food" . UTNE Reader . Retrieved 2010-09-24 .

Where modern food became available, people grew taller and stronger and lived longer.

^ a b "Food Processing Machinery Market Size, Share, Analysis, Trends, Forecast" .

Citius Research . Retrieved 2025-07-10 .

^ Laudan, Rachel (September–October 2010).

"In Praise of Fast Food" . UTNE Reader . Retrieved 2010-09-24 .

If we fail to understand how scant and monotonous most traditional diets were, we can misunderstand the "ethnic foods" we encounter in cookbooks, at restaurants, or on our travels.

^ Laudan, Rachel (September–October 2010).

"In Praise of Fast Food" . UTNE Reader . Retrieved 2010-09-24 .

For our ancestors, natural was something quite nasty. Natural often tasted bad. Fresh meat was rank and tough, fresh fruits inedibly sour, fresh vegetables bitter.

^ Tharrey, Marion; Drogué, Sophie; Privet, Lisa; Perignon, Marlène; Dubois, Christophe; Darmon, Nicole (August 2020).

"Industrially processed v. home-prepared dishes: what economic benefit for the consumer?" .

Public Health Nutrition .

23 (11): 1982– 1990.

doi : 10.1017/S1368980019005081 .

ISSN 1475-2727 .

PMC 10200457 .

PMID 32456744 .

^ Laudan, Rachel (September–October 2010).

"In Praise of Fast Food" . UTNE Reader . Retrieved 2010-09-24 .

^ "USDA Table of Nutrient Retention Factors, Release 6" (PDF) .

USDA . USDA. Dec 2007.

^ Michael Pollan (15 May 2013).

"Some of my Best Friends are Germs" .

The New York Times Magazine .

^ Newby, P. K.; Maras, Janice; Bakun, Peter; Muller, Denis; Ferrucci, Luigi; Tucker, Katherine L. (2007-12-01).

"Intake of whole grains, refined grains, and cereal fiber measured with 7-d diet records and associations with risk factors for chronic disease2" .

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition .

86 (6): 1745– 1753.

doi : 10.1093/ajcn/86.5.1745 .

ISSN 0002-9165 .

^ "Food Flavour Enhancer Market to Garner USD 15.2 Mn by 2032 at 6.8% CAGR, Says FMI | Scoop News" .

Bibliography [ edit ] Fábricas de alimentos , 9th edition (in Spanish) .

Nutritional evaluation of food processing , Food preservation 2nd edition, by Norman W. Desrosier.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Manufacture of food at Wikimedia Commons v t e Food science General Allergy Engineering Food Human Nutritional rating systems Glycemic index Insulin index Satiety value Microbiology Nutrition Diet Clinical Processing Processing aids Psychology Quality Sensory analysis Discrimination testing Rheology Storage Technology v t e Food chemistry Additives Carbohydrates Coloring Enzymes Essential fatty acids Flavors Fortification Lipids "Minerals" (Chemical elements) Proteins Vitamins Water v t e Food preservation Biopreservation Burying in ground Canning Cold chain Curing Drying Fermentation Freeze-drying Freezing Hurdle technology Irradiation Jamming Jellying Jugging Modified atmosphere Pascalization Pickling Potting Confit Potjevleesch Rillettes Salting Smoking Sugaring Tyndallization Vacuum packing Food portal Category: Food preservation Food industry Manufacturing Packaging Marketing Foodservice Fortification v t e Consumer food safety Adulterants , food contaminants 3-MCPD Aldicarb Antibiotic use in livestock Cyanide Formaldehyde HGH controversies Lead poisoning Melamine Mercury in fish Sudan I Food additives Flavorings Monosodium glutamate (MSG) Salt Sugar High-fructose corn syrup Vegetable oil controversy Intestinal parasites , parasitic disease Amoebiasis Anisakiasis Cryptosporidiosis Cyclosporiasis Diphyllobothriasis Enterobiasis Fasciolopsiasis Fasciolosis Giardiasis Gnathostomiasis Paragonimiasis Toxocariasis Toxoplasmosis Trichinosis Trichuriasis Microorganisms Botulism Campylobacter jejuni Clostridium perfringens Cronobacter Enterovirus Escherichia coli O104:H4 Escherichia coli O157:H7 Hepatitis A Hepatitis E Listeria Norovirus Rotavirus Salmonella Shigatoxigenic and verotoxigenic E. coli Vibrio cholerae Pesticides Chlorpyrifos DDT Lindane Malathion Methamidophos Preservatives Benzoic acid Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) Sodium benzoate Sugar substitutes Acesulfame potassium Aspartame controversy Saccharin Sodium cyclamate Sorbitol Sucralose Toxins , poisons , environment pollution Aflatoxin Arsenic contamination of groundwater Benzene in soft drinks Bisphenol A Dieldrin Diethylstilbestrol Dioxins Mycotoxins Nonylphenol Shellfish poisoning Food fraud Bread Breast milk Egg Olive oil Prawn Seafood Shrimp Tea Wine Food processing 4-Hydroxynonenal Acid-hydrolyzed vegetable protein Acrylamide Food additives Food irradiation Heterocyclic amines Modified starch Nitrosamines Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon Shortening Trans fat Variant Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Water fluoridation controversy Food contamination incidents Devon colic Swill milk scandal Esing Bakery incident 1858 Bradford sweets poisoning 1900 English beer poisoning Morinaga Milk arsenic poisoning incident Minamata disease 1959 Moroccan oil poisoning disaster [ ar ] 1971 Iraq poison grain disaster Toxic oil syndrome 1985 Austrian diethylene glycol wine scandal United Kingdom BSE outbreak Australian meat substitution scandal Jack in the Box E. coli outbreak 1996 Odwalla E. coli outbreak 2006 North American E. coli outbreaks ICA meat repackaging controversy 2008 Canada listeriosis outbreak 2008 Chinese milk scandal 2008 Irish pork crisis 2008 United States salmonellosis outbreak 2011 Germany E. coli outbreak 2011 United States listeriosis outbreak Bihar school meal poisoning 2013 horse meat scandal 2015 Mozambique funeral beer poisoning 2017 Brazil Operation Weak Meat 2017–2018 South African listeriosis outbreak 2018 Australian strawberry contamination 2024 United Kingdom Shigatoxigenic E. coli outbreak Kobayashi red yeast rice scandal Food safety incidents in China Food safety incidents in Taiwan Foodborne illness outbreaks death toll United States Regulation , standards , watchdogs Acceptable daily intake E number Food labeling regulations Food libel laws Food safety in Australia International Food Safety Network ISO 22000 Nutrition facts label Organic certification Quality Assurance International United Kingdom food information regulations Institutions Centre for Food Safety (Hong Kong) European Food Safety Authority Food and Drug Administration Food Information and Control Agency (Spain) Food Standards Agency (United Kingdom) Institute for Food Safety and Health International Food Safety Network Ministry of Food and Drug Safety (South Korea) Spanish Agency for Food Safety and Nutrition Related topics Curing (food preservation) Food and drink prohibitions Food marketing Food politics Food preservation Food quality Genetically modified food Conspiracy theories Food portal Drink portal Category Commons Cookbook WikiProject v t e Artificial foods Artificial fat substitutes Olestra Artificial protein substitutes Acid-hydrolyzed vegetable protein Artificial sugar substitutes Acesulfame potassium Alitame Advantame Aspartame Aspartame-acesulfame salt Carrelame Dulcin Glucin Hydrogenated starch hydrolysates Lugduname Neohesperidin dihydrochalcone Neotame Saccharin Sodium cyclamate Sucralose Natural food substitutes Cheese analogues Coffee substitutes Egg substitutes Meat substitutes bacon list Milk substitutes Phyllodulcin Salt substitutes Brands Tang Related topics Food safety List of food additives Food politics Food power Food security Famine Food desert Food swamp List of nutrition guides Malnutrition Overnutrition Institutions International Association for Food Protection Food and Drug Administration Food and Agriculture Organization National Agriculture and Food Research Organization National Food and Drug Authority v t e Public health General Auxology Biological hazard Chief medical officer Cultural competence Deviance Environmental health Eugenics History of Liberal Euthenics Genomics Globalization and disease Harm reduction Health economics Health literacy Health policy Health system Health care reform Housing First Human right to water and sanitation Management of depression Public health law National public health institute Health politics Labor rights Maternal health Medical anthropology Medical sociology Mental health ( Ministers ) Occupational safety and health Pharmaceutical policy Pollution Air Water Soil Radiation Light Prisoners' rights Public health intervention Public health laboratory Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to rest and leisure Right to sit Security of person Sexual and reproductive health Social psychology Sociology of health and illness Unisex changing rooms Unisex public toilets Workers' right to access the toilet Preventive healthcare Behavior change Theories Drug checking Family planning Harm reduction Health promotion Human nutrition Healthy diet Preventive nutrition Hygiene Food safety Hand washing Infection control Oral hygiene Needle and syringe programmes Occupational safety and health Human factors and ergonomics Hygiene Controlled Drugs Injury prevention Medicine Nursing Patient safety Organization Pharmacovigilance Reagent testing Safe sex Sanitation Emergency Fecal–oral transmission Open defecation Sanitary sewer Waterborne diseases Worker School hygiene Smoking cessation Supervised injection site Vaccination Vector control Population health Biostatistics Child mortality Community health Epidemiology Global health Health impact assessment Health system Infant mortality Open-source healthcare software Multimorbidity Public health informatics Social determinants of health Commercial determinants of health Health equity Race and health Social medicine Biological and epidemiological statistics Case–control study Randomized controlled trial Relative risk Statistical hypothesis testing Analysis of variance (ANOVA) Regression analysis ROC curve Student's t -test Z -test Statistical software Infectious and epidemic disease prevention Asymptomatic carrier Epidemics List Notifiable diseases List Public health surveillance Disease surveillance Quarantine Sexually transmitted infection Social distancing Tropical disease Vaccine trial WASH Food hygiene and safety management Food Additive Chemistry Engineering Microbiology Processing Safety Safety scandals Good agricultural practice Good manufacturing practice HACCP ISO 22000 Health behavioral sciences Diffusion of innovations Health belief model Health communication Health psychology Positive deviance PRECEDE–PROCEED model Social cognitive theory Social norms approach Theory of planned behavior Transtheoretical model Organizations, education and history Organizations Caribbean Caribbean Public Health Agency China Center for Disease Control and Prevention Europe Centre for Disease Prevention and Control Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Russia Rospotrebnadzor India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare Canada Health Canada Public Health Agency U.S.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention Health departments in the United States Council on Education for Public Health Public Health Service World Health Organization World Toilet Organization ( Full list ) Education Health education Higher education Bachelor of Science in Public Health Doctor of Public Health Professional degrees of public health Schools of public health History History of public health in the United Kingdom History of public health in the United States History of public health in Australia Sara Josephine Baker Samuel Jay Crumbine Carl Rogers Darnall Joseph Lister Margaret Sanger John Snow Typhoid Mary Radium Girls Germ theory of disease Social hygiene movement Category Commons WikiProject Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐x7tz5
Cached time: 20250814215407
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.783 seconds
Real time usage: 0.983 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2462/1000000
Revision size: 22424/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228856/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1755/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85973/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.495/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22316165/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  782.221      1 -total
 46.06%  360.265      9 Template:Navbox
 28.99%  226.771      1 Template:Reflist
 18.48%  144.536      1 Template:Food_science
 15.25%  119.310      1 Template:In_lang
 14.82%  115.950      5 Template:Cite_book
  9.45%   73.898      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.91%   69.730      1 Template:Ambox
  8.47%   66.246      1 Template:Short_description
  6.65%   52.010      8 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:602960:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215407 and revision id 1304224803. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Food_processing&oldid=1304224803 " Categories : Food processing Agricultural economics Food industry Food science Food technology Industrial processes Packaging Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Food processing 36 languages Add topic

