Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Calorimetry 3 Systems 4 Processes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Thermochemistry 59 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of thermodynamics For other uses, see chemical thermodynamics .

Thermochemistry is the study of the heat energy which is associated with chemical reactions and/or phase changes such as melting and boiling .  A reaction may release or absorb energy, and a phase change may do the same. Thermochemistry focuses on the energy exchange between a system and its surroundings in the form of heat. Thermochemistry is useful in predicting reactant and product quantities throughout the course of a given reaction. In combination with entropy determinations, it is also used to predict whether a reaction is spontaneous or non-spontaneous, favorable or unfavorable.

Endothermic reactions absorb heat, while exothermic reactions release heat.  Thermochemistry coalesces the concepts of thermodynamics with the concept of energy in the form of chemical bonds.  The subject commonly includes calculations of such quantities as heat capacity , heat of combustion , heat of formation , enthalpy , entropy , and free energy .

The world's first ice-calorimeter , used in the winter of 1782–83, by Antoine Lavoisier and Pierre-Simon Laplace , to determine the heat evolved in various chemical changes ; calculations which were based on Joseph Black 's prior discovery of latent heat .  These experiments mark the foundation of thermochemistry .

Thermochemistry is one part of the broader field of chemical thermodynamics , which deals with the exchange of all forms of energy between system and surroundings, including not only heat but also various forms of work , as well the exchange of matter. When all forms of energy are considered, the concepts of exothermic and endothermic reactions are generalized to exergonic reactions and endergonic reactions .

History [ edit ] Thermochemistry rests on two generalizations.  Stated in modern terms, they are as follows: [ 1 ] Lavoisier and Laplace's law (1780): The energy change accompanying any transformation is equal and opposite to energy change accompanying the reverse process.

[ 2 ] Hess' law of constant heat summation (1840): The energy change accompanying any transformation is the same whether the process occurs in one step or many.

[ 3 ] These statements preceded the first law of thermodynamics (1845) and helped in its formulation.

Thermochemistry also involves the measurement of the latent heat of phase transitions .

Joseph Black had already introduced the concept of latent heat in 1761, based on the observation that heating ice at its melting point did not raise the temperature but instead caused some ice to melt.

[ 4 ] Gustav Kirchhoff showed in 1858 that the variation of the heat of reaction is given by the difference in heat capacity between products and reactants: dΔH / dT = ΔC p . Integration of this equation permits the evaluation of the heat of reaction at one temperature from measurements at another temperature.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Calorimetry [ edit ] The measurement of heat changes is performed using calorimetry , usually an enclosed chamber within which the change to be examined occurs. The temperature of the chamber is monitored either using a thermometer or thermocouple , and the temperature plotted against time to give a graph from which fundamental quantities can be calculated. Modern calorimeters are frequently supplied with automatic devices to provide a quick read-out of information, one example being the differential scanning calorimeter .

Systems [ edit ] Several thermodynamic definitions are very useful in thermochemistry. A system is the specific portion of the universe that is being studied. Everything outside the system is considered the surroundings or environment. A system may be: a (completely) isolated system which can exchange neither energy nor matter with the surroundings, such as an insulated bomb calorimeter a thermally isolated system which can exchange mechanical work but not heat or matter, such as an insulated closed piston or balloon a mechanically isolated system which can exchange heat but not mechanical work or matter, such as an un insulated bomb calorimeter a closed system which can exchange energy but not matter, such as an un insulated closed piston or balloon an open system which it can exchange both matter and energy with the surroundings, such as a pot of boiling water Processes [ edit ] A system undergoes a process when one or more of its properties changes. A process relates to the change of state. An isothermal (same-temperature) process occurs when temperature of the system remains constant. An isobaric (same-pressure) process occurs when the pressure of the system remains constant. A process is adiabatic when no heat exchange occurs.

See also [ edit ] Science portal Calorimetry Chemical kinetics Cryochemistry Differential scanning calorimetry Isodesmic reaction Important publications in thermochemistry Photoelectron photoion coincidence spectroscopy Principle of maximum work Reaction Calorimeter Thermodynamic databases for pure substances Thermodynamics Thomsen-Berthelot principle Julius Thomsen References [ edit ] ^ Perrot, Pierre (1998).

A to Z of Thermodynamics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-856552-6 .

^ See page 290 of Outlines of Theoretical Chemistry by Frederick Hutton Getman (1918) ^ Petrucci, Ralph H.; Harwood, William S.; Herring, F. Geoffrey (2002).

General Chemistry (8th ed.). Prentice Hall. pp.

241– 3.

ISBN 0-13-014329-4 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Black, Joseph" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 4 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Laidler K.J.

and Meiser J.H., "Physical Chemistry" (Benjamin/Cummings 1982), p.62 ^ Atkins P.

and de Paula J., "Atkins' Physical Chemistry" (8th edn, W.H. Freeman 2006), p.56 External links [ edit ] Walker, James (1911).

"Thermochemistry" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). pp.

804– 808.

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermochemistry&oldid=1297516299 " Categories : Thermochemistry Physical chemistry Branches of thermodynamics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thermochemistry 59 languages Add topic

