Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction Toggle Introduction subsection 1.1 Theology and myth 1.2 Religion 1.3 Mythology 2 Similarities between different religious mythologies 3 Contrasts between different religious mythologies 4 Academic views 5 Religious views Toggle Religious views subsection 5.1 Opposition to categorizing all sacred stories as myths 5.1.1 Modern-day opposition 5.1.2 The roots of the popular meaning of "myth" 5.2 Non-opposition to categorizing sacred stories as myths 5.2.1 Christianity 5.2.2 Judaism 5.2.3 Neopaganism 6 Miscellaneous 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Religion and mythology 4 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overlapping concepts in myth and religion Mythology Mythologies Indeterminate Proto-Indo-European Africa Berber Bantu Efik Guanche Kongo Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Somali West African Yoruba Mediterranean Egyptian French Greek Iberian Basque Catalan Cantabrian Lusitanian Italian Etruscan Roman Romanian Turkic Europe Albanian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Prussian Celtic Breton Cornish Irish Scottish Welsh English Estonian Georgian Germanic Nazi mythology Frankish Continental Germanic Norse Anglo-Saxon Gothic Slavic Uralic Finnish Hungarian Proto-Uralic Sámi Middle East Arabian Armenian Christian Hittite Jewish Mesopotamian Ossetian Persian Talysh Asia Buddhist Chinese Hindu Japanese Korean Meitei Mongol Philippine Tai Thai Tibetan Vietnamese Oceania Aboriginal Australian Indonesian Māori Melanesian Micronesian Papuan Polynesian North America Algonquian Abenaki Blackfoot Lenape Aztec Californian Miwok Ohlone Choctaw Muscogee/Creek Haida Inuit Iroquois Maya Kwakwakaʼwakw Plains Indians Ho-Chunk Lakota Pawnee Puebloan Hopi Zuni Talamancan South America Brazilian Chaná Chilote Guarani Inca Muisca Selk'nam Types Creation Flood National Origin Lists Creations Creatures Deities Feral children Floods Heroes Culture Folk Objects Pairs Places Sources Related concepts Deity Legendary creature Type Legendary progenitor Twins Culture hero Folk hero See also Comparative mythology Comparative religion Euhemerism Folklore Epics Lower mythology Pseudo-mythology Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology v t e Religion and mythology differ in scope but have overlapping aspects. Both are systems of concepts that are of high importance to a certain community, making statements concerning the supernatural or sacred . Generally, mythology is considered one component or aspect of religion . Religion is the broader term: besides mythological aspects, it includes aspects of ritual , morality , theology , and mystical experience . A given mythology is almost always associated with a certain religion such as Greek mythology with Ancient Greek religion . Disconnected from its religious system, a myth may lose its immediate relevance to the community and evolve—away from sacred importance—into a legend or folktale .

There is a complex relationship between recital of myths and enactment of rituals .

Introduction [ edit ] See also: Myth and ritual The relationship between religion and myth depends on what definition of "myth" one uses. By Robert Graves 's definition, a religion's traditional stories are "myths" if and only if one does not belong to the religion in question. By Segal's definition, all religious stories are myths—but simply because nearly all stories are myths. By the folklorists ' definition, all myths are religious (or "sacred") stories, but not all religious stories are myths: religious stories that involve the creation of the world (e.g., the stories in the Book of Genesis ) are myths; however, some religious stories that don't explain how things came to be in their present form (e.g., hagiographies of famous saints ) are not myths. Generally, mythology is the main component of religion alongside ritual.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] For example, in the early modern period , distinguished Christian theologians developed elaborated witch mythologies which contributed to the intensification of witch trials .

[ 6 ] The Oxford Companion to World Mythology provides the following summary and examples: [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Religious stories are "holy scripture" to believers—narratives used to support, explain, or justify a particular system's rituals, theology, and ethics—and are myths to people of other cultures or belief systems. […] It is difficult to believe that the Buddha was conceived in a dream by a white elephant , so we call that story a myth as well. But, of course, stories such as the parting of the Sea of Reeds for the fleeing Hebrews , Muhammad 's Night Journey , and the dead Jesus rising from the tomb are just as clearly irrational narratives to which a Hindu or a Buddhist might understandably apply the word "myth". All of these stories are definable as myths because they contain events that contradict both our intellectual and physical experience of reality .

Most definitions of "myth" limit myths to stories.

[ 9 ] Thus, non-narrative elements of religion, such as ritual, are not myths.

Theology and myth [ edit ] The term theology for the first time appears in the writings of the Greek philosophers Plato and Aristotle . Initially, theology and mythology were synonymous. With time, both terms gained distinctive qualities: [ 10 ] In the first place, theology is a spiritual or religious attempt of "believers" to explicate their faith. In this sense it is not neutral and is not attempted from the perspective of removed observation—in contrast to a general history of religions. The implication derived from the religious approach is that it does not provide a formal and indifferent scheme devoid of presuppositions within which all religions could be subsumed. In the second place, theology is influenced by its origins in the Greek and Christian traditions, with the implication that the transmutation of this concept to other religions is endangered by the very circumstances of origination.

According to Hege, both primitive and modern theology is inescapably constrained by its mythical backbone: [ 11 ] Hermeneutically , theologians must recognize that mythical thought permeates the biblical texts .

Dogmatically , theologians must be aware of the mythological elements of theology and of how extensively theology relies on mythical forms and functions, especially in light of our awareness of the ubiquity of myth.

Religion [ edit ] Religion is a belief concerning the supernatural, sacred, or divine , and the moral codes , practices, values, and institutions associated with such belief, although some scholars, such as Durkheim, would argue that the supernatural and the divine are not aspects of all religions.

[ 12 ] Religious beliefs and practices may include the following: a deity or higher being, eschatology , practices of worship , practices of ethics and politics . Some religions do not include all these features.

Mythology [ edit ] The term mythology usually refers either to a system of myths or to the study of myths.

[ 13 ] However, the word "myth" itself has multiple (and some contradictory) definitions: 2007: According to the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, "Myth: "1 a: a usually traditional story of ostensibly historical events that serves to unfold part of the world view of a people or explain a practice, belief, or natural phenomenon. b: Parable , Allegory . 2 a: a popular belief or tradition that has grown up around something or someone; especially: one embodying the ideals and institutions of a society or segment of society . 2b: an unfounded or false notion. 3: a person or thing having only an imaginary or unverifiable existence. 4: the whole body of myths.

[ 14 ] In regards to the study of culture and religion, these are some of the definitions scholars have used: 1968: The classicist Robert Graves defines myths as "whatever religious or heroic legends are so foreign to a student's experience that he cannot believe them to be true." [ 15 ] 1973: Another classicist, GS Kirk, rejects the notion that all myths are religious or sacred. In the category of "myth", he includes many legendary accounts that are " secular " for all practical purposes.

[ 16 ] 1997: Folklorists define a myth as "a sacred narrative explaining how the world and humankind came to be in their present form".

[ 17 ] 2004: In religious studies, the word "myth" is usually reserved for stories whose main characters are gods or demigods .

[ 18 ] 2004: The classicist Richard Buxton defines a myth as "a socially powerful traditional story".

[ 19 ] 2004: Robert A. Segal, professor of theories of religion at the Lancaster University , defines "myth" broadly as any story whose "main figures [are] personalities -- divine, human, or even animal. Excluded would be impersonal forces such as Plato's Good." [ 18 ] Similarities between different religious mythologies [ edit ] Given any of the above definitions of "myth", the myths of many religions, both ancient and modern, share common elements. Widespread similarities between religious mythologies include the following: an initial Paradise preceding ordinary historical time [ 20 ] the story of a god who undergoes death and resurrection ( life-death-rebirth deity ).

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The mythical geography of many religions involves an axis mundi , or Cosmic Center.

[ 23 ] Creation myths Supreme deity Hero's journey The similarities between cultures and time periods can be useful, but it is usually not easy to combine beliefs and histories from different groups. Simplification of cultures and time periods by eliminating detailed data remain vulnerable or flimsy in this area of research.

Contrasts between different religious mythologies [ edit ] Though there are similarities among most religious mythologies, there are also contrasts. Many mythologies focus on explanations of the universe, natural phenomena, or other themes of human existence, often ascribing agency to one or more deities or other supernatural forces. However, some religions have very few of this kind of story of cosmic explanation. For instance,  the Buddhist parable of the arrow warns against such speculations as "[Is] the world eternal or not eternal? [Is] the soul different from the body? [Does] the enlightened exist after death or not?", viewing them as irrelevant to the goal of escaping suffering.

[ 24 ] Academic views [ edit ] In academia , the term "myth" often refers to stories whose culture regards them as true (as opposed to fictitious).

[ 25 ] Thus, many scholars will call a body of stories "mythology", leaving open the question of whether the stories are true or false. For example, in Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism , English professor Howard Schwartz writes, "the definition of 'mythology' offered here does not attempt to determine if biblical or subsequent narratives are true or false, i.e., historically accurate or not".

[ 26 ] Since the beginning of modern philosophy and science in the 16th century, many Western intellectuals have seen myth as outdated.

[ 27 ] In fact, some argued that the Christian religion would be better off without mythology, or even that Christianity would be better off without religion: [ 28 ] [J. A. T.] Robinson argued in favor of "the detaching of the Christian doctrine of God from any necessary dependence on a 'supernaturalistic' worldview". He understood this as a prophetic aspect of the Church's ministry to the world. [...] At this time atheism was regarded as the Christian Gospel that should be preached to the world. J. J. Altizer, for example, maintained [this] boldly by stating, "Throughout its history Christian theology has been thwarted from reaching its intrinsic goal by its bondage to a transcendent, a sovereign, and an impassive God". [...] [Dietrich] Bonhoffer called persistently for "Religionless Christianity".

In the 20th century, many scholars have resisted this trend, defending myth from modern criticism.

[ 29 ] Mircea Eliade , a professor of the history of religions, declared that myth did not hold religion back, that myth was an essential foundation of religion, and that eliminating myth would eliminate a piece of the human psyche.

[ 30 ] Eliade approached myth sympathetically at a time when religious thinkers were trying to purge religion of its mythological elements: [ 28 ] Eliade wrote about "sky and sky gods" when Christian theology was shaken at its very foundations by the "death of God" theology. He spoke of "God up there" when theologians such as J. A. T. Robinson were busy with erasing the mythical language of [a] three-storied universe that underlies the early Christian thought and experience.

Similarly, Joseph Campbell believed that people could not understand their individual lives without mythology to aid them. By recalling the significance of old myths, he encouraged awareness of them.

[ 31 ] In responding to the interview question "How would you define mythology?", Joseph Campbell answered: [ 32 ] My favorite definition of mythology: other people's religion. My favorite definition of religion: misunderstanding of mythology.

Religious views [ edit ] Most religions contain a body of traditional sacred stories that are believed to express profound truth. Some religious organizations and practitioners believe that some or all of their traditional stories are not only sacred and "true" but also historically accurate and divinely revealed and that calling such stories "myths" disrespects their special status. Other religious organizations and practitioners have no problem with categorizing their sacred stories as myths.

[ citation needed ] Opposition to categorizing all sacred stories as myths [ edit ] Modern-day opposition [ edit ] Some religious believers take offense when what they consider to be historical aspects of their faith are labeled as "myth". Such believers distinguish between religious fables or myths, on one hand, and those sacred narratives which are described by their tradition as being history or revelation, on the other. For instance, Catholic priest Father John A. Hardon insists that "Christianity is not mythology. What we believe in is not religious fantasies, no matter how pious." [ 33 ] Evangelical Christian theologian Carl F. H. Henry insisted that "Judeo-Christian revelation has nothing in common with the category of myth".

[ 34 ] The roots of the popular meaning of "myth" [ edit ] Especially within Christianity, objection to the word "myth" rests on a historical basis. By the time of Christ, the Greco-Roman world had started to use the term "myth" (Greek muthos ) to mean "fable, fiction, lie"; as a result, the early Christian theologians used "myth" in this sense.

[ 35 ] Thus, the derogatory meaning of the word "myth" is the traditional Christian meaning, and the expression "Christian mythology", as used in academic discourse, [ 36 ] may offend Christians for this reason.

In addition, this early Christian use of the term "myth" passed into popular usage.

[ 37 ] Thus, when essential sacred mysteries and teachings are described as myth , in modern English, the word often still implies that it is "idle fancy, fiction, or falsehood".

[ 36 ] This description could be taken as a direct attack on religious belief , quite contrary to the meaning ostensibly intended by the academic use of the term. Further, in academic writing, though "myth" usually means a fundamental worldview story, even there it is occasionally ambiguous or clearly denotes "falsehood", as in the " Christ myth theory ". The original term " mythos " (which has no pejorative connotation in English) may be a better word to distinguish the positive definition from the negative.

[ 36 ] Non-opposition to categorizing sacred stories as myths [ edit ] Modern day clergy and practitioners within some religious movements have no problem classifying the religion's sacred stories as "myths". They see the sacred texts as indeed containing religious truths, divinely inspired but delivered in the language of mankind. Some examples follow.

Christianity [ edit ] J.R.R. Tolkien 's love of myths and devout Catholic faith came together in his assertion that mythology is the divine echo of "the Truth".

[ 38 ] Tolkien wrote that myths held "fundamental things".

[ 39 ] He expressed these beliefs in his poem Mythopoeia circa 1931, which describes myth-making as an act of "sub-creation" within God's primary creation.

[ 40 ] The poem in part says creation is "myth-woven and elf-patterned": ... There is no firmament , only a void, unless a jewelled tent myth-woven and elf -patterned; and no earth, unless the mother's womb whence all have birth.

— JRR Tolkien Tolkien's opinion was adopted by another Christian writer, C. S. Lewis , in their conversations: "Tolkien explained to Lewis that the story of Christ was the true myth at the very heart of history and at the very root of reality." [ 41 ] C. S. Lewis freely called the Christ story a "true myth", and he believed that even pagan myths express spiritual truths. In his opinion, the difference between the Christ story and pagan myths is that the Christ story is historically as well as spiritually true. Lewis writes, [ 42 ] The story of Christ is simply a true myth: a myth working on us in the same way as the others, but with this tremendous difference that it really happened: and one must be content to accept it in the same way, remembering that it is God's myth where the others are men's myths: i. e. the Pagan stories are God expressing Himself through the minds of poets, using such images as He found there, while Christianity is God expressing Himself through what we call real things.

Another Christian writer, the Catholic priest Father Andrew Greeley , freely applies the term "myth" to Christianity. In his book Myths of Religion , he defends this terminology: [ 43 ] Many Christians have objected to my use of this word [myth] even when I define it specifically. They are terrified by a word which may even have a slight suggestion of fantasy. However, my usage is the one that is common among historians of religion, literary critics, and social scientists. It is a valuable and helpful usage; there is no other word which conveys what these scholarly traditions mean when they refer to myth. The Christian would be well advised to get over his fear of the word and appreciate how important a tool it can be for understanding the content of his faith.

At a "Consultation on the Relationship Between the Wesleyan Tradition
and the Natural Sciences" in Kansas City, Missouri, on October 19, 1991, Dennis Bratcher presented a discussion of the adaptation of Near Eastern mythical thought by the Israelites.

[ 44 ] Bratcher argued that the Old Testament absorbed Near Eastern pagan mythology (although he drew a sharp distinction between the literally-interpreted myths of the Near Eastern pagans and the "mythopoetic" use of imagery from pagan myths by the Hebrews). During this presentation, he gave the following disclaimer: [ 44 ] the term "myth" as used here does not mean "false" or "fiction". Even in my old and yellowed Webster's, "fiction" is the third meaning of the word. In its primary and more technical meaning "myth" refers to a story or group of stories that serve to explain how a particular society views their world.

Judaism [ edit ] Some Jewish scholars, including Dov Noy , a professor of folklore at Hebrew University and founder of the Israel Folktale Archives, and Howard Schwartz , Jewish anthologist and English professor at the University of Missouri – St. Louis, have discussed traditional Jewish stories as "mythology".

[ 45 ] Schwartz authored the book Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism . It consists of myths and belief statements excerpted from—and, in some cases, synthesized from a number of excerpts from—both Biblical and non-Biblical Jewish texts. According to Schwartz, the Jewish people continue to elaborate on, and compose additions to, their traditional mythology.

[ 46 ] In the book's introduction, Schwartz states that the word "myth", as used in the book, "is not offered to mean something that is not true, as in the current popular usage".

[ 26 ] Neopaganism [ edit ] Neopagans frequently refer to their sacred stories as "myths".

Asatru , a modern-day revival of Germanic Paganism, holds "that the Eddas , Myths and Norse Sagas are the divinely inspired wisdom of [its] religion".

[ 47 ] Wicca , another Neopagan movement, also applies the term "mythology" to its stories.

[ 48 ] Miscellaneous [ edit ] The Dewey Decimal system covers religion in the 200 range, with books on " Religious mythology & social theology ", a subset listed under 201.

[ 49 ] See also [ edit ] General Comparative mythology Creation myth Esotericism Magic and religion Myth and ritual Mythical theology Theosophical Society Mythology of world religions Buddhist mythology Christian mythology Hindu mythology Islamic mythology Jewish mythology References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Bultmann, Rudolf (2005).

KERYGMA AND MYTH by Rudolf Bultmann and Five Critics edited by Hans Werner Bartsch . Harper & Row. p. 21.

: "The cosmology of the New Testament is essentially mythical in character." ^ Rue 2005 , pp. 315: religious traditions are, essentially, mythic traditions ^ Rue 2005 , pp. 144–145: "At the core of every religious tradition there is found a narrative vision, a myth unifying ultimate reality and value, a story that is expressed, transmitted, and revitalized by a variety of ancillary strategies." ^ Leeming 2005 , Introduction, xi: "Religious stories are "holy scripture" to believers — narratives used to support, explain, or justify a particular system's rituals, theology, and ethics — and are myths to people of other cultures or belief systems." ^ Gieysztor 1982 , p. 5: "Przez mitologię, stanowiącą część główną religii, rozumiemy system personifikacji, alegorii i symboliki, które wyrażały stosunek człowieka do świata." ^ Levack, Brian P. (2013).

The Oxford Handbook of Witchcraft in Early Modern Europe and Colonial America . Oxford University Press. pp.

48– 49.

ISBN 978-0-19-515669-0 .

^ Leeming 2005 , Introduction.

^ Leeming 2005 , Religion and Myth.

^ Segal 2004, p. 5. See Buxton, p. 18: "There are three elements in [my] definition [of mythology].

The least problematic is the notion of story : a 'myth' is a narrative, a set of events structured into a sequence". (Bolding added) ^ "Theology" .

Britannica . Archived from the original on 2018-08-18.

^ Hege, Brent A. R. (2017).

Myth, History, and the Resurrection in German Protestant Theology . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 132.

ISBN 9781532617539 .

^ "Religion", Encyclopædia Britannica 2007.

^ "Mythology", OED , 2007.

^ "Myth", Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, 2007.

^ Graves 1968, p. v.

^ Kirk 1973, p. 11.

^ Dundes 1997, p. 45.

^ a b Segal 2004, p. 5.

^ Buxton, p. 18 ^ Eliade, Myths, Dreams and Mysteries , 1967 p. 59.

^ "Alternative Religions" .

^ "Pagan Resurrection Myths and the Resurrection of Jesus" .

^ Eliade, Myths, Rites, Symbols: A Mircea Eliade Reader , 1976, pp. 372-75.

^ "The Parable of the Arrow" ^ Eliade, Myth and Reality , p. 1, 8-10; The Sacred and the Profane , p. 95 ^ a b Schwartz, p. lxxviii ^ See Armstrong, pp. 122-27. For example, an 18th century intellectual movement called deism rejected myths about divine intervention, limiting God's role to that of a first cause (Robinson), and a 20th century movement led by the theologian Rudolf Bultmann sought to "demythologize" Christianity, reinterpreting its myths as psychological allegory (Segal, pp. 47-51; Muthuraj). Some 19th and early 20th century secular scholars predicted that science would replace myth, even in religion. The anthropologist Edward Burnett Tylor argued that science was pushing traditional mythology out of religion, which would henceforth consist only of metaphysics and ethics (Segal, p. 14). And the anthropologist Sir James George Frazer even wrote, "In the last analysis, magic, religion, and science are nothing but theories of thought; and as science has supplanted its predecessors, so it may hereafter be itself superseded by some more perfect hypothesis" (Frazer, p. 712).

^ a b Muthuraj ^ Segal, p. 3 ^ According to religious thought, said Eliade, myths establish models for human behavior and "the more religious man is, the more paradigmatic models does he possess as a guide to his attitudes and actions" (Eliade, The Sacred and the Profane , p. 100). Eliade believed that modern novels, ideologies, customs, and pastimes contain "mythological elements" (Eliade, Myth and Reality , pp. 181-93), and that some mythological elements fall within the "transconscious", which Eliade defined as a set of universal human images, symbols, and sentiments (Eliade, Images and Symbols , pp. 16-17).

^ For example, Campbell claimed that mythology's primary function is "that of eliciting and supporting a sense of awe before the mystery of being" (Campbell, p. 519), and that mythology also serves "to initiate the individual into the order of realities of his own psyche" (Campbell, p. 521).

^ Campbell, Thou Are That, p. 111 [in:] James W. Menzies, True Myth, s. 25 ^ Hardon ^ Carl F. H. Henry, quoted by Mohler ^ Eliade, Myth and Reality , 1968, p. 162.

^ a b c Grassie, William (March 1998). "Science as Epic? Can the modern evolutionary cosmology be a mythic story for our time?".

Science & Spirit .

9 (1).

The word 'myth' is popularly understood to mean idle fancy, fiction, or falsehood; but there is another meaning of the word in academic discourse. A myth, in this latter sense of the word, is a story that serves to define the fundamental worldview of a culture .... Using the original Greek term mythos is perhaps a better way to distinguish this more positive and all-encompassing definition of the word.

^ Eliade, Myths, Dreams and Mysteries , 1967, p. 23.

^ Wood ^ Menion, 2003/2004 citing essays by Tolkien using the words "fundamental things".

^ Tolkien, Mythopoeia , circa 1931.

^ Pearce ^ letter to Arthur Greeves, quoted by Brown ^ Greeley, Myths of Religion ; quoted in Bierlein 1994, pp. 304-5.

^ a b Bratcher ^ Schram ^ Schwartz, p. lxxv ^ "About Us" ^ "The Wheel of the Year / the Sabbats"; "What is Wicca?"; "Workshops and Talks" ^ " Dewey Decimal Classification (DDC) system ".  Online Computer Library Center, 2005. ( PDF ) Sources [ edit ] Leeming, David (2005).

The Oxford Companion to World Mythology (ePub ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-515669-2 .

Gieysztor, Aleksander (1982).

Mitologia Słowian (in Polish). Warsaw: Wydawnictwa Artystyczne i filmowe.

ISBN 83-221-0152-X .

Rue, Loyal D. (2005).

Religion is Not about God: How Spiritual Traditions Nurture Our Biological Nature and what to Expect when They Fail . Rutgers University Press.

ISBN 9780813535111 .

"About Us". Ásatrú Utah. 30 December 2007 < http://asatruutah.org/about_us/ >.

"Religion".

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. File retrieved 8 June 2007 [1] .

"Myth", Oxford English Dictionary ("OED") . File retrieved 2 June 2007. [] Bierlein, J.F.

Parallel Myths . New York: Ballantine, 1994.

Bratcher, Dennis. "Speaking the Language of Canaan: The Old Testament and the Israelite Perception of the Physical World".

The Voice . CRI/Voice, Institute. 30 December 2007 < http://www.cresourcei.org/langcaan.html#symbol >.

Brown, Dave. "Real Joy and True Myth". Dave Brown's C. S. Lewis Page. 31 December 2007 < https://web.archive.org/web/20091026222931/http://www.geocities.com/athens/forum/3505/LewisJoy.html >.

Buxton, Richard.

The Complete World of Greek Mythology . London: Thames & Hudson, 2004.

"Myth", Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary . File retrieved June 18, 2007.

Campbell, Joseph.

The Masks of God: Occidental Mythology . NY: Penguin, 1991.

Eliade, Mircea : Images and Symbols: Studies in Religious Symbolism". Trans. Philip Mairet. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1991.

Myth and Reality . Trans. Willard R. Trask. NY: Harper & Row, 1968.

Myths, Dreams and Mysteries . Trans. Philip Mairet. NY: Harper & Row, 1967.

Myths, Rites, Symbols: A Mircea Eliade Reader . Ed. Wendell C. Beane and William G. Doty. Vol 2. New York: Harper & Row, 1976.

The Sacred and the Profane: The Nature of Religion . Trans. Willard R. Trask. NY Harper & Row, 1961.

Dundes, Alan. "Binary Opposition in Myth: The Propp/Levi-Strauss Debate in Retrospect".

Western Folklore 56 (Winter, 1997): pp. 39–50.

Frazer, J. G.

The Golden Bough: A Study in Magic and Religion . NY: Macmillan, 1930.

Kirk, G. S.

Myth: Its Meaning and Function in Ancient and Other Cultures . Berkeley: Cambridge UP, 1973.

Graves, Robert, "Introduction," New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology (trans. Richard Aldington and Delano Ames), London: Hamlyn, 1968, pp. v-viii.

Menion, Michael.

Tolkien Elves and Art, in  J.R.R. Tolkien's  Aesthetics . 2003/2004 (commentary on Mythopoeia the poem).

Mohler, Albert. "The Mythology of Star Wars: The Faith versus the Force". AlbertMohler.com. 30 December 2007 < http://www.albertmohler.com/commentary_read.php?cdate=2005-05-25 >.

Muthuraj, Joseph. "The Significance of Mircea Eliade for Christian Theology".

Religion Online . 15 January 2008 < https://web.archive.org/web/20080413053729/http://www.religion-online.org/showarticle.asp?title=1901 >. This article was previously published in Bangalore Theological Forum 33.2 (2001): 38-59.

Pearce, Joseph. "J.R.R. Tolkien: Truth and Myth". Catholic Education Research Center. 31 December 2007 < http://www.catholiceducation.org/articles/arts/al0107.html >.

Robinson, B. A. "Deism: About the God who went away".

ReligiousTolerance.org . 30 December 2007 < http://www.religioustolerance.org/deism.htm >.

Segal, Robert A.

Myth: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford UP, 2004.

Schram, Peninnah. Review: Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism . University of Missouri – St. Louis. 30 December 2007 < http://www.umsl.edu/~schwartzh/bookworld.htm >.

Schwartz, Howard.

Tree of Souls: The Mythology of Judaism . Oxford: Oxford UP, 2004.

"The Parable of the Arrow" (adapted from the Majjhima-nikaya ). Staffordshire Learning Net. File retrieved 2 June 2007.

[2] "The Wheel of the Year / the Sabbats". Wicca for the Rest of Us. 30 December 2007 < https://web.archive.org/web/20070701140411/http://wicca.timerift.net/sabbat.shtml >.

"What is Wicca?" Greywing's Wicca Basics.

Manor House for Wiccan Studies . 30 December 2007 < https://www.webcitation.org/5knCD8Qro?url=http://www.geocities.com/athens/4177/wiccab.html#Wicca Wood, Ralph C. "Biography of J.R.R. Tolkien". Leadership University. 31 December 2007 < http://www.leaderu.com/humanities/wood-biography.html >.

"Workshops and Talks".

Deborah Lipp . Nightowls Webspace. 30 December 2007 < http://www.deborahlipp.com/workshop_talks.htm >.

Further reading [ edit ] Campbell, Joseph , The Hero with a Thousand Faces , Princeton University Press, 1949.

ISBN 978-0-691-01784-6 Girard, René, Jean-Michel Oughourlian, and Guy Lefort, " Things Hidden since the Foundation of the World ". Stanford University Press, 1987 Goodwin, J., " Mystery Religions of the Ancient World ". Thames & Hudson, 1981.

Heidel, Alexander, " The Epic of Gilgamesh and Old Testament parallels ". University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Kirk, G.S.

Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures . University of California Press. 1970.

Redford, Donald. " Similarity Between Egyptian and Biblical Texts—Indirect Influence?

" Biblical Archaeology Review, 1987. (13[3]:18-32, May/June) Wright L.M.

Christianity, Astrology and Myth.

USA: Oak Hill Free Press, 2002.

ISBN 0-9518796-1-8 Robinson, B. A.," Parallels between Christianity and ancient Pagan religions ". Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance, 2004.

External links [ edit ] Look up religion or mythology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

" Mythology ". The Columbia Encyclopedia, Sixth Edition, 2005.

" Religion and mythology : Selected resources ". University of Wisconsin Library, 2004.

Occultopedia : The Occult and Unexplained Encyclopedia.

Internet Sacred Text Archive v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Religion and ...

( Some topic...

) and religion Anarchism Astronomy Cannabis Disability Fertility Gender Homosexuality Hittite mythology Intersex people Law Magic Marxism Morality Slavery Subud Transgender people Vaccination Vegetarianism Women World War I Religion and ( some topic ) abortion agriculture AIDS alcohol animal rights authoritarianism birth control business capital punishment child marriage children climate change communism coping with trauma coronavirus corruption crime death penalty disability divorce domestic violence drugs education in Pakistan environmentalism ethics ethnicity executions gambling gender geography government happiness health HIV/AIDS human migration identity intelligence the internet LGBTQ people mental health mental illness schizophrenia morality mythology negotiations pacifism peacebuilding personality politics in the United States ritual sexuality adolescent bestiality heterosexuality polygamy polygyny pornography superstition terror torture vaccination video games violence warfare Category:... and religion Adoption African Americans Cannabis Economics Economy Environment Evolution Films about LGBTQ Freemasonry Gender Hellenistic philosophy LGBTQ Liberalism Marriage Mythology Aztec Maya Mesoamerican Mixtec Muisca Olmec Pre-Columbian Nature Psychedelics Sexual abstinence Sexuality Slavery Tamils Tobacco Transgender topics Vegetarianism Water Wealth Women Category:Religion and ...

the arts abortion alcohol atheism capital punishment children death drugs education euthanasia the French Revolution geography government health mental health HIV/AIDS law medicine music peace race science society by country in France in the United States spirituality podcasts sports suicide technology v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s5swz
Cached time: 20250817222450
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.690 seconds
Real time usage: 0.887 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2906/1000000
Revision size: 33952/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 264428/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3510/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93196/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.333/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8105906/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  601.621      1 -total
 22.27%  133.985      1 Template:Reflist
 17.62%  106.019      6 Template:Cite_book
 14.17%   85.249      1 Template:Mythology
 13.99%   84.174      1 Template:Short_description
 13.85%   83.306      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.91%   77.669      1 Template:Religion_topics
 12.36%   74.365      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.72%   46.444      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.36%   38.280      4 Template:Refn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25824:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222450 and revision id 1293665111. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religion_and_mythology&oldid=1293665111 " Categories : Anthropology of religion Mythography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 01:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religion and mythology 4 languages Add topic

