Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic tenets 2 The Praxis journal 3 Korčula Summer School 4 Suppression 5 Praxis International journal 6 Aftermath 7 Influence 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Praxis School 17 languages Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Hrvatski Македонски ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist humanist philosophical movement This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The Praxis school was a Marxist humanist philosophical circle, whose members were influenced by Western Marxism .

[ 1 ] It originated in Zagreb in the SFR Yugoslavia , during the 1960s.

Prominent Praxis school theorists include Gajo Petrović and Milan Kangrga of Zagreb and Mihailo Marković of Belgrade. From 1964 to 1974 they published the Marxist journal Praxis , which was renowned as one of the leading international journals in Marxist theory . The group also organized the widely popular Korčula Summer School in the island of Korčula .

Basic tenets [ edit ] Due to the tumultuous sociopolitical conditions in the 1960s, the affirmation of 'authentic' Marxist theory and praxis , and its humanist and dialectical aspects in particular, was an urgent task for philosophers working across the SFRY . There was a need to respond to the kind of modified Marxism–Leninism enforced by the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (see Titoism ). To vocalize this need, the program of Praxis school was defined in the first issue of Praxis ( Why Praxis?

). Predrag Vranicki ("On the problem of Practice") and Danko Grlić ("Practice and Dogma") expanded this program in the same issue.

[ 2 ] The Praxis philosophers considered Leninism and Stalinism to be apologetic due to their ad hoc nature. Leninist and Stalinist theories were considered to be unfaithful to the Marxist theory, as they were adjusted according to the needs of the party elite and intolerant of ideological criticism.

[ citation needed ] The defining features of the school were: 1) emphasis on the writings of the young Marx ; and 2) call for freedom of speech in both East and West based upon Marx's insistence on ruthless social critique. As Erich Fromm has argued in his preface to Marković's work From Affluence to Praxis , the theory of the Praxis theoreticians was to "return to the real Marx as against the Marx equally distorted by right wing social democrats and Stalinists".

[ 3 ] Different theorists emphasized different aspects of the theory. Where Gajo Petrović writes of philosophy as radical critique of all existing things, emphasizing the essentially creative and practical nature of human beings, Mihailo Marković writes of alienation and the dynamic nature of human beings. Milan Kangrga emphasizes creativity as well, but also the understanding of human beings as producers humanizing nature.

The Praxis School critiqued the implementation of socialist self-management in Yugoslavia , arguing that the expansion of bureaucratic power in the Yugoslav economy was because Yugoslav workers' self-management was not sufficiently implemented.

[ 4 ] Another important feature of the Praxis theory is the incorporation of existential philosophy into the Praxis brand of Marxist social critique, spearheaded by Rudi Supek .

Organizing Korčula Summer School and publishing the international edition of Praxis were ways to promote open inquiry in accordance with these postulates. Erich Fromm's collection of articles from 1965 entitled Socialist Humanism: An International Symposium has been of much help in promoting the Praxis school abroad. As many as six members of the Praxis school have published articles in this collection: Marković, Petrović, Danilo Pejović , Veljko Korać, Rudi Supek and Predrag Vranicki .

Although the tolerance for dissent from orthodox Communist thought afforded to the Praxis School in Yugoslavia was unusual, it had its limits. When University of Belgrade students held mass demonstrations in 1968 against poor living conditions, authoritarianism, unemployment and the Vietnam War with the support of eight academics associated with the Praxis School, Tito urged that they be sacked on the grounds that they were "corrupting" their students, although the Belgrade Eight (as they became known) narrowly held on to their jobs.

[ 4 ] The Praxis journal [ edit ] The Praxis journal was published by a group of praxis theoreticians, mainly from the departments of Philosophy and Sociology at Zagreb University and the Philosophy department at Belgrade University .

[ 4 ] It was established as the successor to a previous political journal, Pogledi , which was published in Zagreb for three years in the 1950s before being disbanded due to state suppression.

[ 4 ] Praxis was published in two editions: Yugoslav (in Serbo-Croatian ) and foreign (in multiple languages).

[ 4 ] The first issue of the Yugoslav edition was published on 1 September 1964 and was published until 1974. As for the foreign edition, it was published between 1965 and 1973. Its founders were Branko Bošnjak , Danko Grlić , Milan Kangrga , Rudi Supek , Gajo Petrović , Predrag Vranicki , Danilo Pejović and Ivan Kuvačić . The first editors of the journal were Petrović and Pejović, but in 1966 Pejović resigned from Praxis . After that, Supek was the co-editor of the journal together with Petrović. In January 1974 Supek also resigned and was replaced by Kuvačić as the co-editor of Praxis .

Praxis has helped to restore the creative potential of Marxism. It drew inspiration from the works of Antonio Gramsci , Karl Korsch , Georg Lukács , Ernst Bloch , Herbert Marcuse , Erich Fromm and Lucien Goldmann . The texts in the magazine featured articles by writers from both the East and the West.

Praxis editors had a strong tendency to publish articles that went against the Leninist theory and praxis promoted and enforced by the League of Communists of Yugoslavia . They also advocated freedom of speech and of the press. According to Praxis School member Žarko Puhovski , Praxis articles on controversial areas such as politics and ideology were often disguised as writings about more abstract topics such as aesthetics or ontology .

[ 4 ] Korčula Summer School [ edit ] Korčula Summer School was preceded by a symposium organized by Gajo Petrovic and Milan Kangrga in the summer of 1963 in Dubrovnik . The summer school was organized by the publishers of the journal Praxis from 1964 to 1974 in the Croatian island of Korčula , with the exception of 1966, when the gathering was cancelled due to the intense attacks by the League of Communists of Croatia .

The school was a meeting place for philosophers and social critics from the entire world. Some of the prominent attendees included Ernst Bloch , Eugen Fink , Erich Fromm , Herbert Marcuse , Jürgen Habermas , Henri Lefebvre , Richard J. Bernstein and Shlomo Avineri , to name a few. Other notable participants included A. J. Ayer , Norman Birnbaum and Lucien Goldmann .

[ 4 ] Another peculiarity is that one of the attendants was from the Vatican, Father Gustav Wetter, which testifies to the fact that Korčula Summer School was not merely a Marxist symposium – the attendees held interests ranging from phenomenology to theology.

The articles produced during the meeting were published in the journal during the following year. Each summer, the gathering focused on a particular topic: 1963: Progress and Culture (held in Dubrovnik ) 1964: Meaning and Perspectives of Socialism 1965: What is History?

1966: The summer school was canceled due to the intense attacks by the League of Communists of Croatia 1967: Creativity and Creation 1968: Marx and Revolution 1969: Power and Humanity 1970: Hegel and Our Time (celebrating the anniversary of 200 years since Hegel's birth) 1971: Utopia and Reality 1972: Freedom and Equality 1973: The Essence and Limits of Civil Society 1974: Art in a Technologized World Suppression [ edit ] Due to its critical nature – some party ideologues referred to the editors and authors of Praxis as "professional anti-Communists" and "enemies of self-managing socialism" – the journal was banned on several occasions. By 1975 it became impossible to publish the journal under the increasingly repressive conditions in SFRY.

In the same year, in January, the aforementioned Belgrade Eight (Mihailo Marković, Ljubomir Tadić , Zagorka Golubović , Svetozar Stojanović , Miladin Životić, Dragoljub Mićunović , Nebojša Popov and Trivo Inđić ) were expelled from the Faculty of Philosophy in Belgrade on the basis of a decision of the Serbian Assembly. Some of the Eight taught abroad: Marković took up a part-time position at the University of Pennsylvania , whilst Stojanović worked at the University of California, Berkeley and the University of Kansas . Although the Zagreb Praxisists were treated less harshly, they still faced restrictions: Puhovski was unable to publish for two years. During subsequent years, the Praxisists organised underground meetings in private homes, which they dubbed the "Free University": however these were at risk of police interruption.

[ 4 ] Praxis International journal [ edit ] The Praxis members tried in several occasions to resume publishing of Praxis and reopening Korčula Summer School. Their efforts failed, which was the main motive for several Praxis members from Belgrade to try to publish the journal abroad. They succeeded in achieving this and by April 1981, the Praxis International journal was edited and published in Oxford in the spirit of the original Praxis journal. However, not all Praxis members supported this move. This move was supported by four members of the editorial board of the Praxis : Supek, Marković, Tadić and Stojanović. The majority of the Praxis theorists, however, led by Kangrga, disagreed on the basis of the fact that an international journal with the same or similar name as the original journal would reduce the possibilities of republishing the journal inside Yugoslavia. First co-editors of Praxis International were Richard J. Bernstein and Mihailo Marković. From 1986 the co-editors were Seyla Benhabib and Svetozar Stojanović .

Praxis International was published until January 1994 when it continued to be published under the name Constellations: An International Journal of Critical and Democratic Theory .

Aftermath [ edit ] As inter-ethnic tensions in Yugoslavia rose , some of the Belgrade Praxisists turned towards Serbian nationalism . In 1986, Marković, Tadić and Golubović, along with writer and Praxis associate Dobrica Ćosić , signed a petition in support of Kosovo Serbs , who had made allegations that they were being persecuted by the ethnic Albanian community there: the petition implied support for removing the region's autonomous status . Marković was also a co-author of the SANU Memorandum , which has been described as the catalyst for Slobodan Milošević 's rise to power.

[ 4 ] In 1990, Praxis International published an article by Marković on Kosovo in which he claimed that the high birthrate among the Albanian community in the province was a plot by Albanian nationalists against the Serb population, and that despite their poverty, the Kosovo Albanians had historically had support from powerful allies against the Serbian community, including the Ottoman Empire , Austria-Hungary , Italy , the Catholic Church , the United Kingdom , the Comintern , the United States , Pan-Islamists , Albania and bureaucrats in the Yugoslav government. He proposed a reduction in financial investment in the province and the introduction of a family planning program, "in a gentle and psychologically acceptable way, and by the Albanians themselves, using primarily educational means". Seyla Benhabib subsequently stated that the publication of the article was the one editorial decision she regretted at Praxis International : in a 1999 interview she explained that whilst she was aware of tensions in Kosovo, she lacked knowledge regarding the situation, and the commissioning of the article was an attempt to remedy this. Looking back, she highlighted the article's invoking of the Albanians as a demographic threat as its most striking feature: "This is cliche neo-fascist thinking, racist thinking about an oppressed group. You will find racists everywhere saying the same thing". The outbreak of the Yugoslav Wars shortly afterwards drove a wedge between the Belgrade Praxisists and their western collaborators: by this time Marković had been appointed vice-president of Milošević's Socialist Party of Serbia , and served as its ideologue. This divide eventually led to the end of the journal under its original name.

[ 4 ] Of the other Belgrade Praxisists, Stojanović became chief adviser to Ćosić when the latter was appointed President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia by Milošević in 1992. Tadić and Mićunović formed the Democratic Party in 1990. Although Tadić was a leader of the opposition to Milošević in Serbia, he was an uncritical supporter of Radovan Karadžić , the President of the Republika Srpska in Bosnia : in 1996 he and Marković signed a petition urging the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to drop charges against Karadžić, describing him as "the true leader of all Serbs".

However, some of the Belgrade Praxisists maintained opposition to the nationalist turn: Popov founded the liberal Civic Alliance of Serbia , whilst Životić (who had moved away from Marxism towards post-structuralism in the 1980s) founded the Belgrade Circle , an NGO dedicated to inter-ethnic dialogue and peace activism, in collaboration with Tito protege-turned veteran dissident Milovan Djilas . Of the Zagreb Praxisists, Puhovski became a leading member of the Croatian Helsinki Committee , and spoke out against ethnic cleansing campaigns by the Croatian Army.

[ 4 ] Influence [ edit ] The influence of the Praxis school is mainly through its intellectual legacy as a heterodox interpretation of Marxism. This interpretation has been popular among Western Marxists and academics, notably Marshall Berman , who references the Praxis group in his major works. Many praxis theoreticians taught at various universities in Europe and US. The Praxis approach was appealing to Western academia due to its emphasis on the dialectical, humanist Marx.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Socialism portal Budapest School (Lukács) Critical theory New class Novi Plamen , a new journal drawing from the Praxis tradition Praxis intervention References [ edit ] ^ Martin Jay , Marxism and Totality: The Adventures of a Concept from Lukács to Habermas , University of California Press, 1984, p. 5: "Although such thinkers as the Polish philosopher Leszek Kolakowski (during his Marxist Humanist phase) and the Czech philosopher Karel Kosík were certainly important in their own right, their work was nonetheless built upon the earlier thought of Western Marxists, as was that of the Yugoslav theoreticians published in the journal Praxis ." ^ Praxis , 1965, 1, pounds. 41–48 and pp. 49–58 ^ Erich Fromm, "Foreword". In From Affluence to Praxis , Mihailo Markovic. The University of Michigan Press, 1974. p. vii.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Secor, Laura (September 1999).

"Testaments Betrayed" .

Lingua Franca . Retrieved 19 June 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mihailo Markovic and Robert S. Cohen Yugoslavia: The Rise and Fall of Socialist Humanism. A History of the Praxis Group , Nottingham, Spokesman Books, 1975.

Gerson S. Sher, Praxis: Marxist Criticism and Dissent in Socialist Yugoslavia . Bloomington, Indiana University Press, 1977.

Oskar Gruenwald The Yugoslav search for man: Marxist humanism in contemporary Yugoslavia . J.F. Bergin Publishers, South Hadley, MA. 1983.

Nebojša Popov (ed.) Freedom and Violence: a conversation about the Praxis journal and Korčula Summer school ("Sloboda i nasilje: Razgovor o časopisu Praxis i Korčulanskoj letnjoj školi"), "Res publica", Beograd, 2003 (in Serbian) Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , 2nd Edition. Gen. Ed. Robert Audi. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Kukoč, Mislav (December 1994).

"Temelji hrvatske filozofije prakse" [Foundations of Croatian Praxis Philosophy] (PDF) .

Prilozi Za Istraživanje Hrvatske Filozofske Baštine (in Croatian).

20 (1–2 (39–40)): 407– 432 . Retrieved 7 July 2017 .

External links [ edit ] The Praxis Archive at Marxists Internet Archive Praxis International Archive Praxis Philosophy Study Guide at Autodidact Project Robert Stallaerts, The Disintegration of the Yugoslav Intellectual Community Rei Shigeno, On the Conception of Politics of the Praxis Group: Exposing the Limits Noam Chomsky on the repression of the Belgrade Praxis members , The New York Review of Books , February 7, 1974.

Online archive of Praxis and Korcula Summer School (in Serbo-croatian) Milan Kangrga, The Korčula Summer School (in Croatian) Bozidar Jakšić, The Praxis of Gajo Petrović (in Serbian) 2002 Republika article about the Praxis school (in Croatian) 1999 NIN article about Mihailo Marković and the Praxis school (in Serbian) An Analysis of a Serbian Anarchist Group about Praxis (in Serbian) Webpage contributed to the Philosophy of praxis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Praxis_School&oldid=1289243172 " Categories : Social philosophy Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Marxist schools of thought Marxist theory 1960s in Yugoslavia 1970s in Yugoslavia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 10:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Praxis School 17 languages Add topic

