Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background in Islamic philosophy Toggle Background in Islamic philosophy subsection 1.1 Ibn Rushd 2 Islamic Modernists Toggle Islamic Modernists subsection 2.1 Rifa'a al-Tahtawi 2.2 Muhammad Abduh 3 Other Islamic thinkers Toggle Other Islamic thinkers subsection 3.1 Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd 3.2 Socialist Shi'ism 3.2.1 Ali Shariati 3.2.2 Mahmoud Taleghani 4 Specific issues and doctrines Toggle Specific issues and doctrines subsection 4.1 Ijtihad 4.2 Freedom of religion 4.3 Feminism 4.3.1 Hijab 4.3.2 Wives' obedience to husbands 4.4 Human rights 4.5 LGBTQ rights 4.5.1 Story of Lut 4.6 Secularism 4.7 Egalitarianism 5 Movements Toggle Movements subsection 5.1 Islamic modernism 5.2 Quranism 5.3 Scriptural fallibility 6 Notable organizations Toggle Notable organizations subsection 6.1 Muslims for Progressive Values 6.2 Sisters in Islam 6.3 Tolu-e-Islam 7 List of notable members Toggle List of notable members subsection 7.1 Scholars 7.2 Writers 7.3 Activists 7.4 Politicians 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and progressivism within Islam 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latviešu مصرى Bahasa Melayu پښتو Português Русский کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For modernist reform movements in Islam, see Islamic modernism .

Part of a series on Islam Beliefs Oneness of God Angels Holy books Prophets Judgement Day Predestination Practices Profession of faith Prayer Almsgiving Fasting Pilgrimage Texts Foundations Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Tafsir (exegesis) Ijtihad Aqidah (creed) Qisas al-Anbiya ( Stories of the Prophets ) Mathnawi (poems) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) History Timeline Jahiliyyah Muhammad Ahl al-Bayt Sahabah Rashidun Caliphate Imamate Spread of Islam Succession to Muhammad Abbasid Caliphate Al-Andalus Golden Age Seljuk Empire Ilkhanate Timurid Renaissance Gunpowder empires Ottoman Empire Saudi Arabia Culture and society Academics Animals Art Association football Calendar Cats Censorship Children Circumcision Democracy Demographics Diaspora Denominations Sunni Shia Ibadi Economics Education Ethics Exorcism Feminism Festivals Finance Liberalism Madrasa Moral teachings Mosque Music Mysticism Philosophy Poetry Politics Proselytizing Science Sexuality LGBTQ Slavery Concubinage Social welfare Women Related topics Arabic language Apostasy Criticism Muhammad Quran Hadith Other religions Islamism Violence terrorism war Islamophobia Jihad Jihadism Salafi jihadism Deobandi jihadism Military laws Peace Pacifism Glossary Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Liberalism and progressivism within Islam or simply Islamic liberalism or Islamic progressivism are a range of interpretation of Islamic understanding and practice, it is a religiously left-leaning view , similar to Christian and other religious progressivism .

[ 1 ] Some Muslims have created a considerable body of progressive interpretation of Islamic understanding and practice. Their work is sometimes characterized as progressive [ 2 ] ( Arabic : الإسلام التقدمي al-Islām at-taqaddumī ) or liberal Islam.

[ 3 ] Some scholars, such as Omid Safi , differentiate between "progressive Muslims" (post-colonial, anti-imperialist, and critical of modernity and the West) versus "liberal advocates of Islam" (an older movement embracing modernity).

[ 4 ] Liberal Islam originally emerged from the Islamic revivalist movement of the 18th–19th centuries.

[ 1 ] Leftist ideas are considered controversial by some traditional fundamentalist Muslims, who criticize liberal Muslims on the grounds of being too Western and/or rationalistic .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] The methodologies of liberal and progressive Islam rest on the re-interpretation of traditional Islamic sacred scriptures (the Quran ) and other texts (the Hadith ), a process called ijtihad .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ page needed ] This reinterpreting can vary from minor to fundamental, including re-interpretation based on the belief that while the meaning of the Quran is a revelation , its expression in words is the work of the Islamic prophet Muhammad in his particular time and context.

Liberal Muslims see themselves as returning to the principles of the early ummah and as promoting the ethical and pluralistic intent of the Quran.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] The reform movement uses monotheism ( tawhid ) as "an organizing principle for human society and the basis of religious knowledge, history, metaphysics , aesthetics, and ethics, as well as social, economic and world order".

[ 8 ] Liberal Muslims affirm the promotion of progressive values such as democracy , gender equality , human rights , LGBT rights , women's rights , religious pluralism , interfaith marriage , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] freedom of expression , freedom of thought , and freedom of religion ; [ 1 ] opposition to theocracy and total rejection of Islamism and Islamic fundamentalism ; [ 1 ] and a modern view of Islamic theology , ethics , sharia , culture , tradition, and other ritualistic practices in Islam.

[ 1 ] Liberal Muslims claim that the re-interpretation of the Islamic scriptures is important in order to preserve their relevance in the 21st century.

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] Background in Islamic philosophy [ edit ] Main articles: Islamic philosophy , List of Muslim philosophers , Islamic ethics , and Political aspects of Islam The rise of Islam , based on both the transmission of the Quran and the life of Muhammad , strongly altered the power balances and perceptions of origin of power in the Mediterranean region.

Early Islamic philosophy emphasized an inexorable link between religion and science , and the process of ijtihad to find truth — in effect, all philosophy was " political " as it had real implications for governance. This view was challenged by the "rationalist" Muʿtazilite philosophers , who held a more Hellenistic view, emphasizing reason above revelation, and as such are known to modern scholars as the first speculative theologians of Islam ; they were supported by a secular aristocracy who sought freedom of action independent of the Caliphate . By the late ancient period, the "traditionalist" Ashʿarīte theology had in general triumphed over rationalists. According to the Ashʿarītes, reason must be subordinate to the Quran and the sunnah .

[ 12 ] Ibn Rushd [ edit ] Ibn Rushd was the preeminent philosopher in the history of Al-Andalus .

14th-century painting by Andrea di Bonaiuto Ibn Rushd (1126–1198) often Latinized as Averroes, was an Andalusian polymath . Being described as "founding father of secular thought in Western Europe", [ 13 ] [ 14 ] he was known by the nickname the Commentator for his precious commentaries on Aristotle's works. His main work was The Incoherence of the Incoherence in which he defended philosophy against al-Ghazali 's claims in The Incoherence of the Philosophers . His other works were the Fasl al-Maqal and the Kitab al-Kashf .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Ibn Rushd presented an argument in Fasl al-Maqal ( Decisive Treatise ) providing a justification for the emancipation of science and philosophy from official Ash'ari theology and that there is no inherent contradiction between philosophy and religion; thus Averroism has been considered a precursor to modern secularism.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Ibn Rushd accepts the principle of women's equality. According to him, they should be educated and allowed to serve in the military; the best among them might be tomorrow's philosophers or rulers.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The 13th-century philosophical movement in Latin Christian and Jewish tradition based on Ibn Rushd's work is called Averroism . Ibn Rushd became something of a symbolic figure in the debate over the decline and proposed revitalization of Islamic thought and Islamic society in the late 20th century. A notable proponent of such a revival of Averroist thought in Islamic society was Mohammed Abed al-Jabri with his Critique de la Raison Arabe (1982).

[ 20 ] Islamic Modernists [ edit ] Rifa'a al-Tahtawi [ edit ] Rifa'a al-Tahtawi, 1801–1873 Egyptian Egyptologist and renaissance intellectual Rifa'a al-Tahtawi (1801−1873) is considered one of the early adapters to Islamic Modernism . Islamic Modernists attempted to integrate Islamic principles with European social theories. In 1831, Rifa'a al-Tahtawi was part of the statewide effort to modernize the Egyptian infrastructure and education. They introduced his Egyptian audience to Enlightenment ideas such as secular authority and political rights and liberty; his ideas regarding how a modern civilized society ought to be and what constituted by extension a civilized or "good Egyptian"; and his ideas on public interest and public good.

[ 21 ] Tahtawi's work was the first effort in what became an Egyptian renaissance ( nahda ) that flourished in the years between 1860 and 1940.

[ 22 ] In 1826, Al-Tahtawi was sent to Paris by Mehmet Ali . There, he studied at an educational mission for five years, returning in 1831. Tahtawi was appointed director of the School of Languages. At the school, he worked translating European books into Arabic. Tahtawi was instrumental in translating military manuals, geography, and European history.

[ 23 ] In total, al-Tahtawi supervised the translation of over 2,000 foreign works into Arabic. He even made favorable comments about French society in some of his books.

[ 24 ] Tahtawi stressed that the Principles of Islam are compatible with those of European Modernity. In his piece, The Extraction of Gold or an Overview of Paris, Tahtawi discusses the patriotic responsibility of citizenship. He uses Roman civilization as an example of what could become of Islamic civilizations; at one point, all Romans are united under one Caesar but split into East and West. After splitting, the two nations see "all its wars ended in defeat, and it retreated from a perfect existence to nonexistence." Tahtawi understands that if Egypt is unable to remain united, it could fall prey to outside invaders. He stresses the importance of citizens defending the patriotic duty of their country. One way to protect one's country, according to Tahtawi, is to accept the changes that come with a modern society.

[ 25 ] Muhammad Abduh [ edit ] Muhammad Abduh (1849–1905) Egyptian Islamic jurist and religious scholar Muhammad Abduh (1849—1905), regarded as one of the key founding figures of Islamic Modernism , [ 26 ] broke the rigidity of the Muslim ritual, dogma, and family ties.

[ 27 ] Abduh argued that Muslims could not simply rely on the interpretations of texts provided by medieval clerics, they needed to use reason to keep up with changing times. He said that in Islam, man was not created to be led by a bridle, man was given intelligence so that he could be guided by knowledge. According to Abduh, a teacher's role was to direct men towards study. He believed that Islam encouraged men to detach from the world of their ancestors and that Islam reproved the slavish imitation of tradition. He said that the two greatest possessions relating to religion that man was graced with were independence of will and independence of thought and opinion. It was with the help of these tools that he could attain happiness. He believed that the growth of Western civilization in Europe was based on these two principles. He thought that Europeans were roused to act after a large number of them were able to exercise their choice and to seek out facts with their minds.

[ 28 ] In his works, he portrays God as educating humanity from its childhood through its youth and then on to adulthood. According to him, Islam is the only religion whose dogmas can be proven by reasoning. He was against polygamy and thought that it was an archaic custom. He believed in a form of Islam that would liberate men from enslavement, provide equal rights for all human beings, abolish the religious scholar's monopoly on exegesis , and abolish racial discrimination and religious compulsion.

[ 29 ] Muhammad Abduh claimed in his book Al-Idtihad fi Al-Nasraniyya wa Al-Islam that no one had exclusive religious authority in the Islamic world. He argued that the Caliph did not represent religious authority, because he was not infallible nor was the Caliph the person to whom the revelation was given; therefore, according to Abduh, the Caliph and other Muslims are equal.

[ 30 ] ʿAbduh argued that the Caliph should have the respect of the ummah but not rule it; the unity of the umma is a moral unity which does not prevent its division into national states .

[ 31 ] Mohammad Abduh made great efforts to preach harmony between Sunnis and Shias . Broadly speaking, he preached brotherhood between all schools of thought in Islam.

[ 32 ] Abduh regularly called for better friendship between religious communities. As Christianity was the second biggest religion in Egypt , he devoted special efforts towards friendship between Muslims and Christians. He had many Christian friends and many a time he stood up to defend Copts .

[ 32 ] Other Islamic thinkers [ edit ] Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd [ edit ] Egyptian Qur'anic post-modern thinker, author, academic Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd is one of the leading liberal theologians in Islam . He is famous for his project of a humanistic Qur'anic hermeneutics , which "challenged mainstream views" on the Qur'an sparking "controversy and debate".

[ 33 ] While not denying that the Qur'an was of divine origin, Zayd argued that it was a "cultural product" that had to be read in the context of the language and culture of seventh century Arabs, [ 34 ] and could be interpreted in more than one way.

[ 35 ] He also criticized the use of religion to exert political power.

[ 36 ] In 1995 an Egyptian Sharia court declared him an apostate , this led to threats of death and his fleeing Egypt several week later.

[ 36 ] He later "quietly" returned to Egypt where he died.

[ 36 ] According to scholar Navid Kermani "three key themes" emerge from Abu Zayd's work: to trace the various interpretations and historical settings of the single Qur'anic text from the early days of Islam up to the present; to demonstrate the "interpretational diversity" ( al-ta 'addud alta 'wili ) [ 37 ] that exists within the Islamic tradition; and to show how this diversity has been "increasingly neglected" across Islamic history.

[ 35 ] Abu Zayd saw himself as an heir to the Muʿtazila , "particularly their idea of the created Qurʿān and their tendency toward metaphorical interpretation".

[ 38 ] Abu Zayd strongly opposed the belief in a "single, precise and valid interpretation of the Qur'an handed down by the Prophet for all times".

[ 39 ] In his view, the Quran made Islamic Arab culture a 'culture of the text` ( hadarat al-nass ) par excellence, but because the language of the Quran is not self-explanatory, this implied Islamic Arab culture was also a culture of interpretation ( hadarat al-ta'wil ).

[ 40 ] Abu Zayd emphasized "intellect" ( `aql ) in understanding the Quran, as opposed to "a hermeneutical approach which gives priority to the narrated traditions [ hadith ]" ( naql ). As a reflection of this Abu Zayd used the term ta'wil (interpretation) for efforts to understand the Quran, while in the Islamic sciences, the literature that explained the Quran was referred to as tafsir (commentary, explanation).

[ 41 ] For Abu Zayd, interpretation goes beyond explanation or commentary, "for without" the Qur'an would not have meaning: The [Qur'anic] text changed from the very first moment - that is, when the Prophet recited it at the moment of its revelation - from its existence as a divine text ( nass ilahi ), and became something understandable, a human text ( nass insani ), because it changed from revelation to interpretation ( li-annahu tahawwala min al-tanzil ila al-ta'wil ). The Prophet's understanding of the text is one of the first phases of movement resulting from the text's connection with the human intellect.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Abu Zayd's critical approach to classical and contemporary Islamic discourse in the fields of theology , philosophy , law , politics , and humanism , promoted modern Islamic thought that might enable Muslims to build a bridge between their own tradition and the modern world of freedom of speech , equality ( minority rights , women's rights , social justice ), human rights , democracy and globalisation .

[ 43 ] Socialist Shi'ism [ edit ] Socialist Shi'ism had a significant impact on the first and so far only Islamist revolution, the 1979 Iranian Revolution by giving a radical political interpretation to the religious themes of Shia Islam . Socialist Shiaism arose from a 1970s movement of young secular-educated leftists in majority-Shia Iran who sought a socialist revolution to overthrow the pro-American authoritarian monarchy of Shah Mohammad Reza Shah . Although a socialist revolution never came, the Shah was overthrown by the Islamist revolution, whose leader, the Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini , borrowed many of the socialist Shia ideas and in doing so was able to draw crucial support from students and the Iranian middle class.

[ 44 ] In attempting to build their revolutionary force the Iranian socialists failed to establish "deep roots" with the Muslim Iranian masses [ 45 ] who did not relate to Marxist concepts of rationalism , materialism , and atheism .

[ 46 ] Traditional peasant and manual laborer  Iranians did however strongly relate to the traditional religious Messianic expectation of the return of the Mahdi to cleanse the world of injustice, [ 47 ] and to traditional stories of the tragic/heroic struggle of the Imam Husayn , one of the most revered figures in Shia Islam, who had been defeated and killed by the Sunni Umayyad Caliphate at Karbala .

Ali Shariati [ edit ] Ali Shariati Ali Shariati Mazinani ( Persian (1933–1977) was the leading member amongst the Shia socialists.  He came from a "strictly religious family" but was a sociologist, not a religious scholar. He had studied in Paris and been influenced by the writings of Marxist-oriented writers such as Jean-Paul Sartre , Frantz Fanon , and Che Guevara .

[ 48 ] Shariati intertwined the Shia belief in an inevitable elimination of injustice by the Mahdi with socialist revolution against the Iranian ruling class.

[ 47 ] Socialist Shia preached that Imam Hussein was not just a historical holy figure but the original oppressed one ( muzloun ), and his killer the "analog" of the modern Iranian people's "oppression by the shah".

[ 47 ] His killing was not just an "eternal manifestation of the truth but a revolutionary act by a revolutionary hero".

[ 49 ] Shi'a should respond to his killing not with the traditional lamentation, flagellation, [ 50 ] and patient awaiting of the return of the messiah, that the traditional clergy encouraged, [ 51 ] but by fighting against the injustice of the state as Ali and Hussein had.

[ 50 ] Shariati's harsh criticism of the traditional Usuli Shia clergy as standing in the way of the revolutionary potential of the masses, [ 51 ] was met with fatwas.  Ayatullah Hadi Milani, the influential Usuli Marja' in Mashhad during the 1970s, issued a fatwa prohibiting his followers from reading Ali Shariati's books and Islamist literature produced by young clerics. This fatwa was followed by similar ones from Ayatullah Mar'ashi Najafi , Ayatullah Muhammad Rouhani, Ayatullah Hasan Qomi , and others. Ayatullah Khomeini, however, refused to comment.

[ 52 ] In addition to socialism, Shariati advocated women's rights , as evidenced in his book Fatima Is Fatima , where he argued that Fatima Zahra the daughter of the Islamic prophet Muhammad is as a role model for Muslim women around the world and a woman who was free .

[ citation needed ] Shariati did not advocate  Western liberal democracy which he saw as involved in imperialist plundering of the developing world and advocated what he called "Commitment Democracy", which would be, according to Shariati, the government of Imam Ali .

[ citation needed ] Shariati was influenced by anti-democratic Islamist ideas of Muslim Brotherhood thinkers in Egypt and tried to meet Muhammad Qutb while visiting Saudi Arabia in 1969.

[ 53 ] Iran was a petroleum exporter and had relatively large sums to devote to education, which led to the creation of a relatively large number of post-secondary students. While Iranian peasants, proletariat, and lumpen proletariat did not respond to Socialist Shiaism in large numbers, Shariati was phenomenally popular with students.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The Islamic Marxist movements, most notably the People's Mujahideen, were strongly influenced by Shariati.  Ayatollah Khomeini emphasized Shariati's themes of revolution, anti-imperialism, and the radical message of Muharram; and incorporated into his public declarations such 'Fanonist' terms as the 'mostazafin will inherit the earth', 'the country needs a cultural revolution', and the 'people will dump the exploiters onto the garbage heap of history.'" [ 54 ] Mahmoud Taleghani [ edit ] Further information: Mahmoud Taleghani Taleghani Mahmoud Taleghani (1911–1979) was another Shia leftist and contemporary of Khomeini, but also a cleric and a veteran leader in his own right of the movement against Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi . A founding member of the Freedom Movement of Iran , he has been described as a representative of the tendency of many "Shia clerics to blend Shia with Marxist ideals in order to compete with leftist movements for youthful supporters" during the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 56 ] He served a total of a dozen years in prison, [ 57 ] where he developed connections with leftist political prisoners and the influence of the left on his thinking was reflected in his famous book Islam and Ownership (Islam va Malekiyat) which argued in support of collective ownership "as if it were an article of faith in Islam." [ 58 ] Taleghani was instrumental in "shaping the groundswell movement" that led to the Iranian Revolution and served as the chair of powerful and secret Revolutionary Council during the Islamic Revolution .

[ 57 ] [ 59 ] He clashed with Khomeini in April 1979, warning the leadership against a 'return to despotism.'" After two of his sons were arrested [ 57 ] by revolutionary Guards, thousands of his supporters marched in the streets chanting "Taleghani, you are the soul of the revolution! Down with the reactionaries!" Khomeini summoned Taleghani to Qom where he was given a severe criticism, after which the press was called, and Khomeini made a statement pointedly not referring to Taleghani as an Ayatollah. "Mr. Taleghani is with us, and he is sorry for what happened." [ 60 ] Specific issues and doctrines [ edit ] Ijtihad [ edit ] Main article: Ijtihad Ijtihad (lit. "effort, physical or mental, expended in a particular activity") [ 61 ] is an Islamic legal term referring to independent reasoning [ 62 ] or the thorough exertion of a jurist's mental faculty in finding a solution to a legal question.

[ 61 ] It is contrasted with taqlid (imitation, conformity to legal precedent).

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] According to classical Sunni theory, ijtihad requires expertise in the Arabic language, theology, revealed texts, and principles of jurisprudence ( usul al-fiqh ), [ 62 ] and is not employed where authentic and authoritative texts (Qur'an and hadith) are considered unambiguous with regard to the question, or where there is an existing scholarly consensus ( ijma ).

[ 61 ] Ijtihad is considered to be a religious duty for those qualified to perform it.

[ 62 ] An Islamic scholar who is qualified to perform ijtihad is called a mujtahid .

[ 61 ] Starting from the 18th century, some Muslim reformers began calling for the abandonment of taqlid and emphasis on ijtihad , which they saw as a return to Islamic origins.

[ 61 ] Public debates in the Muslim world surrounding ijtihad continue to the present day.

[ 61 ] The advocacy of ijtihad has been particularly associated with Islamic modernists . Among contemporary Muslims in the West, new visions of ijtihad have emerged, emphasizing substantive moral values over traditional juridical methodology.

[ 61 ] Freedom of religion [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Al-Baqara 256 .

[ edit ] The verse ( ayah ) 256 of Al-Baqara is a famous verse in the Islamic scripture, the Quran .

[ 64 ] The verse includes the phrase that "there is no compulsion in religion".

[ 65 ] Immediately after making this statement, the Quran offers a rationale for it: Since the revelation has, through explanation, clarification, and repetition, clearly distinguished the path of guidance from the path of misguidance, it is now up to people to choose the one or the other path.

[ 64 ] This verse comes right after the Throne Verse .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The overwhelming majority of Muslim scholars consider that verse to be a Medinan one, [ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] when Muslims lived in their period of political ascendance, [ 71 ] [ 72 ] and to be non abrogated , [ 73 ] including Ibn Taymiyya , [ 74 ] Ibn Qayyim , [ 75 ] Al-Tabari , [ 76 ] Abi ʿUbayd, [ 77 ] Al-Jaṣṣās , [ 78 ] Makki bin Abi Talib, [ 79 ] Al-Nahhas, [ 80 ] Ibn Jizziy, [ 81 ] Al-Suyuti , [ 82 ] Ibn Ashur , [ 83 ] Mustafa Zayd, [ 84 ] and many others.

[ 85 ] According to all the theories of language elaborated by Muslim legal scholars, the Quranic proclamation that 'There is no compulsion in religion. The right path has been distinguished from error' is as absolute and universal a statement as one finds, [ 86 ] and so under no condition should an individual be forced to accept a religion or belief against his or her will according to the Quran .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Feminism [ edit ] Main articles: Islamic feminism and Hermeneutics of feminism in Islam See also: Women in Islam , Gender roles in Islam , Islam and domestic violence , Religious views on female genital mutilation § Islam , and List of Muslim feminists A combination of Islam and feminism has been advocated as "a feminist discourse and practice articulated within an Islamic paradigm" by Margot Badran in 2002.

[ 91 ] Islamic feminists ground their arguments in Islam and its teachings, [ 92 ] seek the full equality of women and men in the personal and public sphere, and can include non-Muslims in the discourse and debate. Islamic feminism is defined by Islamic scholars as being more radical than secular feminism, [ 93 ] and as being anchored within the discourse of Islam with the Quran as its central text.

[ 94 ] During recent times, the concept of Islamic feminism has grown further with Islamic groups looking to garner support from many aspects of society. In addition, educated Muslim women are striving to articulate their role in society.

[ 95 ] Examples of Islamic feminist groups are the Revolutionary Association of the Women of Afghanistan , founded by Meena Keshwar Kamal , [ 96 ] Muslim Women's Quest for Equality from India, [ 97 ] [ 98 ] and Sisters in Islam from Malaysia, founded by Zainah Anwar and Amina Wadud among other five women.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] In 2014, the Selangor Islamic Religious Council (MAIS) issued a fatwa declaring that Sisters In Islam, as well as any other organisation promoting religious liberalism and pluralism, deviate from the teachings of Islam. According to the edict, publications that are deemed to promote liberal and pluralistic religious thinking are to be declared unlawful and confiscated, while social media is also to be monitored and restricted.

[ 103 ] As fatwas are legally binding in Malaysia, [ 103 ] SIS is challenging it on constitutional grounds.

[ 104 ] Hijab [ edit ] While most Conservative Muslims believe the hijab is mandatory, many Progressive Muslims take alternate views.

In a fatwa, Khaled Abou El Fadl states that the Quran requires women only to cover their bosoms. The idea that the Quran mandates a piece of cloth ( khimar ) to cover either a woman's face or her hair, but not her face, is ahistorical. In addition, he declares that it is an error for Muslim women to continue wearing a hijab if it brings them undue attention or puts her at risk of harm.

[ 105 ] Sheikh Mustapha Mohamed Rashed at Al-Azhar University similarly defended a thesis that concluded wearing a hijab is not a religious duty, and that the Quran only mandates a piece of cloth to cover breasts.

[ 106 ] Wives' obedience to husbands [ edit ] Main article: An-Nisa, 34 Verse An-Nisa 34 of the Quran has traditionally been interpreted as mandating wives' obedience to their husbands and beating as a punishment for disobedience, [ 107 ] with the following translations from Mustafa Khattab and Sahih International : Men are the caretakers of women, as men have been provisioned by Allah over women and tasked with supporting them financially. And righteous women are devoutly obedient and, when alone, protective of what Allah has entrusted them with. And if you sense ill-conduct from your women, advise them ˹first˺, ˹if they persist,˺ do not share their beds, ˹but if they still persist,˺ then discipline them ˹gently˺. But if they change their ways, do not be unjust to. Surely Allah is Most High, All-Great.

— Quran 4:34 ("The Clear Quran" translation by Mustafa Khattab ) Men are in charge of women by [right of] what Allāh has given one over the other and what they spend [for maintenance] from their wealth. So righteous women are devoutly obedient, guarding in [the husband's] absence what Allāh would have them guard. But those [wives] from whom you fear arrogance - [first] advise them; [then if they persist], forsake them in bed; and [finally], strike them [lightly]. But if they obey you [once more], seek no means against them. Indeed, Allāh is ever Exalted and Grand.

— Quran 4:34 ( Sahih International translation) However, Progressive Muslims have given many alternative interpretations and translations of the verse [ 108 ] (such as a deterrent from anger-based domestic violence).

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Riffat Hassan , has taken the view that qawwamun in the verse is not talking about men being superior to women, but rather is referring to men's role as breadwinners.

Nushuz is interpreted as not referring to domestic disobedience but to a mass rebellion of all women against their role as child-bearers.

Asma Barlas has taken a similar view that qawwamun means moral guidance or caring, nushuz means disharmony, and that wa-dribuhunna has multiple meanings, such as "to set an example" or "to separate", and that "to beat" is "the worst one!" of all possible interpretations.

[ 108 ] Amina Wadud has stated that qawwamun refers to men's financial support of women while nushuz refers to disharmony in the relationship. She interprets wa-dribuhunna , the word often translated as "strike" or "beat", as being used in a non-literal sense.

[ 108 ] [ 111 ] Laleh Bakhtiar , in her Quran translation, The Sublime Quran , translated wa-dribuhunna as "to go away from" or "to leave", claiming the verse recommends husbands to leave their wives if there are irreconcilable disagreements and differences. She cites prophetic biographies claiming Muhammad never beat his wives and talking about his respect for women, and other Quran verses like 2:231.

[ 108 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] Laury Silvers, based on the methodology of medieval Islamic thinker Ibn Arabi , believes that "God may intend all meanings, but it does not follow that he 'approves' of all meanings." Using this, she believes that the Quran has to be ambiguous, as if it weren't, there would be no room for human responsibility. Using this, she claims that Allah did intend for all meanings of wa-dribuhunna , including beating, and that true human morality comes from the freedom to choose the best of these interpretations. It is claimed Muhammad never beat his wives, and that his "conflicted response" to this revelation shows that God revealed it out of necessity (to restrain existing violence against women) rather than out of approval, and that it remains best to refrain from violence entirely.

[ 111 ] [ 115 ] Khaled Abou El Fadl claims nushuz is better understood as "a grave and known sin" and in 4:34, this is a lewd act or sexual sin that can be proven by evidence and verified by a judge. According to his interpretation, 4:34 is about how a judge would punish a woman for a sexual crime, rather than about wifely disobedience.

Fatema Mernissi cites Quran 33:35 as evidence for gender equality within Islam and several hadith to claim that while beating was permissible, the best Muslims would never beat their wives.

[ 111 ] Edip Yüksel in his Quran translation, The Quran: A Reformist Translation , interprets qawwamun as "supporters" rather than as "guardians" or "in charge of", citing other Quran verses using the word. Furthermore, he believes nushuz is not referring to disobedience, but instead an extramarital affair or marital disloyalty, citing Quran 4:128. Finally, he claims idribuhunna does not mean beating, but rather means separation, saying beating would not make sense with Quran 30:21 stating that marriage is tranquil.

[ 116 ] Human rights [ edit ] Further information: Human rights in Muslim-majority countries and Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Abdul Ghaffar Khan with Mahatma Gandhi .

Moderate Islamic political thought contends that the nurturing of the Muslim identity and the propagation of values such as democracy and human rights are not mutually exclusive, but rather should be promoted together.

[ 117 ] Most liberal Muslims believe that Islam promotes the notion of absolute equality of all humanity, and that it is one of its central concepts. Therefore, a breach of human rights has become a source of great concern to most liberal Muslims.

[ 118 ] Liberal Muslims differ with their culturally conservative counterparts in that they believe that all humanity is represented under the umbrella of human rights. Many Muslim majority countries have signed international human rights treaties, although the impact of these largely remains to be seen in local legal systems. Muslim liberals often reject traditional interpretations of Islamic law, which allow Ma malakat aymanukum and slavery . They say that slavery opposed Islamic principles which they believe to be based on justice and equality and some say that verses relating to slavery or "Ma malakat aymanukum" now can not be applied due to the fact that the world has changed, while others say that those verses are misinterpreted and twisted to legitimize slavery.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] In the 20th century, South Asian scholars Ghulam Ahmed Pervez and Amir Ali argued that the expression ma malakat aymanukum should be properly read in the past tense. When some called for a reinstatement of slavery in Pakistan upon its independence from the British colonial rule , Pervez argued that the past tense of this expression means that the Quran had imposed "an unqualified ban" on slavery.

[ 121 ] Liberal Muslims have argued against death penalty for apostasy based on the Quranic verse that "There shall be no compulsion in religion".

[ 122 ] LGBTQ rights [ edit ] Main articles: LGBTQ people and Islam § LGBTQ-related movements within Islam , Al-Fatiha Foundation , and Gay Muslims El-Farouk Khaki , founding member of Salaam group and the Toronto Unity Mosque / el-Tawhid Juma Circle In January 2013, the Muslim Alliance for Sexual and Gender Diversity (MASGD) was launched.

[ 123 ] The organization was formed by members of the Queer Muslim Working Group, with the support of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.

[ clarification needed ] Several initial MASGD members previously had been involved with the Al-Fatiha Foundation , including Faisal Alam and Imam Daayiee Abdullah .

[ 124 ] The Safra Project for women is based in the UK. It supports and works on issues relating to prejudice against LGBTQ Muslim women. It was founded in October 2001 by Muslim LBT women. The Safra Project's "ethos is one of inclusiveness and diversity".

[ 125 ] In Australia, Nur Wahrsage has been an advocate for LGBTI Muslims and founded Marhaba, a support group for queer Muslims in Melbourne, Australia . In May 2016, Wahrsage revealed that he is homosexual in an interview on SBS2 ’s The Feed , being the first openly gay Imam in Australia.

[ 126 ] In Canada, Salaam was founded as the first gay Muslim organization in Canada and the second in the world. Salaam was founded in 1993 by El-Farouk Khaki , who organized the Salaam / Al-Fateha International Conference in 2003.

[ 127 ] In May 2009, the Toronto Unity Mosque / el-Tawhid Juma Circle (ETJC) was founded by Laury Silvers, a University of Toronto religious studies scholar, alongside Muslim gay-rights activists El-Farouk Khaki and Troy Jackson. Unity Mosque / ETJC is a gender-equal , LGBT+ affirming.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] In November 2012, a prayer room was set up in Paris by gay Islamic scholar and founder of the group Homosexual Muslims of France, Ludovic-Mohamed Zahed . It was described by the press as the first gay-friendly mosque in Europe. The reaction from the rest of the Muslim community in France has been mixed, and the opening has been condemned by the Grand Mosque of Paris .

[ 132 ] Examples of Muslim LGBT media works are the 2006 Channel 4 's documentary Gay Muslims , [ 133 ] the film production company Unity Productions Foundation, [ 134 ] the 2007 and 2015 documentary films A Jihad for Love and A Sinner in Mecca , both produced by Parvez Sharma , [ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] and the Jordanian LGBT publication My.Kali .

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] Story of Lut [ edit ] Quranic verses about the Story of Lut have traditionally been interpreted as condemning homosexuality, with the following translations of Al-A'raf 81 from Mustafa Khattab and Sahih International: You lust after men instead of women! You are certainly transgressors.

— Quran 7:81 ("The Clear Quran" translation by Mustafa Khattab ) Indeed, you approach men with desire, instead of women. Rather, you are a transgressing people.

— Quran 7:81 ( Sahih International translation) This section is an excerpt from LGBTQ people and Islam § Modern interpretation .

[ edit ] Scott Siraj al-Haqq Kugle, a professor of Islamic Studies at Emory University , has argued for a different interpretation of the Lot narrative focusing not on the sexual act but on the infidelity of the tribe and their rejection of Lot's Prophethood. According to Kugle, "where the Qur'an treats same-sex acts, it condemns them only so far as they are exploitive or violent." More generally, Kugle notes that the Quran refers to four different levels of personality. One level is "genetic inheritance." The Qur'an refers to this level as one's "physical stamp" that "determines one's temperamental nature" including one's sexuality. On the basis of this reading of the Qur'an, Kugle asserts that homosexuality is "caused by divine will", so "homosexuals have no rational choice in their internal disposition to be attracted to same-sex mates." [ 140 ] : 42–46 Kugle argues that if the classical commentators had seen "sexual orientation as an integral aspect of human personality", they would have read the narrative of Lot and his tribe "as addressing male rape of men in particular" and not as "addressing homosexuality in general".

[ 140 ] : 54 Kugle furthermore reads the Qur'an as holding "a positive assessment of diversity". Under this reading, Islam can be described as "a religion that positively assesses diversity in creation and in human societies", allowing gay and lesbian Muslims to view homosexuality as representing the "natural diversity in sexuality in human societies." [ 141 ] A critique of Kugle's approach, interpretations and conclusions was published in 2016 by Mobeen Vaid.

[ 142 ] In 2018, Junaid Jahangir and Hussein Abdullatif published their own critique of Vaid's criticisms against Kugle.

[ 143 ] Secularism [ edit ] Main article: Islam and secularism See also: Criticism of Sharia law and Application of Islamic law by country The definition and application of secularism , especially the place of religion in society, vary among Muslim countries as it does among non-Muslim countries.

[ 144 ] As the concept of secularism varies among secularists in the Muslim world, reactions of Muslim intellectuals to the pressure of secularization also varies. On the one hand, secularism is condemned by some Muslim intellectuals who do not feel that religious influence should be removed from the public sphere.

[ 145 ] On the other hand, secularism is claimed by others to be compatible with Islam. For example, the quest for secularism has inspired some Muslim scholars who argue that secular government is the best way to observe sharia ; "enforcing [sharia] through coercive power of the state negates its religious nature, because Muslims would be observing the law of the state and not freely performing their religious obligation as Muslims" says Abdullahi Ahmed An-Na'im, a professor of law at Emory University and author of Islam and the secular state: negotiating the future of Shariʻa .

[ 146 ] Moreover, some scholars [ which?

] argue that secular states have existed in the Muslim world since the Middle Ages.

[ 147 ] Egalitarianism [ edit ] This section may contain information not important or relevant to the article's subject.

Please help improve this section .

( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The place of equality versus hierarchy in Islam is sometimes disputed, with Progressive Islam coming down on the side of equity and equality.

Main articles: Caste system among South Asian Muslims and Kafa'ah § The Hadhrami Controversy Progressive Islam emphasizes what is sometimes called the "decidedly egalitarian spirit" (Judith Miller) of Islam, [ 148 ] and how it is "in principle egalitarian, recognizing no superiority of one believer over another by birth or descent, race or nationality, or social status" (Bernard Lewis).

[ 149 ] At the same time, Muslims known as Sayyids (those accepted as descendants of the Islamic prophet Muhammad ) traditionally have special privileges in Islam, notably of tax exemptions and a share in Khums .

[ 150 ] A number of scholars (quoted in a number of fatwa sites) have also encouraged discrimination in regards to intermarriage between persons of Arab and non-Arab lineages (Darul Ifta Birmingham ( Hanafi fiqh) quoting Raddul Muhtar, [ a ] and Islamic Virtues website quoting the Shafi’i manual Reliance of the Traveller ...

) [ b ] Quraishi and non-Quraishi, [ c ] and Sayyid and non-Sayyid, [ d ] as can be found in a number of fatwa sites.

This is notably in direct contrast to the Prophet Muhammad's last sermon, "...All mankind is from Adam and Eve, an Arab has no superiority over a non-Arab nor a non-Arab has any superiority over an Arab; also a white has no superiority over a black nor a black has any superiority over white except by piety and good action." [ 155 ] Movements [ edit ] For individual movements, see Liberal and progressive Islam in Europe , Liberal and progressive Islam in North America , and List of Islamic feminist movements .

Over the course of the 19th and 20th centuries, in accordance with their increasingly modern societies and outlooks, liberal Muslims have tended to reinterpret many aspects of the application of their religion in their life in an attempt to reconnect. This is particularly true of Muslims who now find themselves living in non-Muslim countries.

[ 156 ] Islamic modernism [ edit ] Main article: Islamic modernism Islamic modernism, also sometimes referred to as modernist Salafism , [ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] is a movement that has been described as "the first Muslim ideological response" [ e ] attempting to reconcile Islamic faith with modern Western values such as nationalism , democracy , civil rights , rationality , equality , and progress .

[ 161 ] It featured a "critical reexamination of the classical conceptions and methods of jurisprudence" and a new approach to Islamic theology and Quranic exegesis ( Tafsir ).

[ 160 ] It was the first of several Islamic movements – including secularism , Islamism and Salafism – that emerged in the middle of the 19th century in reaction to the rapid changes of the time, especially the perceived onslaught of Western Civilization and colonialism on the Muslim world.

[ 161 ] Founders include Muhammad Abduh (1849–1905), a Sheikh of Al-Azhar University for a brief period before his death in 1905, Jamal ad-Din al-Afghani (1838–1897), and Sir Syed Ahmed Khan (1817–1898).

The early Islamic Modernists (al-Afghani and Muhammad Abdu) used the term " salafiyya " [ 162 ] to refer to their attempt at renovation of Islamic thought, [ 163 ] and this " salafiyya movement" is often known in the West as "Islamic modernism," although it is very different from what is currently called the Salafi movement , which generally signifies "ideologies such as wahhabism ".

[ f ] Since its inception, Modernism has suffered from co-option of its original reformism by both secularist rulers and by "the official ulama " whose "task it is to legitimise" rulers' actions in religious terms.

[ 164 ] Modernism differs from secularism in that it insists on the importance of religious faith in public life, and from Salafism or Islamism in that it embraces contemporary European institutions, social processes, and values .

[ 161 ] Quranism [ edit ] Main article: Quranism See also: Criticism of Hadith Quranists reject the hadith and follow the Quran only. The extent to which Quranists reject the authenticity of the Sunnah varies, [ 165 ] but the more established groups have thoroughly criticised the authenticity of the hadith and refused it for many reasons, the most prevalent being the Quranist claim that hadith is not mentioned in the Quran as a source of Islamic theology and practice, was not recorded in written form until more than two centuries after the death of the Muhammad, and contain perceived internal errors and contradictions.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Quranists believe Muhammad himself was a Quranist and the founder of Quranism, and that his followers distorted the faith and split into schisms and factions such as Sunni , Shia , and Khawarij .

Scriptural fallibility [ edit ] Some Muslims (Saeed Nasheed, Abdul Karim Soroush , Sayyed Ahmad Al-Qabbanji, Hassan Radwan) have argued for taking "the bold step of challenging the very idea that the Qur’an and Sunna are infallible", and asserting that instead the Qur'an is "divinely inspired but ... human-authored".

[ 167 ] Saeed Nasheed writes: "The Qur’an is not the speech of God, just as the loaf of bread is not the work of the farmer. God produced the raw material, which was inspiration, just as the farmer produces the raw material, which is wheat. But it is the baker who turns the wheat or flour into bread according to his own unique way, artistic expertise, and creative ability. Thus it is the Prophet who was responsible for interpreting the inspiration and turning it into actual phrases and words according to his own unique view." [ 168 ] [ 167 ] By acknowledging this, Hassan Radwan argues, Muslims will be freed to use their reason to "take what is useful and helpful from religion and ignore what is not." [ 167 ] [ 169 ] Notable organizations [ edit ] Muslims for Progressive Values [ edit ] Main article: Muslims for Progressive Values Muslims for Progressive Values (MPV) is a Progressive Muslim grassroots human rights organization founded by Ani Zonneveld and Pamela K. Taylor in 2007.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] In December 2013, the United Nations recognized MPV as an official non-government organization (NGO) association member.

[ 172 ] It has supported women's rights, LGBTQ rights, and interfaith marriage.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] For its progressive beliefs, the organization was expelled from the Islamic Society of North America Convention bazaar with it being accused of "promoting ignorance of Islam among Muslims at the event" and "claiming haram was good and virtuous".

[ 175 ] Sisters in Islam [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Sisters in Islam .

[ edit ] Sisters in Islam (SIS) is a Malaysian registered company committed to promoting the rights of women in Malaysia. Its efforts to promote the rights of Muslim women are based on the principles of equality, justice and freedom enjoined by the Quran . SIS work focuses on challenging laws and policies made in the name of Islam that discriminate against women. As such it tackles issues covered under Malaysia's Islamic family and sharia laws, such as polygamy , [ 176 ] child marriage , [ 177 ] moral policing, [ 178 ] Islamic legal theory and jurisprudence , the hijab and modesty, [ 179 ] violence against women and hudud .

[ 180 ] It is noted for its Islamic feminist research and advocacy.

[ 181 ] Tolu-e-Islam [ edit ] Main article: Tolu-e-Islam (organization) This organization was initiated by Muhammad Iqbal , and later spearheaded by Ghulam Ahmed Pervez . Ghulam Ahmed Pervez did not reject all hadiths; however, he only accepted hadiths which "are in accordance with the Quran or do not stain the character of the Prophet or his companions ".

[ 182 ] The organization, which does not belong to any political party or to any religious group or sect, publishes and distributes books, pamphlets, and recordings of Pervez's teachings.

[ 182 ] List of notable members [ edit ] Scholars [ edit ] Abu Layth (born 1979) – British Islamic scholar and mufti Adnan Ibrahim – Palestinian Islamic scholar Amina Wadud (born 1952) – American Islamic scholar and co-founder of Sisters in Islam Asma Barlas (born 1950) – Pakistani Islamic scholar Asma Lamrabet (born 1961) – Moroccan Islamic scholar Edip Yüksel (born 1957) – Kurdish Quranist scholar Fazlur Rahman Malik (1919-1988) – Pakistani Islamic scholar and philosopher Hassan al-Maliki (born 1970) – Saudi Islamic scholar Irfan Habib (born 1931) – Indian Marxist historian Javed Ahmad Ghamidi (born 1952) – Pakistani Islamic scholar and philosopher Khaled Abou El Fadl (born 1963) – Kuwaiti Islamic scholar and UCLA professor of law Laleh Bakhtiar (1938-2020) – Iranian Islamic scholar Leila Ahmed (born 1940) – Egyptian Islamic scholar Mahmud Shaltut (1893-1963) – Egyptian Islamic scholar and Grand Imam of al-Azhar (1958-1963) Mohsen Kadivar (born 1959) – Iranian Islamic scholar and philosopher Muhammad Asad (1900-1992) – Pakistani polymath Muhammad Shahrur (1938-2019) – Syrian Islamic scholar Nasr Abu Zayd (1943-2010) – Egyptian Islamic scholar Reza Aslan (born 1972) – American scholar of religious studies Riffat Hassan (born 1943) – Pakistani Islamic scholar Shabir Ally (born 1953) – Canadian Islamic scholar Siti Musdah Mulia (born 1958) – Indonesian Islamic scholar and feminist activist Ziba Mir-Hosseini (born 1952) – Iranian legal anthropologist Writers [ edit ] Bilkisu Yusuf (1952-2015) – Nigerian writer and journalist Ed Husain (born 1974) – British writer Fatema Mernissi (1940-2015) – Moroccan feminist writer and sociologist Hidayet Şefkatli Tuksal (born 1963) – Turkish columnist and activist Irshad Manji (born 1968) – Canadian writer and educator Mustafa Akyol (born 1972) – Turkish writer and journalist Nassima al-Sadah (born 1974) – Saudi writer and activist Samina Ali – Indian author and activist Shahla Sherkat (born 1956) – Iranian feminist author, journalist, and activist Shamima Shaikh (1960-1998) – South African feminist journalist and activist Zainab Salbi (born 1969) – Iraqi feminist writer and activist Activists [ edit ] Abdul Ghaffar Khan (1890-1988) – Indian independence activist Ani Zonneveld (born 1962) – Malaysian activist and co-founder of Muslims for Progressive Values Kadra Yusuf (born 1980) – Norwegian feminist activist Linda Sarsour (born 1980) – American feminist activist Malala Yousafzai (born 1997) – Pakistani feminist activist Manal al-Sharif (born 1979) – Saudi feminist activist Samar Badawi (born 1981) – Saudi feminist activist Taimur Rahman (born 1975) – Pakistani socialist activist Zainah Anwar – Malaysian feminist activist and co-founder of Sisters in Islam Politicians [ edit ] Ilhan Omar (born 1982) – American congresswoman in the US House of Representatives Rashida Tlaib (born 1976) – American congresswoman in the US House of Representatives Rania Al Abdullah (born 1970) – Queen consort of Jordan Salman Taseer (1944-2011) – Pakistani Governor of Punjab (2008–2011) Zille Huma Usman (1971-2007) – Pakistani provincial minister for social welfare in Punjab (2006–2007) See also [ edit ] Akhbari Cultural Muslim Islah Islam and modernity Islam and secularism Islamic revival Jaringan Islam Liberal Modern Islamic philosophy Muslims for Progressive Values Mu'tazilism Nahdlatul Ulama Post-Islamism Ideology of Mahmoud Mohammed Taha Unitarian Universalism Notes [ edit ] ^ *According to Darul Ifta Birmingham ( Hanafi fiqh) quoting Raddul Muhtar: 'An Ajmi (non-Arab) cannot be a match for a woman of Arab descent, no matter that he be an Aalim (religious scholar) or even a Sultan (ruling authority).' [ 151 ] The Jurists have stated that among Arabs, a non-Quraishi male is not a match (Kuf) for a Quraishi woman, nor can any person of non-Arab descent be a match for a woman of Arab descent. For example, the Sayyids, whether Siddique or Farooque, Uthmaani or Alawi, or belonging to some other branch, can never be matched by any person not sharing their lineage, no matter his profession and family status. The Sayyids are suitable matches for one another, since they share descent from the Quraishi tribe. Thus, marriages between themselves are correct and permitted without any condition, as appearing in Durrul Mukhtar: "And Kafaah in lineage. Thus, the Quraysh are suitable matches for one another as are the (other) Arabs suitable matches for one another." The ruling relevant to non-Arabs is as follows: ‘An Ajmi (non-Arab) cannot be a match for a woman of Arab descent, no matter that he be an Aalim (religious scholar) or even a Sultan (ruling authority).

[ 151 ] ^ *The website Islamic Virtues quotes the Shafi’i manual Reliance of the Traveller and Tools of the Worshipper : 'And the ajami (non-Arab) is not suitable for an Arab woman', ... " (the quote goes on to discourage marriages between Muslims of different tribes).
"the classic Shafi’i manual of Islamic law titled ‘Umdat as-Salik wa ‘Uddat an-Nasik (Reliance of the Traveller and Tools of the Worshipper)" " Kafa’a (Suitability in marriage for a female) is in the lineage (ancestry of the man), and in religiousness, and his being a free man (not a slave), and in his profession, and his being free of defects that can cause the annulment of the marriage.

And the ajami (non-Arab) is not suitable for an Arab woman , ... " (the quote goes on to forbid marriages between Muslims of different tribes).

[ 152 ] ^ *Still another site ("Answered according to Shafi'i Fiqh by Qibla.com ... Answered by Shaykh Amjad Rasheed") states: "… most of the scholars do consider this aspect [i.e., lineage] for suitability, therefore a non-Arab is not suitable for an Arab. And a non- Qurayshi is not suitable for a Qurayshi woman …" Q. I heard that an Arab father has the right to refuse the proposal of a non-Arab to his daughter. How is this in line with the teachings of Islam? How could one, for example, reject a God-fearing man like Bilal, may Allah be well pleased with him?

A. This issue is known as the issue of suitability in marriage. What is meant by this is that a woman and her guardians have the right that she not be married off except to someone that is suitable for her. The scholars have differed in the characteristics that should be considered for suitability, but they have agreed that one of them is religion. This means that a corrupt man is not suitable for a religious woman. They have also differed as to whether lineage should be considered. So, most of the scholars do consider this aspect for suitability, therefore, a non-Arab is not suitable for an Arab. And a non-Qurayshi is not suitable for a Qurayshi woman. This means that if an Arab woman wants to refuse marriage to a non-Arab, she may, and her guardian can not force her. Also, the guardian can refuse an Arab woman’s marriage to a non-Arab if she wishes. But if an Arab girl is content, as well as he guardian, with marrying a non-Arab, it is perfectly permissible for them to marry and their marriage contract is valid. This is what most of the scholars have decided.

[ 153 ] ^ Can a Sayyed marry a non-Sayyed? 
Answered as per Hanafi Fiqh by IslamicSolutions.org. 
Scholar: Shaykh Saeed Ahmed Golaub
Answer:

In the Name of Allah, the Most Gracious, the Most Merciful.

As-salāmu ‘alaykum wa-rahmatullāhi wa-barakātuh.

Hadrat Ali Radiallaho Anhu was the cousin of Rasulullah Salallahu Alaihi wa Salam. Hadrat Ali Radiallaho Anhu was married to Hadrat Fatima Radiallaho Anha ,who was the daughter of Rasulullah Salallahu Alaihi wa Salam. The progeny of  Hadrat Ali Radiallaho Anhu and Hadrat Fatima Radiallaho Anha are called Sayyeds. The progeny of Hadrat Ali Radiallaho Anhu  and his other wives are called Alawis.(Bahishti Zewar Vol. 1 Pg. 365.)

Shariah emphasizes ensuring that nikah takes place with persons who are compatible with each other in order for a marriage to be successful. Spouses of different backgrounds and incompatible can lead to a breakdown in the marriage. The following are areas of consideration for compatibility in a marriage according to the Hanafi school of thought:

(i) Lineage (ii) Deen (iii) piety (iv) wealth (v) occupation (Bahishti Zewar Vol. 1 Pg. 441) [the fatwa goes on to say that the decision is in the hands of the family guardian] A Syed woman cannot marry a non-Syed man, without the consent of the family guardian. If a Syed woman marries a man from a different lineage without the consent of the guardian, the guardian will have the right to annul the marriage if he deems it necessary.

[ 154 ] ^ "Islamic modernism was the first Muslim ideological response to the Western cultural challenge. Started in India and Egypt in the second part of the 19th century ... reflected in the work of a group of like-minded Muslim scholars, featuring a critical reexamination of the classical conceptions and methods of jurisprudence and a formulation of a new approach to Islamic theology and Quranic exegesis. This new approach, which was nothing short of an outright rebellion against Islamic orthodoxy, displayed astonishing compatibility with the ideas of the Enlightenment." [ 160 ] ^ "Salafism is, therefore, a modern phenomenon, being the desire of contemporary Muslims to rediscover what they see as the pure, original and authentic Islam, ... However, there is a difference between two profoundly different trends that sought inspiration from the concept of salafiyya. Indeed, between the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, intellectuals such as Jamal Edin al-Afghani and Muhammad Abdu used salafiyya to mean a renovation of Islamic thought, with features that would today be described as rationalist, modernist, and even progressive. This Salafiyya movement is often known in the West as 'Islamic modernism.' However, the term salafism is today generally employed to signify ideologies such as Wahhabism , the puritanical ideology of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia ." [ 163 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Kurzman, Charles (1998).

"Liberal Islam and Its Islamic Context" . In Kurzman, Charles (ed.).

Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

1– 26.

ISBN 9780195116229 .

OCLC 37368975 .

^ Safi, Omid , ed. (2003).

Progressive Muslims: on justice, gender and pluralism . Oxford: Oneworld Publications .

ISBN 9781851683161 .

OCLC 52380025 .

^ Chamieh 1977 , p. 41.

^ Safi, Omid .

"What is Progressive Islam?" .

averroes-foundation.org . Averroes Foundation. Archived from the original on July 9, 2006.

^ "Liberalism - Oxford Islamic Studies Online" .

www.oxfordislamicstudies.com . Archived from the original on November 4, 2013 . Retrieved July 11, 2019 .

^ Aslan, Reza (2011) [2005].

No god but God: the origins, evolution, and future of Islam (Updated ed.). New York: Random House .

ISBN 9780812982442 .

OCLC 720168240 .

^ Sajid, Abdul Jalil (December 10, 2001).

" 'Islam against Religious Extremism and Fanaticism': speech delivered by Imam Abdul Jalil Sajid at a meeting on International NGO Rights and Humanity" .

mcb.org.uk . Muslim Council of Britain. Archived from the original on June 7, 2008.

^ "Tawhid" .

oxfordislamicstudies.com . Oxford Islamic Studies Online. Archived from the original on September 17, 2017 . Retrieved March 22, 2015 .

^ Leeman, A. B. (Spring 2009).

"Interfaith Marriage in Islam: An Examination of the Legal Theory Behind the Traditional and Reformist Positions" (PDF) .

Indiana Law Journal .

84 (2).

Bloomington, Indiana : Indiana University Maurer School of Law : 743– 772.

ISSN 0019-6665 .

S2CID 52224503 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 23, 2018 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ Jahangir, Junaid (March 21, 2017).

"Muslim Women Can Marry Outside The Faith" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on March 25, 2017 . Retrieved October 24, 2021 .

^ Zubaidah Rahim, Lily (2006). Capano, Giliberto; Howlett, Michael P.

; Jarvis, Darryl S. L.; Ramesh, M. (eds.).

"Discursive Contest between Liberal and Literal Islam in Southeast Asia" .

Policy and Society .

25 (4).

Taylor & Francis : 77– 98.

doi : 10.1016/S1449-4035(06)70091-1 .

ISSN 1839-3373 .

LCCN 2009205416 .

OCLC 834913646 .

S2CID 218567875 .

^ Aslan, Reza (2005).

No god but God . Random House Inc. p. 153.

ISBN 978-1-58836-445-6 .

By the ninth and tenth centuries...

^ a b "John Carter Brown Library Exhibitions – Islamic encounters" . Retrieved October 30, 2012 .

^ a b "Ahmed, K. S. "Arabic Medicine: Contributions and Influence". The Proceedings of the 17th Annual History of Medicine Days, March 7th and 8th, 2008 Health Sciences Centre, Calgary, AB" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 6, 2013 . Retrieved October 30, 2012 .

^ Sarrió, Diego R. (2015).

"The Philosopher as the Heir of the Prophets: Averroes's Islamic Rationalism" .

Al-Qanṭara .

36 (1): 45– 68.

doi : 10.3989/alqantara.2015.002 .

ISSN 1988-2955 .

p.48 ^ Abdel Wahab El Messeri.

Episode 21: Ibn Rushd , Everything you wanted to know about Islam but was afraid to Ask , Philosophia Islamica .

^ Fauzi M. Najjar (Spring, 1996).

The debate on Islam and secularism in Egypt Archived 2010-04-04 at the Wayback Machine , Arab Studies Quarterly (ASQ) .

^ Averroes (2005).

Averroes On Plato's Republic . Translated by Ralph Lerner .

Cornell University Press . p. xix.

ISBN 0-8014-8975-X .

^ Fakhry, Majid (2001).

Averroes (Ibn Rushd) His Life, Works and Influence .

Oneworld Publications . p. 110.

ISBN 1-85168-269-4 .

^ Nicola Missaglia, "Mohamed Abed Al-Jabri's new Averroism" ^ Vatikiotis, P. J. (1976).

The Modern History of Egypt (Repr. ed.). Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0297772620 .

p. 115-16 ^ Vatikiotis, P. J. (1976).

The Modern History of Egypt (Repr. ed.). Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0297772620 .

p. 116 ^ Gelvin, 133-134 ^ Cleveland, William L. (2008)"History of the Modern Middle East" (4th ed.) pg.93.

^ Galvin 160-161 ^ Ahmed H. Al-Rahim (January 2006). "Islam and Liberty", Journal of Democracy 17 (1), p. 166-169.

^ Kerr, Malcolm H. (2010).

" 'Abduh Muhammad" . In Hoiberg, Dale H. (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. I: A-ak Bayes (15th ed.). Chicago, IL: Encyclopædia Britannica Inc. pp.

20–21 .

ISBN 978-1-59339-837-8 .

^ Gelvin, J. L. (2008). The Modern Middle East (2nd ed., pp. 161-162). New York: Oxford university Press.

^ Kügelgen, Anke von. "ʿAbduh, Muḥammad." Encyclopaedia of Islam, v. 3. Edited by: Gudrun Krämer, Denis Matringe, John Nawas and Everett Rowson. Brill, 2009. Syracuse University. 23 April 2009 ^ ʿAbduh, Muhammad. "al-Idtihad fi al-Nasraniyya wa al-Islam." In al-A'mal al-Kamila li al-Imam Muhammad ʿAbduh. edited by Muhammad ʿAmara. Cairo: Dar al-Shuruk, 1993. 257-368.

^ Hourani, Albert. Arabic Thought in the Liberal Age 1798-1939. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983. 156.

^ a b Benzine, Rachid. Les nouveaux penseurs de l'islam, p. 43-44.

^ "Naṣr Ḥāmid Abū Zayd" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved December 10, 2015 .

^ Cook, Michael (2000).

The Koran: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 46.

ISBN 0192853449 .

^ a b Kermani, "From revelation to interpretation", 2004 : p.174 ^ a b c "Nasr Abu Zayd, Who Stirred Debate on Koran, Dies at 66" .

The New York Times . REUTERS. July 6, 2010 . Retrieved December 10, 2015 .

^ Mafhum al-nass: dirasa fi 'ulum al-Qur'an . Cairo, 1990. p.11 ^ Shepard, William E.

"Abu Zayd, Nasir Hamid" .

Oxford Islamic Studies Online . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved December 14, 2015 .

^ Kermani, "From revelation to interpretation", 2004 : p.173 ^ Kermani, "From revelation to interpretation", 2004 : p.171 ^ a b Kermani, "From revelation to interpretation", 2004 : p.172 ^ Naqd al-hhitab al-dini, p. 93., translated by Kermani, Navid (2004).

"From revelation to interpretation: Nasr Hamid Abu Zayd and the Literary study of the Qur'an" (PDF) . In Taji-Farouki, Suha (ed.).

Modern Muslim Intellectuals and the Qur'an . Oxford University Press. p. 172. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 4, 2022 . Retrieved May 2, 2017 .

^ "10. Reformers. Reformers in the Modern Period".

Faith and Philosophy of Islam . Gyan Publishing House. 2009. pp.

166– 7.

ISBN 978-81-7835-719-5 .

^ Kepel 2002 , pp. 40–41.

^ Kepel 2002 , pp. 37–39.

^ Kepel 2002 , pp. 39, 107–108.

^ a b c Kepel 2002 , pp. 107–108.

^ Kepel 2002 , p. 37.

^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival , Norton, (2006), pp. 128 ^ a b Kepel 2002 , p. 38.

^ a b Rahnema 2000 , pp. 123–124.

^ Rahnema 2000 , pp. 274–276.

^ Bohdan 2020 , p. 256.

^ a b Abrahamian 1982 , p. 534.

^ Nasr 2006 , p. 129.

^ Nasr, Vali, The Shia Revival , Norton, (2006), pp. 126–7 ^ a b c "Milestones, Sep. 24, 1979" . September 24, 1979. Archived from the original on October 16, 2007 – via time.com.

^ Nasr, Vali 2006 p.127 ^ "Demise of Ayatollah Taleghani" . Islamic Revolution Document Center. Archived from the original on 13 April 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2016 .

^ Mackay, Iranians , (1998), p. 291 ^ a b c d e f g Rabb, Intisar A. (2009).

"Ijtihād" . In John L. Esposito (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530513-5 .

^ a b c d John L. Esposito, ed. (2014).

"Taqiyah" .

Ijtihad .

The Oxford Dictionary of Islam . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512558-0 .

^ John L. Esposito, ed. (2014).

"Taqlid" .

The Oxford Dictionary of Islam . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512558-0 .

^ a b Mustansir Mir (2008), Understanding the Islamic Scripture , p. 54.

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0321355737 .

^ Quran 2:256 ^ Jacques Berque (1995), Le Coran : Essai de traduction , p.63, note v.256, éditions Albin Michel, Paris.

^ "Surah Al-Baqarah - 255-256" .

Quran.com . Retrieved November 13, 2024 .

^ John Esposito (2011), What Everyone Needs to Know About Islam , p. 91.

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-979413-3 .

^ Sir Thomas Walker Arnold (1913), Preaching of Islam: A History of the Propagation of the Muslim Faith , p. 6. Constable.

^ Mapel, D.R. and Nardin, T., eds. (1999), International Society: Diverse Ethical Perspectives , p. 233.

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691049724 .

^ Taha Jabir Alalwani (2003), La 'ikraha fi al-din: 'ichkaliyat al-riddah wa al-murtaddin min sadr al-Islam hatta al-yawm , pp.92-93.

ISBN 9770909963 .

^ "this verse is acknowledged to belong to the period of Quranic revelation corresponding to the political and military ascendance of the young Muslim community. ‘There is no compulsion in religion’ was not a command to Muslims to remain steadfast in the face of the desire of their oppressors to force them to renounce their faith, but was a reminder to Muslims themselves, once they had attained power, that they could not force another's heart to believe. There is no compulsion in religion addresses those in a position of strength, not weakness. The earliest commentaries on the Quran (such as that of Al-Tabari ) make it clear that some Muslims of Medina wanted to force their children to convert from Judaism or Christianity to Islam, and this verse was precisely an answer to them not to try to force their children to convert to Islam." Open Letter to his holiness Pope Benedict XVI (PDF) Archived 2009-02-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Curtis (2010), Reasonable Perspectives on Religion , p. 204. Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-0739141892 . Quote: "While the pope, following many anti-Islam propagandists, seemingly argues that the oft-cited Quranic dictum "no compulsion in religion" was abrogated by subsequent revelations, this is not the mainstream Muslim interpretation . Indeed, the pope made a major scholarly blunder when he claimed that the "no compulsion in religion" verse was revealed during the Meccan period, "when Mohammed was still powerless and under threat." In fact, it was revealed during the later Medinan period--the same period as the verses that authorize armed struggle against the Meccan enemies of the nascent Muslim community in Medina, that is, "when Muhammad was in a position of strength, not weakness."" (emphasis added) ^ Ibn Taymiyya , Qāʿidah Mukhtaṣarah fī Qitāl al-Kuffār wa Muhādanatihim wa Taḥrīm Qatlihim li-Mujarrad Kufrihim: Qāʿidah Tubayyn al-Qiyam al-Sāmiyah lil-Haḍārah al-Islāmiyyah fī al-Harb wa al-Qitāl , p.123. Ed. ʿAbd al-ʿAzīz ibn ʿAbd Allah ibn Ibrāhīm al-Zayd Āl Hamad. Riyadh: N.p., 2004/1424. Quote: "جمهور السلف و الخلف على أنها ليست مخصوصة و لا منسوخة، ..." Translation: "Most of the salaf considered the verse to be neither specific nor abrogated but the text is general, ..." ^ Ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya , Ahkam Ahl al-Dhimma , pp.21-22.

^ Al-Tabari , Jāmiʿ al-bayān ʿan ta'wīl āy al-Qur'ān 4, Dar Hajar, 2001, p.553.

^ Abi ʿUbayd, Kitab al-Nasikh wa al-Mansukh , p.282.

^ Al-Jaṣṣās, Aḥkām al-Qur'ān 2, p.168.

^ Makki bin Abi Talib, al-Idah li Nasikh al-Qur'an wa Mansukhih , p. 194.

^ Abu Jaʿfar al-Nahhas, al-Nasikh wa al-Mansukh fi al-Quran al-Karim , p.259.

^ Ibn Jizziy.

at-Tasheel . p. 135.

^ Jalal al-Din al-Suyuti , Al-Itqān fi ʿUlum al-Qur’an 2. p.22-24.

^ Muhammad al-Tahir ibn Ashur , Al-Tahrir wa al-Tanwir , (2:256) .

^ Mustafa Zayd, al-Naskh fi al-Qur'an al-Karim 2, p.510. Dar al-Wafa'. Quote: "تبطل دعوى النسخ في قوله جل تناؤه: 
لَا إِكْرَاهَ فِي الدِّينِ : ٢٥٦ في سورة البقرة." ^ Muhammad S. Al-Awa (1993), Punishment in Islamic Law , p.51. US American Trust Publications.

ISBN 978-0892591428 .

^ A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014).

Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy .

Oneworld Publications . p.

186 .

ISBN 978-1780744209 .

^ Yousif, Ahmad (April 1, 2000). "Islam, Minorities and Religious Freedom: A Challenge to Modern Theory of Pluralism".

Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs .

20 (1): 35.

doi : 10.1080/13602000050008889 .

ISSN 1360-2004 .

S2CID 144025362 .

^ Leonard J. Swidler (1986), Religious Liberty and Human Rights in Nations and in Religions , p.178. Ecumenical Press.

^ Farhad Malekian (2011), Principles of Islamic International Criminal Law , p.69.

Brill .

ISBN 978-9004203969 .

^ Mohammad Hashim Kamali , 
The Middle Path of Moderation in Islam: The Qur'anic Principle of Wasatiyyah (Religion and Global Politics), pp. 110-1.

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0190226831 .

^ Al-Ahram Weekly | Culture | Islamic feminism: what's in a name?

Archived March 20, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ^ " 'Islamic feminism means justice to women', The Milli Gazette, Vol.5 No.02, MG96 (16-31 January 04)" .

milligazette.com . Retrieved December 9, 2015 .

^ "Islamic feminism: what's in a name?" Archived 2015-03-20 at the Wayback Machine by Margot Badran, Al-Ahram , January 17–23, 2002 ^ "Exploring Islamic Feminism" Archived 2005-04-16 at the Wayback Machine by Margot Badran, Center for Muslim-Christian Understanding, Georgetown University, November 30, 2000 ^ [1] Archived 2011-04-10 at the Wayback Machine Rob L. Wagner: "Saudi-Islamic Feminist Movement: A Struggle for Male Allies and the Right Female Voice", University for Peace (Peace and Conflict Monitor), March 29, 2011 ^ "RAWA testimony to the Congressional Human Rights Caucus Briefing" . U.S. Congressional Human Rights Caucus. December 18, 2001. Archived from the original on June 28, 2007.

^ "Muslim women's group demands complete ban on Shariah courts | india-news" . Hindustan Times. September 6, 2016 . Retrieved September 7, 2016 .

^ "SC admits Muslim woman's plea to declare triple talaq illegal" .

The Hindu . August 26, 2016 . Retrieved September 7, 2016 .

^ "Polygamy not a God-given right to Muslims" . May 21, 2010.

^ "Syariah court fails to protect and safeguard Muslim girls — Sisters in Islam" . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014.

^ "Archives" . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved April 22, 2017 .

^ "Sisters In Islam: News / Comments / Dress and Modesty in Islam" . Archived from the original on August 23, 2013 . Retrieved April 22, 2017 .

^ a b "Selangor | Portal Rasmi Fatwa Malaysia" . Archived from the original on November 3, 2014 . Retrieved November 3, 2014 .

^ "Sisters in Islam files for judicial review on fatwa - Nation - The Star Online" .

www.thestar.com.my .

^ "FATWA: On Hijab (The Hair-covering of Women) UPDATED" .

Khaled Abou El Fadl on The Search For Beauty in Islam . January 2, 2016 . Retrieved March 10, 2025 .

^ jamal-saidi (June 24, 2012).

"Hijab is Not an Islamic Duty: Muslim Scholar" .

Morocco World News . Retrieved March 16, 2025 .

^ Ibn Kathir.

"Tafsir (Abridged)" .

Quran.com . Retrieved March 5, 2025 .

^ a b c d Ghafournia, Nafiseh (December 7, 2017).

"Towards a New Interpretation of Quran 4:34" .

Hawwa .

15 (3): 279– 292.

doi : 10.1163/15692086-12341309 .

ISSN 1569-2078 .

^ Tesneem Alkiek, Dalia Mogahed, Omar Suleiman and Jonathan Brown (May 22, 2017).

"Islam and Violence Against Women: A Critical Look at Domestic Violence and Honor Killings in the Muslim Community" . Yaqeen Institute . Retrieved February 23, 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Nomani, Asra Q. (October 22, 2006).

"Clothes Aren't the Issue" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2018.

^ a b c Dunn, Shannon; Kellison, Rosemary B. (2010).

"At the Intersection of Scripture and Law: Qur'an 4:34 and Violence against Women" .

Journal of Feminist Studies in Religion .

26 (2): 11– 36.

doi : 10.2979/fsr.2010.26.2.11 .

ISSN 1553-3913 .

^ "How Three American Women Translated One of the World's Most Popular Qurans" .

The Daily Beast . March 26, 2017 . Retrieved November 16, 2024 .

^ MacFarquhar, Neil (March 25, 2007).

"New Translation Prompts Debate on Islamic Verse" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2012 . Retrieved November 15, 2024 .

^ Tribune, Chicago (April 10, 2007).

"A new look at a holy text" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved November 16, 2024 .

^ Silvers, Laury (2006).

" "In the Book We have Left out Nothing": The Ethical Problem of the Existence of Verse 4:34 in the Qur'an" .

Comparative Islamic Studies .

2 (2): 171– 180.

doi : 10.1558/cisv2i2.171 .

ISSN 1743-1638 .

^ Yüksel, Edip; al-Shaiban, Layth Saleh; Schulte-Nafeh, Martha, eds. (2007).

The Quran: A Reformist Translation . United States of America: Brainbow Press. pp.

17– 20, 104.

ISBN 978-0-9796715-0-0 .

^ The Fundamentalist City?: Religiosity and the Remaking of Urban Space , Nezar Alsayyad (ed.), Chapter 7: "Hamas in Gaza Refugee camps: The Construction of Trapped Spaces for the Survival of Fundamentalism", Francesca Giovannini. Taylor & Francis, 2010.

ISBN 978-0-415-77936-4 ." ^ Hassan Mahmoud Khalil: "Islam's position on violence and violation of human rights", Dar Al-Shaeb, 1994.

^ "Writer and Islamic thinker "Gamal al-Banna": The Muslim Brotherhood is not fit to rule (2-2)" . Ahewar.org . Retrieved March 25, 2016 .

^ "Writer and Islamic thinker "Gamal al-Banna": The Muslim Brotherhood is not fit to rule (1-2)" . Ahewar.org. February 18, 2008 . Retrieved March 25, 2016 .

^ Clarence-Smith, William (2006).

Islam and the Abolition of Slavery . Oxford University Press. pp.

198– 200.

ISBN 0195221516 .

^ "Sudan death penalty reignites Islam apostasy debate" .

BBC News . May 15, 2014 . Retrieved September 21, 2020 .

^ "Muslim Alliance for Sexual and Gender Diversity" . Muslimalliance.org. Archived from the original on August 5, 2014 . Retrieved November 18, 2013 .

^ "The Progressive Muslim Movement" . OutSmart Magazine. October 1, 2013 . Retrieved November 18, 2013 .

^ "The Safra Project - rabble.ca" .

Rabble.ca . April 11, 2014 . Retrieved April 5, 2017 .

^ Power, Shannon (May 3, 2016).

"Being gay and muslim: 'death is your repentance' " .

Star Observer . Retrieved May 5, 2016 .

^ Catherine Patch, "Queer Muslims find peace; El-Farouk Khaki founded Salaam Offers a place to retain spirituality", Toronto Star , June 15, 2006 ^ "El-tawhid juma circle" . Archived from the original on April 19, 2017 . Retrieved April 19, 2017 .

^ Mastracci, Davide (April 4, 2017).

"What It's Like To Pray At A Queer-Inclusive Mosque" .

BuzzFeed . Retrieved April 19, 2017 .

^ Habib, Samra (June 3, 2016).

"Queer and going to the mosque: 'I've never felt more Muslim than I do now' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved April 19, 2017 .

^ Gillis, Wendy (August 25, 2013).

"Islamic scholars experience diversity of Muslim practices at U of T summer program" .

Toronto Star . Retrieved April 19, 2017 .

^ Banerji, Robin (November 30, 2012).

"Gay-friendly 'mosque' opens in Paris" .

BBC News .

^ "Channel 4 in a Nutshell" (PDF) .

^ "About UPF - UPF (Unity Productions Foundation)" .

UPF.tv . Retrieved April 5, 2017 .

^ "A JIHAD FOR LOVE:::A FIlm by Parvez Sharma" .

AJihadForLove.org . Retrieved April 5, 2017 .

^ "Press" .

A Sinner in Mecca . Archived from the original on October 10, 2018 . Retrieved May 7, 2015 .

^ Webster, Andy (September 3, 2015).

"In 'A Sinner in Mecca,' a Gay Director Ponders His Sexuality and Islamic Faith" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 7, 2015 .

^ "Jordan: a gay magazine gives an hope to Middle East", Ilgrandecolibri.com , retrieved 11 August 2012 ^ "Gay Egypy" .

Gay Middle East . Archived from the original on July 11, 2011 . Retrieved January 20, 2011 .

^ a b Kugle, Scott (2010).

Homosexuality in Islam . Oxford, England: Oneworld Publications.

^ Scott Siraj al-Haqq Kugle (2003).

"Sexuality, diversity and ethics in the agenda of progressive Muslims" (PDF) . In Omid Safi (ed.).

Progressive Muslims: On Justice, Gender, and Pluralism . Oneworld Publications. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 26, 2018.

^ Vaid, Mobeen (July 11, 2016).

"Can Islam Accommodate Homosexual Acts? Quranic Revisionism and the Case of Scott Kugle" . MuslimMatters.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2017 . Retrieved July 31, 2017 .

^ Jahangir, Junaid; Abdullatif, Hussein (2018).

"Homosexuality: the emerging new battleground in Islam" .

Iran Namag .

3 (1).

^ Asad, Talal. Formation of Secular: Christianity, Islam, Modernity. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2003. 5-6.

^ "From the article on secularism in Oxford Islamic Studies Online" . Archived from the original on June 17, 2013 . Retrieved November 3, 2014 .

^ Naʻīm, ʻAbd Allāh Aḥmad. Islam and the secular state: negotiating the future of Shariʻa. Cambridge:Harvard University Press, 2008.

ISBN 9780674027763 ^ Ira M. Lapidus (October 1975). "The Separation of State and Religion in the Development of Early Islamic Society", International Journal of Middle East Studies 6 (4), pp. 363-385 [364-5] ^ Miller, Judith (1996).

God Has Ninety-Nine Names . Touchstone. p. 91.

ISBN 0684809737 .

^ Bernard, Lewis (1995).

The Middle East, A Brief History of the Last 2000 Years . Touchstone Book. p. 179.

^ Kazuo, Morimoto (2012).

Sayyids and Sharifs in Muslim Societies . Routledge. pp. 131, 132.

ISBN 978-0-415-51917-5 .

^ a b (Raddul Muhtar p.209 v.4, "Islam QA" .

Darul Ifta Birmingham . July 1, 2019 . Retrieved July 14, 2020 .

^ "Non-Arab men are NOT suitable for marriage with Arab Women" .

Islamic Virtues ~ This day have I perfected your religion for you! ~ al-Ma'idah, Verse 3 . December 13, 2013 . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ Amjad Rasheed (September 14, 2012).

"Arab father refusing the proposal of non-Arab for his daughter" .

IslamQA.org . Retrieved April 12, 2022 .

^ "Can a Sayyed marry a non-Sayyed? Answered as per Hanafi Fiqh by IslamicSolutions.org. Scholar: Shaykh Saeed Ahmed Golaub" .

^ Yusuf Khan.

"What did the Prophet say about Racism" .

islamcity.org . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

^ Being a Muslim in the U.S.ا [ usurped ] ^ Salafism Modernist Salafism from the 20th Century to the Present ^ Tore Kjeilen (January 18, 2006).

"Salafism" . I-cias.com . Retrieved September 4, 2016 .

^ Salafism Archived 2015-03-11 at the Wayback Machine Tony Blair Faith Foundation ^ a b Mansoor Moaddel (May 16, 2005).

Islamic Modernism, Nationalism, and Fundamentalism: Episode and Discourse . University of Chicago Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780226533339 .

^ a b c Encyclopedia of Islam and the Muslim World , Thomson Gale (2004) ^ Salafism, Modernist Salafism from the 20th Century to the Present oxfordbibliographies.com ^ a b Atzori, Daniel (August 31, 2012).

"The rise of global Salafism" . Retrieved January 6, 2015 .

^ Ruthven, Malise (2006) [1984].

Islam in the World . Oxford University Press. p. 318.

ISBN 9780195305036 . Retrieved April 23, 2015 .

^ a b Richard Stephen Voss, Identifying Assumptions in the Hadith/Sunnah Debate , 19.org, Accessed December 5, 2013 ^ Aisha Y. Musa, The Qur’anists , Florida International University, accessed May 22, 2013.

^ a b c Radwan, Hassan (December 16, 2015).

"Muslims can reinterpret their faith: it's the best answer to Isis" . The Guardian . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

^ Nasheed, Sa’eed.

Religious Freedom: A Foundation for Individual Freedom . Beirut: Dar al-Tanweer.

^ Radwan, Hassan (February 17, 2018).

"Is the Quran a Miracle?" .

YouTube . Archived from the original on April 24, 2019 . Retrieved March 13, 2021 .

^ Khaki, El-Farouk (June 21, 2007).

"For the love of Allah" .

NOW Magazine . Retrieved April 25, 2018 .

^ Huus, Kari (November 24, 2011).

"Battling for Gay Right's in Allah's Name" .

NBCNews.com . Archived from the original on April 15, 2013 . Retrieved June 3, 2020 .

^ "Muslims for Progressive Values Secures United Nations' Consultative Status" . prlog.org . Retrieved July 11, 2016 .

^ "Muslims for Progressive Values is challenging the mainstream narrative" .

NBC News . January 5, 2017 . Retrieved November 16, 2024 .

^ "The New Radical Islam" .

HuffPost . March 29, 2012 . Retrieved November 16, 2024 .

^ Shaikh, Ahmed (July 31, 2019).

"Were Muslim Groups Duped Into Supporting an LGBTQ Rights Petition at the US Supreme Court?" .

MuslimMatters.org . Retrieved November 16, 2024 .

^ Nik Badli Shah, Nik Noriani (May 21, 2010).

"Polygamy not a God-given right to Muslims" .

MalaysiaKini .

^ "Syariah court fails to protect and safeguard Muslim girls — Sisters in Islam" . Archived from the original on July 14, 2014.

^ "State must refrain from moral policing, says SIS" .

The Star . December 17, 2006. Archived from the original on July 14, 2014.

^ "Dress and Modesty in Islam" .

Sisters in Islam . August 8, 1997 . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ "Press Statement: Sisters in Islam remains firmly opposed to the implementation of Hudud law for Malaysia" .

Sisters in Islam . October 5, 2011 . Retrieved June 18, 2025 .

^ Gürkan, Senem; Barut, Yaşar (June 7, 2021).

"Feminizmden Esinlenen İslami Bir Oluşum: Sisters in Islam (SIS)" [A synergy of Feminism and Islam: Sisters in Islam (SIS)].

Ondokuz Mayıs University Journal of Women's and Family Studies (in Turkish).

1 (1).

Ondokuz Mayıs University : 41– 53.

eISSN 2791-6871 .

^ a b "Bazm-e-Tolu-e-Islam" . Retrieved March 22, 2015 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Abrahamian, Ervand (1982).

Iran Between Two Revolutions . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691053424 .

OCLC 7975938 .

Bohdan, Siarhei (Summer 2020).

" 'They Were Going Together with the Ikhwan': The Influence of Muslim Brotherhood Thinkers on Shi'i Islamists during the Cold War" .

The Middle East Journal .

74 (2): 243– 262.

doi : 10.3751/74.2.14 .

ISSN 1940-3461 .

S2CID 225510058 .

Nasr, Vali (2006).

The Shia Revival . Norton.

Chamieh, Jebran (1977).

Traditionalists, Militants and Liberal in Present Islam . Research and Publishing House.

Devji, Faisal; Kazmi, Zaheer, eds. (2017).

Islam after Liberalism . Oxford University Press.

Kepel, Gilles (2002).

Jihad: The Trail of Political Islam . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674010901 .

Rahnema, Ali (2000).

An Islamic Utopian - A Political Biography of Ali Shari'ati . London, NY: I.B. Tauris .

ISBN 1860645526 .

Safi, Omid , ed. (2003).

Progressive Muslims: on justice, gender and pluralism . Oxford: Oneworld Publications .

ISBN 9781851683161 .

OCLC 52380025 .

Further reading [ edit ] Safi, Omid, Progressive Islam, in Muhammad in History, Thought, and Culture: An Encyclopedia of the Prophet of God (2 vols.), Edited by C. Fitzpatrick and A. Walker, Santa Barbara, ABC-CLIO, 2014, Vol. II, pp. 486–490.

ISBN 1610691776 Qur'an and Woman by Amina Wadud .

American Muslims: Bridging Faith and Freedom by M. A. Muqtedar Khan .

Charles Kurzman , ed. (1998).

Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook . Oxford University Press, USA.

ISBN 0-19-511622-4 .

"Debating Moderate Islam", edited by M. A. Muqtedar Khan .

Qur'an, Liberation and Pluralism by Farid Esack .

Revival and Reform in Islam by Fazlur Rahman Malik .

The Unthought in Contemporary Islamic Thought by Mohammed Arkoun .

Unveiling Traditions: Postcolonial Islam in a Polycentric World by Anouar Majid.

Islam and Science: Religious Orthodoxy and the Battle for Rationality by Pervez Hoodbhoy .

Islam is Mercy: Essential Features of a Modern Religion , by Mouhanad Khorchide 2012; English 2014.

The Viability of Islamic Science by S. Irfan Habib, Economic and Political Weekly , June 5, 2004.

The Reformist Islamic Thinker Muhammad Shahrur: In the Footsteps of Averroes A Liberal Muslim Blog Vanessa Karam, Olivia Samad and Ani Zonneveld, eds. (2011).

Progressive Muslim Identities . Oracle Releasing.

ISBN 978-0-9837161-0-5 .

Mustafa Akyol (2011).

Islam Without Extremes: A Muslim Case for Liberty . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-07086-6 .

Alrabaa, Sami (2010).

Veiled Atrocities: True Stories of Oppression in Saudi Arabia . Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books.

ISBN 978-1-61614-159-2 .

Al-Rasheed, Madawi (2007).

Contesting the Saudi State: Islamic Voices from a New Generation . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-85836-6 .

External links [ edit ] Charles Kurzman's Liberal Islam links , compiled by the author of Liberal Islam: A Sourcebook .

v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_and_progressivism_within_Islam&oldid=1306378708 " Categories : Liberal and progressive movements within Islam Women's rights in Islam LGBTQ Muslim organizations LGBTQ and multiculturalism Islam in Turkey Islam in Pakistan Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2024 Articles with excerpts Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2020 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2017 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 12:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism and progressivism within Islam 26 languages Add topic

