Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Reporting 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Washington Free Beacon 4 languages العربية Español فارسی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative political journalism website The Washington Free Beacon Type Online news site Format Website Editor-in-chief Eliana Johnson Managing editor Sonny Bunch, Victorino Matus, Stephanie Wang Founded 2012 ; 13 years ago ( 2012 ) Political alignment Conservative Language English Headquarters Washington, D.C.

Website freebeacon .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Washington Free Beacon is an American political journalism website launched in 2012.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The website identifies as conservative .

Eliana Johnson is the website's editor-in-chief.

The Free Beacon has broken stories about states using racial preferences in rationing COVID-19 drugs, exposed Columbia Law School 's plans to evade the banning of consideration of race in admissions, and uncovered Yale administrators' bullying of a student, which led to personnel changes at the school.

[ 3 ] The Free Beacon also reported on plagiarism accusations against Harvard President Claudine Gay , who resigned shortly thereafter.

The Washington Post called Gay's resignation "a major win" for the Free Beacon , which it called "the rare conservative media outlet that does significant reporting of its own." [ 4 ] The website's reporting on a number of senior administrators at Columbia University exchanging text messages it considers antisemitic led three deans to resign.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] The Free Beacon was founded by Michael Goldfarb , Aaron Harrison, and Matthew Continetti . It launched on February 7, 2012, as a project of the Center for American Freedom, a conservative advocacy group modeled on the liberal Center for American Progress .

[ 6 ] The website is financially backed by Paul Singer , an American billionaire hedge fund manager and Republican donor.

[ 7 ] The site is known for its conservative reporting, with the intention to publicize stories and influence the coverage of the mainstream media , and is modeled after liberal counterparts in the media such as Think Progress and Talking Points Memo .

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The site has roots in the neoconservative wing of the Republican Party.

[ 10 ] In 2019, Politico journalist Eliana Johnson , described by Ben Smith as "a leading political reporter", assumed the editor-in-chief position from the WFB's founding editor Matthew Continetti. At the time, the outlet had a staff of 24.

[ 11 ] Reporting [ edit ] Jack Hunter , a staff member of Senator Rand Paul 's office, resigned in 2013 after a Free Beacon report detailed his past as a pro-secessionist radio shock jock known as the "Southern Avenger".

[ 8 ] The publication also broke several stories about Hillary Clinton 's successful 1975 legal defense of an accused child rapist that attracted national media attention.

[ 12 ] From October 2015 to May 2016, The Free Beacon hired Fusion GPS to conduct opposition research on "multiple candidates" during the 2016 presidential election , including Donald Trump . The Free Beacon stopped funding this research when Trump clinched the Republican nomination.

[ 13 ] Fusion GPS later hired former British intelligence officer Christopher Steele and produced the Steele dossier that alleged links between the Trump campaign and the Kremlin.

Paul Singer , a major donor to the Free Beacon , said he was unaware of this dossier until BuzzFeed News published it in January 2017.

[ 14 ] On October 27, 2017, the Free Beacon publicly disclosed that it had hired Fusion GPS, and said that it "had no knowledge of or connection to the Steele dossier, did not pay for the dossier, and never had contact with, knowledge of, or provided payment for any work performed by Christopher Steele".

[ 15 ] The Free Beacon came under criticism for its reporting on Fusion GPS. Three days before it was revealed that the Free Beacon had funded the work by Fusion GPS, the Free Beacon wrote that the firm's work "was funded by an unknown GOP client while the primary was still going on." [ 16 ] The Free Beacon has published pieces portraying Fusion GPS's work as unreliable "without noting that it considered Fusion GPS reliable enough to pay for its services".

[ 16 ] In an editor's note, Continetti wrote, "the reason for this omission is that the authors of these articles, and the particular editors who reviewed them, were unaware of this relationship", and that the outlet was reviewing its editorial process to avoid similar issues in the future.

[ 17 ] In 2022, a Free Beacon article by Patrick Hauf accused President Joe Biden 's administration of planning to use federal dollars to fund safe smoking kits that included crack pipes as part of a harm reduction initiative; [ 18 ] this prompted outrage among Republicans in Congress, some of whom proposed a bill to ban the federal government from funding drug paraphernalia.

[ 19 ] The Washington Post later reported that, according to a United States Department of Health and Human Services spokesperson, "Hauf jumped to a conclusion that was not warranted" because, while the safe smoking kits were meant to reduce risk in smoking "any illicit substance", the agency funding the program "d[id] not specify the kits' elements, only the parameters"; thus, although such smoking kits often include crack pipes and (according to a Drug Policy Alliance spokesman interviewed for the Washington Post article) some of the groups planning to apply for the funding had assumed that its kits would also include them, it was not clear that the agency had intended to include them.

[ 19 ] Bill Gertz , a senior editor until October 2019, took $100,000 from Guo Wengui , a conspiracy theorist, without disclosure, [ 20 ] wrote stories citing him, and introduced him to Steve Bannon .

[ 21 ] Gertz was subsequently fired, [ 22 ] with a disclaimer appended to his affected stories.

[ 20 ] In 2023 and 2024, The New York Times credited the Free Beacon with breaking, together with Chris Rufo , [ 23 ] and subsequently expanding on, the plagiarism accusations against Harvard President Claudine Gay , [ 24 ] who resigned shortly thereafter.

[ 25 ] The Washington Post called Gay's resignation "a major win" for the Free Beacon , which it called "the rare conservative media outlet that does significant reporting of its own".

[ 4 ] In May 2024, the Free Beacon reported that the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA had continued to evaluate applicants based on race rather than qualifications despite the illegality of race-based affirmative action in California since 1996 . According to the outlet's reporting, 50% of UCLA medical students now fail basic tests of medical competence. A former admissions staff member called UCLA a "failed medical school".

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] On July 3, 2024, the Free Beacon reported that a number of senior administrators at Columbia University had exchanged text messages demeaning members of a panel on Jewish life on campus after the 2024 Columbia University pro-Palestinian campus occupations .

[ 28 ] In August 2024, three deans resigned in the wake of that reporting.

[ 5 ] Reception [ edit ] Jim Rutenberg of The New York Times described the reporting style of the Free Beacon as "gleeful evisceration".

[ 29 ] The Atlantic ' s Conor Friedersdorf called the Free Beacon ' s mission "decadent and unethical".

[ 30 ] Ben Howe wrote in The Daily Beast that The Washington Free Beacon established "itself as a credible source of conservative journalism with deep investigative dives and exposes on money in politics", but after Trump 's election it was "producing less actual reporting" and moved "more towards the path of least resistance: spending their time criticizing the left and the media, along with healthy doses of opinion writing".

[ 31 ] McKay Coppins in the Columbia Journalism Review wrote in September 2018 that while the website contains "a fair amount of trolling… it has also earned a reputation for real-deal journalism… If a partisan press really is the future, we could do worse than the Free Beacon ".

[ 32 ] Jeet Heer wrote in The New Republic : "Much of the conservative press is terrible but the Free Beacon is far superior to propagandist fare like The Daily Caller . Unlike other comparable conservative websites, the Free Beacon makes an effort to do original reporting. Its commitment to journalism should be welcomed by liberals".

[ 33 ] In 2015, Mother Jones wrote that the Free Beacon was far better than contemporary conservative outlets such as The Daily Caller but that "the Beacon hasn't always steered clear of stories that please the base but don't really stand up", and that it tends towards inflammatory pieces that "push conservatives' buttons".

[ 34 ] That same year, the Washingtonian wrote that " The Beacon ' s emphasis on newsgathering sets it apart among right-facing publications".

[ 35 ] Ben Smith wrote in BuzzFeed News that the Free Beacon was "[a]lternately parodic and wire-service serious", and had "broken major political news, mostly negative" (although its focus was mainly directed against Democrats). Smith continued that the Free Beacon ' s hard news reporting differentiated it from other conservative outlets which were either opinion focused or did not produce journalism which met mainstream standards.

[ 11 ] Politico Magazine reported that it is "somewhat grudgingly respected in liberal circles." [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Aaron Sibarium Alternative media (U.S. political right) References [ edit ] ^ Vogel, Kenneth P.; Haberman, Maggie (October 27, 2017).

"Conservative Website First Funded Anti-Trump Research by Firm That Later Produced Dossier (Published 2017)" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

^ Lima, Cristiano (October 27, 2017).

"Conservative Free Beacon originally funded firm that created Trump-Russia dossier" .

POLITICO . Retrieved October 9, 2020 .

^ a b Novicoff, Marc (November 25, 2023).

"This Gen Z Investigative Reporter Is Rocking Conservative Media" . Politico Magazine . Retrieved November 20, 2024 .

^ a b Sommer, Will (January 4, 2024).

"Harvard resignation is a win for conservative Washington Free Beacon" .

Washington Post . Retrieved March 5, 2024 .

^ a b Douglas-Gabriel, Danielle (August 8, 2024).

"Columbia deans involved in texts evoking 'antisemitic tropes' resign" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2024 . Retrieved August 9, 2024 .

^ a b Smith, Ben (January 5, 2012).

"How to fight liberals: Imitate them" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2014 . Retrieved September 8, 2014 .

^ Wines, Michael (May 30, 2019).

"Deceased G.O.P. Strategist's Hard Drives Reveal New Details on the Census Citizenship Question" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2019 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 .

^ a b Auletta, Ken (June 2, 2014).

"The Hillary Show" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2014 . Retrieved September 8, 2014 .

^ Friedersdorf, Conor (February 8, 2012).

"The Worst Mission Statement in the History of D.C. Journalism" .

The Atlantic. theatlantic.com .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2017 . Retrieved May 29, 2016 .

^ Smith, Ben (September 14, 2019).

"A Top White House Reporter Is Taking Over The Washington Free Beacon" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2019 .

^ a b "A Top White House Reporter Is Taking Over The Washington Free Beacon " .

BuzzFeed News . September 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ Kreutz, Liz (June 20, 2014).

"Hillary Clinton's Handling of 1975 Rape Case Emerges Again" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on September 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 8, 2014 .

^ Vogel, Kenneth P.; Haberman, Maggie (October 27, 2017).

"Conservative Website First Funded Anti-Trump Research by Firm That Later Produced Dossier" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2017 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ Vogel, Kenneth P.; Haberman, Maggie (October 27, 2017).

"Conservative Website First Funded Anti-Trump Research by Firm That Later Produced Dossier" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2017 . Retrieved October 27, 2017 .

^ Continetti, Matthew; Goldfarb, Michael (October 27, 2017).

"Fusion GPS and the Washington Free Beacon" .

Washington Free Beacon .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2017 . Retrieved October 27, 2017 .

^ a b Borchers, Callum (October 27, 2017).

"Analysis | Washington Free Beacon reported 'an unknown GOP client' funded Fusion GPS. It was the Beacon" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2017 . Retrieved October 28, 2017 .

^ Continetti, Matthew (October 30, 2017).

"Editor's Note" .

Washington Free Beacon .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2017 . Retrieved November 16, 2017 .

^ Hauf, Patrick (February 7, 2022).

"Biden Administration To Fund Crack Pipe Distribution To Advance 'Racial Equity' " .

Washington Free Beacon . Archived from the original on May 13, 2022 . Retrieved May 14, 2022 .

^ a b Kessler, Glenn (February 11, 2022).

"Viral article that unleashed 'crack pipe' firestorm relied on assumptions" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 13, 2022 . Retrieved May 14, 2022 .

^ a b Staff, Washington Free Beacon (October 11, 2019).

"A Note to Our Readers on the Departure of Bill Gertz" .

Washington Free Beacon . Retrieved October 9, 2023 .

^ Osnos, Evan (October 17, 2022).

"How a Tycoon Linked to Chinese Intelligence Became a Darling of Trump Republicans" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved October 9, 2023 .

^ Gray, Rosie (October 12, 2019).

"The Free Beacon Fired A Top Reporter For A "Financial Transaction" With Someone He Frequently Covered" .

BuzzFeed News . Retrieved October 9, 2023 .

^ Nicholas Confessore (January 2, 2024).

"How a Proxy Fight Over Campus Politics Brought Down Harvard's President" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

began almost immediately after the hearing with a post by Mr. Rufo, who had obtained an anonymous dossier of work published by Dr. Gay in which she had allegedly plagiarized other scholars, as well as a report in the Washington Free Beacon ^ Jennifer Schuessler (December 20, 2023).

"Harvard Finds More Instances of 'Duplicative Language' in President's Work" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

Additional allegations continued to surface in conservative outlets like The Washington Free Beacon ^ Jennifer Schuessler; Anemona Hartocollis; Michael Levenson; Alan Blinder (January 2, 2024).

"Harvard President Resigns After Mounting Plagiarism Accusations" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

Dr. Gay's resignation came after the latest plagiarism accusations against her were circulated in an unsigned complaint published on Monday in The Washington Free Beacon ^ Gligich, Daniel (May 23, 2024).

"Report: UCLA engaging in illegal, race-based admissions process for med school" .

The San Joaquin Valley Sun . Retrieved May 24, 2024 .

^ Leef, George (May 23, 2024).

"What DEI Does to a Medical School" .

National Review . Retrieved May 24, 2024 .

^ Sibarium, Aaron (July 3, 2024).

"Columbia Officials Admit Protest Rules 'Don't Work,' Mock Other Administrators in New Texts" .

The Washington Free Beacon .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved August 9, 2024 .

^ Rutenberg, Jim (February 23, 2014).

"A Conservative Provocateur, Using a Blowtorch as His Pen" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 12, 2017 . Retrieved September 8, 2014 .

^ Friedersdorf, Conor (January 8, 2014).

"The ascendant 'smear wing' of the conservative movement" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2017 . Retrieved March 11, 2017 .

^ Howe, Ben (May 11, 2018).

"Dear Conservative Media: Do Some More Damn Reporting" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2018 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Coppins, McKay (September 19, 2018).

"What if the right-wing media wins?" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2018 . Retrieved September 19, 2018 .

^ Heer, Jeet (2017).

"Democrats like Jon Ossoff should welcome the Washington Free Beacon" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2018 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Baumann, Nick (March–April 2015).

" The Washington Free Beacon Is Unapologetically Conservative. It's Also Kind of Good" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2018 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

^ Beaujon, Andrew (August 6, 2015).

"The Problem with the Mainstream Media: It's Not More Like The Washington Free Beacon " .

Washingtonian .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2016 . Retrieved September 20, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Washington_Free_Beacon&oldid=1306568901 " Categories : American political websites News aggregators American conservative websites American political blogs Conservative media in the United States Criticism of journalism American news websites Political organizations based in the United States American journalism organizations Internet properties established in 2012 Online magazines published in the United States 2012 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2019 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Washington Free Beacon 4 languages Add topic

