Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Motors 2 Jacobi's law 3 Electrotyping and telegraphy 4 Naval mine 5 Family 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Moritz von Jacobi 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German-Russian electrical engineer and physicist (1801–1874) Moritz von Jacobi Jacobi in 1856 Born Moritz Hermann von Jacobi ( 1801-09-21 ) 21 September 1801 Potsdam , Margraviate of Brandenburg , Kingdom of Prussia , Holy Roman Empire Died 10 March 1874 (1874-03-10) (aged 72) Saint Petersburg , Russian Empire Known for Advancing the electric motor Advancing electroplating Formulating maximum power transfer theorem Inventing the electric boat Inventing electrotyping Inventing the Jacobi mine Relatives Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi (brother) Awards Demidov Prize (1840) Scientific career Fields Physics Institutions Russian Academy of Sciences Moritz Hermann von Jacobi ( German: [ˈmoːʁɪts fɔn jaˈkoːki] ; 21 September 1801 – 10 March 1874), also known as Boris Semyonovich Yakobi ( Russian : Борис Семёнович Якоби ), was a German-Russian electrical engineer and physicist .

Motors [ edit ] Jacobi began to study magnetic motors in 1834. In 1835 moved to Dorpat (now Tartu, Estonia) to lecture at Dorpat University . He moved to Saint Petersburg in 1837 to research the usage of electromagnetic forces for moving machines at the Russian Academy of Sciences . He investigated the power of an electromagnet in  motors and generators. While studying the transfer of power from a battery to an electric motor, he deduced the maximum power theorem . Jacobi tested the output of motors by determining the amount of zinc consumed by the battery. With the financial assistance of Tsar Nicholas I , in 1839 Jacobi constructed a 28-foot electric motor boat powered by battery cells, which carried 14 passengers on the Neva river against the current at three miles per hour.

Jacobi's law [ edit ] Circuit Diagram Power is being transferred from the source, with voltage V and resistance R S , to a load with resistance R L , resulting in a current I .

I is simply the source voltage divided by the total circuit resistance The law known as the maximum power theorem states: Maximum power is transferred when the internal resistance of the source equals the resistance of the load, when the external resistance can be varied, and the internal resistance is constant.

The transfer of maximum power from a source with a fixed internal resistance to a load, the resistance of the load must be the same as that of the source. This law is of use when driving a load such as an electric motor from a battery.

Electrotyping and telegraphy [ edit ] In 1838 he discovered galvanoplastics, or electrotyping , a method of making printing plates by electroplating . The way this works is analogous to a battery acting in reverse. The stereotype was an impression taken from a form of movable lead type and used for printing instead of the original type. This technique is used in relief printing .

He also worked on the development of the electric telegraph . In 1842-1845 he built a telegraph line between Saint Petersburg and Tsarskoe Selo using an underground cable. In 1867 he was a Russian delegate to the Commission on Measurement Units at the Paris World's Fair . He was a strong proponent of the metric system .

Naval mine [ edit ] In 1853 Jacobi developed the Jacobi naval mine .

The mine was tied to the sea bottom by an anchor, a cable connected it to a galvanic cell which powered it from the shore. The power of its explosive charge was equal to 14 kilograms (31 lb) of black powder . Its production was approved by the Committee for Mines of the Ministry of War of the Russian Empire .

In 1854 60 Jacobi mines were laid in the vicinity of the Forts Pavel and Alexander ( Kronstadt ).

[ 1 ] Family [ edit ] Von Jacobi's brother was the mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi .

[ 2 ] Von Jacobi's tomb, from wife and children Jacobi was born into an Ashkenazi Jewish family.

[ 3 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Tarle, Yevgeny (1944).

Крымская война [ Crimean War ] (in Russian). Vol. II. Moscow: Soviet Academy of Sciences. pp.

44– 45.

^ Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Jacobi, Moritz Hermann" .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

^ Pieper, H. (2005). Der Euler des 19. Jahrhunderts: CG Jacob Jacobi.

Elemente der Mathematik , 60(3), 89-107.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Moritz Hermann von Jacobi .

Katz, Eugenii.

"Moritz Hermann Jacobi" . Archived from the original on 2006-10-06.

Calvert, J. B., " Jacobi's Theorem Also known as the Maximum Power Transfer Theorem, misunderstanding of it retarded development of dynamos ". March 30, 2001 [1] Jacobi's motor - The first real electric motor of 1834 v t e Electric machines AC - Alternating current DC - Direct current PM - Permanent magnet Components Rotor Stator Winding Armature Field coil Damper winding Slip ring Commutator Brush Generators AC generator Alternator Flux switching alternator Linear alternator PM synchronous generator Magneto Induction generator Doubly fed induction generator Single-phase generator DC generator Dynamo Homopolar generator Motors AC motor Induction motor Shaded-pole motor Dahlander pole changing motor Wound rotor motor Linear induction motor Doubly fed electric machine Synchronous motor Repulsion motor DC motor Brushed DC electric motor Brushless DC electric motor Stepper motor Homopolar motor / Unipolar motor Universal motor Reluctance motor Switched reluctance motor Synchronous reluctance motor Axial flux motor Radial flux motor PM motor Dual-rotor motor Linear motor Ball bearing motor Electrostatic motor Piezoelectric motor Ultrasonic motor Servomotor Traction motor TEFC motor Motor controllers and other accessories AC-to-AC converter Cycloconverter Amplidyne Drives Variable-frequency drive Direct torque control Vector control Metadyne Motor soft starter Ward Leonard control Braking chopper DC injection brake module History, education, recreational use Timeline of the electric motor Barlow's wheel Lynch motor Mendocino motor Mouse mill motor Experimental, futuristic Coilgun Railgun Superconducting machine Related topics Blocked-rotor test Circle diagram Coil winding technology Electromagnetism Open-circuit test Open-loop controller Power-to-weight ratio Two-phase system Inchworm motor Starter Voltage controller People Arago Barlow Botto Davenport Davidson Dolivo-Dobrovolsky Faraday Ferraris Gramme Henry Jacobi Jedlik Lenz Maxwell Ørsted Park Pacinotti Pixii Saxton Siemens Sprague Steinmetz Sturgeon Tesla Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moritz_von_Jacobi&oldid=1292219656 " Categories : 1801 births 1874 deaths German Ashkenazi Jews Emigrants from the Kingdom of Prussia to the Russian Empire Electrical engineers from the Russian Empire Inventors from the Russian Empire Demidov Prize laureates Full members of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences Burials at Smolensky Lutheran Cemetery 19th-century engineers from the Russian Empire Sustainable transport pioneers Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles containing Russian-language text Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moritz von Jacobi 30 languages Add topic

