Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory and antiquity 2.1.1 Asian developments 2.1.2 Mediterranean developments 2.2 Medieval and early modern periods 2.2.1 Asian developments 2.2.2 European developments 2.3 19th and 20th centuries 2.4 21st century 3 Types of ships Toggle Types of ships subsection 3.1 Inland vessels 3.1.1 Great Lakes 3.2 Merchant ship 3.3 Special purpose vessels 3.4 Naval vessels 4 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 4.1 Hull 4.2 Propulsion systems 4.3 Steering systems 4.4 Holds, compartments, and the superstructure 4.5 Equipment 5 Design considerations Toggle Design considerations subsection 5.1 Hydrostatics 5.2 Hydrodynamics 6 Lifecycle Toggle Lifecycle subsection 6.1 Design 6.2 Construction 6.3 Repair and conversion 6.4 End of service 7 Measuring ships 8 Ship pollution Toggle Ship pollution subsection 8.1 Oil spills 8.2 Ballast water 8.3 Exhaust emissions 8.4 Ship breaking 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Citations 11.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Ship 154 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Diné bizaad Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 گیلکی 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiatun Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Romani čhib Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Lea faka-Tonga Türkçe Twi Tyap Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Betawi Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Large watercraft For other uses, see Ship (disambiguation) .

Ship Feeder ship Iris Bolten at Container Terminal Altenwerder , port of Hamburg, Germany General characteristics Tonnage Greater than 500 DWT Propulsion steam turbine ( fossil fuel , nuclear ), diesel , gas turbine , sterling , steam (reciprocating) Sail plan For sailing ships – two or more masts, [ citation needed ] variety of sail plans A ship is a large watercraft designed for travel across the surface of a body of water , carrying cargo or passengers , or in support of specialized tasks such as warfare , oceanography and fishing . Ships are generally distinguished from boats , based on size, shape, load capacity and purpose. Ships have supported exploration , trade , warfare , migration , colonization , and science .

Ship transport is responsible for the largest portion of world commerce.

The word ship has meant, depending on era and context, either simply a large vessel or specifically a full-rigged ship with three or more masts , each of which is square rigged .

The earliest historical evidence of boats is found in Egypt during the 4th millennium BCE.

[ 1 ] In 2024, ships had a global cargo capacity of 2.4 billion tons, with the three largest classes being ships carrying dry bulk (43%), oil tankers (28%) and container ships (14%).

[ 2 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Further information: Glossary of nautical terms (A–L) and Glossary of nautical terms (M–Z) Main parts of ship.

1 : Funnel ; 2 : Stern ; 3 : Propeller and Rudder ; 4 : Portside (the right side is known as starboard ); 5 : Anchor ; 6 : Bulbous bow ; 7 : Bow ; 8 : Deck ; 9 : Superstructure Ships are typically larger than boats, but there is no universally accepted distinction between the two. Ships generally can remain at sea for longer periods of time than boats.

[ 3 ] A legal definition of ship from Indian case law is a vessel that carries goods by sea.

[ 4 ] A common notion is that a ship can carry a boat, but not vice versa .

[ 5 ] A ship is likely to have a full-time crew assigned.

[ 6 ] A US Navy rule of thumb is that ships heel towards the outside of a sharp turn, whereas boats heel towards the inside [ 7 ] because of the relative location of the center of mass versus the center of buoyancy .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] American and British 19th century maritime law distinguished "vessels" from other watercraft; ships and boats fall in one legal category, whereas open boats and rafts are not considered vessels.

[ 10 ] Starting around the middle of the 18th century, sailing vessels started to be categorised by their type of rig . (Previously they were described by their hull type – for example pink , cat .) Alongside the other rig types such as schooner and brig , [ a ] the term "ship" referred to the rig type. In this sense, a ship is a vessel with three or more masts, all of which are square-rigged . For clarity, this may be referred to as a full-rigged ship or a vessel may be described as "ship-rigged".

[ b ] Alongside this rig-specific usage, "ship" continued to have the more general meaning of a large sea-going vessel. Often the meaning can only be determined by the context.

[ 13 ] : 71–73 [ 14 ] : 2 Some large vessels are traditionally called boats , notably submarines .

[ 15 ] Others include Great Lakes freighters , riverboats , and ferryboats , which may be designed for operation on inland or protected coastal waters.

[ 10 ] In most maritime traditions ships have individual names , and modern ships may belong to a ship class often named after its first ship.

In many documents the ship name is introduced with a ship prefix being an abbreviation of the ship class, for example "MS" (motor ship) or "SV" (sailing vessel), making it easier to distinguish a ship name from other individual names in a text.

"Ship" (along with "nation") is an English word that has retained a female grammatical gender in some usages, which allows it sometimes to be referred to as a "she" without being of female natural gender .

[ 16 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Maritime history and Sailing ship For most of history, transport by ship – provided there is a feasible route –  has generally been cheaper, safer and faster than making the same journey on land. Only the coming of railways in the middle of the 19th century and the growth of commercial aviation in the second half of the 20th century have changed this principle. This applied equally to sea crossings, coastal voyages and use of rivers and lakes.

[ 17 ] : 15 Examples of the consequences of this include the large grain trade in the Mediterranean during the classical period . Cities such as Rome were totally reliant on the delivery by sailing and human powered (oars) ships of the large amounts of grain needed. It has been estimated that it cost less for a sailing ship of the Roman Empire to carry grain the length of the Mediterranean than to move the same amount 15 miles by road. Rome consumed about 150,000 tons of Egyptian grain each year over the first three centuries AD.

[ 18 ] : 297 [ 19 ] : 147 [ c ] Until recently, it was generally the case that ships were the most advanced representations of the technology available to the societies that produced them.

[ 17 ] : 1 Prehistory and antiquity [ edit ] See also: Ships of ancient Rome Asian developments [ edit ] Fijian voyaging outrigger boat with a crab claw sail One of the sailing vessels depicted in Borobudur temple, c. 8th century AD in Java , Indonesia The earliest attestations of ships in maritime transport in Mesopotamia are model ships , which date back to the 4th millennium BC. In archaic texts in Uruk , Sumer , the ideogram for "ship" is attested, but in the inscriptions of the kings of Lagash , ships were first mentioned in connection to maritime trade and naval warfare at around 2500–2350 BCE.

[ citation needed ] Austronesian peoples originated in what is now Taiwan . From here, they took part in the Austronesian Expansion . Their distinctive maritime technology was integral to this movement and included catamarans and outriggers . It has been suggested that they had sails some time before 2000 BCE.

[ 21 ] : 144 Their crab claw sails enabled them to sail for vast distances in open ocean.  From Taiwan, they rapidly colonized the islands of Maritime Southeast Asia , then sailed further onwards to Micronesia , Island Melanesia , Polynesia , and Madagascar , eventually colonizing a territory spanning half the globe.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Austronesian sails were made from woven leaves, usually from pandan plants.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] These were complemented by paddlers, who usually positioned themselves on platforms on the outriggers in the larger boats.

[ 22 ] [ 26 ] Austronesian ships ranged in complexity from simple dugout canoes with outriggers or lashed together to large edge-pegged plank-built boats built around a keel made from a dugout canoe. Their designs were unique, evolving from ancient rafts to the characteristic double-hulled, single-outrigger, and double-outrigger designs of Austronesian ships.

[ 23 ] [ 26 ] In the 2nd century AD, people from the Indonesian archipelago already made large ships measuring over 50 m long and standing 4–7 m out of the water. They could carry 600–1000 people and 250–1000 ton cargo. These ships were known as kunlun bo or k'unlun po (崑崙舶, lit. "ship of the Kunlun people") by the Chinese, and kolandiaphonta by the Greeks. They had 4–7 masts and were able to sail against the wind due to the usage of tanja sails . These ships may have reached as far as Ghana .

[ 27 ] : 41 [ 28 ] : 262 [ 29 ] : 347 In the 11th century, a new type of ship called djong or jong was recorded in Java and Bali .

[ 30 ] : 222, 230, 267 [ 31 ] : 82 This type of ship was built using wooden dowels and treenails, unlike the kunlun bo which used vegetal fibres for lashings.

[ 32 ] : 138 In China, miniature models of ships that feature steering oars have been dated to the Warring States period (c. 475–221 BC).

[ 33 ] By the Han dynasty , a well kept naval fleet was an integral part of the military. Centre-line rudders, mounted at the stern, started to appear on Chinese ship models starting in the 1st century AD.

[ d ] [ 33 ] However, these early Chinese ships were fluvial (riverine), and were not seaworthy.

[ 35 ] : 20 [ 36 ] The Chinese only acquired sea-going ship technologies in the 10th-century AD Song dynasty after contact with Southeast Asian k'un-lun po trading ships, leading to the development of the junks .

[ 37 ] [ 35 ] : 20–21 Mediterranean developments [ edit ] Egyptian sailing ship, c. 1422–1411 BC A Roman ship carved on the face of the "Ship Sarcophagus" , c. 2nd century AD The earliest historical evidence of boats is found in Egypt during the 4th millennium BCE [ 1 ] The Greek historian and geographer Agatharchides had documented ship-faring among the early Egyptians : "During the prosperous period of the Old Kingdom , between the 30th and 25th centuries BC , the river -routes were kept in order, and Egyptian ships sailed the Red Sea as far as the myrrh -country." [ 38 ] Sneferu 's ancient cedar wood ship Praise of the Two Lands is the first reference recorded (2613 BC) to a ship being referred to by name.

[ 39 ] The ancient Egyptians were perfectly at ease building sailboats. A remarkable example of their shipbuilding skills was the Khufu ship , a vessel 143 feet (44 m) in length entombed at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza around 2500 BC and found intact in 1954.

The oldest discovered sea faring hulled boat is the Late Bronze Age Uluburun shipwreck off the coast of Turkey, dating back to 1300 BC.

[ 40 ] By 1200 B.C., the Phoenicians were building large merchant ships. In world maritime history, declares Richard Woodman, they are recognized as "the first true seafarers, founding the art of pilotage, cabotage , and navigation" and the architects of "the first true ship, built of planks, capable of carrying a deadweight cargo and being sailed and steered." [ 41 ] Medieval and early modern periods [ edit ] Asian developments [ edit ] A Japanese atakebune from the 16th century During the 15th century, China's Ming dynasty assembled one of the largest and most powerful naval fleets in the world for the diplomatic and power projection voyages of Zheng He . Elsewhere in Japan in the 15th century, one of the world's first iron-clads, "Tekkōsen" ( 鉄甲船 ), literally meaning "iron ships", [ 42 ] was also developed. In Japan, during the Sengoku era from the 15th century to 17th century, the great struggle for feudal supremacy was fought, in part, by coastal fleets of several hundred boats, including the atakebune . In Korea, in the early 15th century during the Joseon era, " Geobukseon "(거북선), was developed.

The empire of Majapahit used large ships called jong , built in northern Java, for transporting troops overseas.

[ 43 ] : 115 The jongs were transport ships which could carry 100–2000 tons of cargo and 50–1000 people, 28.99–88.56 meter in length.

[ 44 ] : 60–62 The exact number of jong fielded by Majapahit is unknown, but the largest number of jong deployed in an expedition is about 400 jongs, when Majapahit attacked Pasai, in 1350.

[ 45 ] European developments [ edit ] Further information: Medieval ships Replica of Magellan's Victoria .

Ferdinand Magellan and Juan Sebastián Elcano led the first expedition that circumnavigated the globe in 1519–1522.

Until the late 13th or early 14th century, European shipbuilding had two separate traditions. In Northern Europe [ e ] clinker construction predominated. In this, the hull planks are fastened together in an overlapping manner. This is a "shell first" construction technique, with the hull shape being defined by the shaping and fitting of the hull planks. The reinforcing frame s (or ribs) are fitted after the planks.

[ 17 ] : 65–66 Clinker construction in this era usually used planks that were cleft (split radially from the log) and could be made thinner and stronger per unit of thickness than the sawn logs, thanks to preserving the radial integrity of the grain.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 17 ] : 53–54 An exception to clinker construction in the Northern European tradition is the bottom planking of the cog . Here, the hull planks are not joined to each other and are laid flush (not overlapped). They are held together by fastening to the frames [ f ] but this is done after the shaping and fitting of these planks. Therefore, this is another case of a "shell first" construction technique.

[ g ] [ 17 ] : 65–66 These Northern European ships were rigged with a single mast setting a square sail . They were steered by rudders hung on the sternpost .

[ 17 ] : 69 In contrast, the ship-building tradition of the Mediterranean was of carvel construction – the fitting of the hull planking to the frames of the hull. Depending on the precise detail of this method, it may be characterised as either "frame first" or "frame-led". In either variant, during construction, the hull shape is determined by the frames, not the planking. The hull planks are not fastened to each other, only to the frames.

[ 17 ] : 69 These Mediterranean ships were rigged with lateen sails on one or more masts (depending on the size of the vessel) and were steered with a side rudder. They are often referred to as "round ships".

[ 17 ] : 68-69 Crucially, the Mediterranean and Northern European traditions merged. Cogs [ h ] are known to have travelled to the Mediterranean in the 12th and 13th centuries. Some aspects of their designs were being copied by Mediterranean ship-builders early in the 14th century. Iconography shows square sails being used on the mainmast but a lateen on the mizzen, [ i ] and a sternpost hung rudder replacing the side rudder. The name for this type of vessel was "coche" or, for a larger example, "carrack". Some of these new Mediterranean types travelled to Northern European waters and, in the first two decades of the 15th century, a few were captured by the English, two of which had previously been under charter to the French. The two-masted rig started to be copied immediately, but at this stage on a clinker hull. The adoption of carvel hulls had to wait until sufficient shipwrights with appropriate skills could be hired, but by late in the 1430s, there were instances of carvel ships being built in Northern Europe, and in increasing numbers over the rest of the century.

[ 17 ] : 69-72 This hybridisation of Mediterranean and Northern European ship types created the full-rigged ship , a three-masted vessel with a square-rigged foremast and mainmast and a lateen sail on the mizzen. This provided most of the ships used in the Age of Discovery , being able to carry sufficient stores for a long voyage and with a rig suited to the open ocean. Over the next four hundred years, steady evolution and development, from the starting point of the carrack , gave types such as the galleon , fluit , East Indiaman , ordinary cargo ships, warships, clippers and many more, all based on this three-masted square-rigged type.

[ 13 ] : 29, passim The transition from clinker to carvel construction facilitated the use of artillery at sea since the internal framing of the hull could be made strong enough to accommodate the weight of guns. It was easier to fit gunports in a carvel hull. As vessels became larger and the demand for ship-building timber affected the size of trees available, clinker construction became limited by the difficulty of finding large enough logs from which to cleave planks. Nonetheless, some clinker vessels approached the size of contemporary carracks.

[ j ] Before the adoption of carvel construction, the increasing size of clinker-built vessels necessitated greater amounts of internal framing of their hulls for strength – something that somewhat lessened the conceptual change to the new technique.

[ 17 ] : 55, 58–60 19th and 20th centuries [ edit ] Painting of the Battle of Trafalgar by Auguste Mayer .

[ 48 ] Italian full-rigged ship Amerigo Vespucci in New York Harbor RMS Titanic departs from Southampton. Her sinking led to tighter safety regulations .

Parallel to the development of warships, ships in service of marine fishery and trade also developed in the period between antiquity and the Renaissance.

Maritime trade was driven by the development of shipping companies with significant financial resources. Canal barges, towed by draft animals on an adjacent towpath , contended with the railway up to and past the early days of the Industrial Revolution . Flat-bottomed and flexible scow boats also became widely used for transporting small cargoes. Mercantile trade went hand-in-hand with exploration, self-financed by the commercial benefits of exploration.

During the first half of the 18th century, the French Navy began to develop a new type of vessel known as a ship of the line , featuring seventy-four guns. This type of ship became the backbone of all European fighting fleets. These ships were 56 metres (184 ft) long and their construction required 2,800 oak trees and 40 kilometres (25 mi) of rope; they carried a crew of about 800 sailors and soldiers. During the 19th century the Royal Navy enforced a ban on the slave trade , acted to suppress piracy , and continued to map the world. Ships and their owners grew with the 19th century Industrial Revolution across Europe and North America, leading to increased numbers of oceangoing ships, as well as other coastal and canal based vessels.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Through more than half of the 19th century and into the early years of the 20th century, steam ships coexisted with sailing vessels. Initially, steam was only viable on shorter routes, typically transporting passengers who could afford higher fares, and mail. Steam went through many developmental steps that gave greater fuel efficiency, thereby increasingly making steamships commercially competitive with sail. Screw propulsion worked better than paddle wheels , but relied, among other things, on the invention of an effective stern gland for the propeller shaft. Higher boiler pressures of 60 pounds per square inch (410 kPa) powering compound engines, were introduced in 1865, making long-distance steam cargo vessels commercially viable on the route from England to China – even before the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869. Within a few years, steam had replaced many of the sailing ships that had served this route. Even greater fuel efficiency was obtained with triple-expansion steam engines – but this had to wait for higher quality steel to be available to make boilers running at 125 pounds per square inch (860 kPa) in SS Aberdeen (1881) . By this point virtually all routes could be served competitively by steamships. Sail continued with some cargoes, where low costs were more important to the shipper than a predictable and rapid journey time.

[ 51 ] : 99–100, passim [ 52 ] [ 53 ] : 106–111 [ 54 ] : 89 The Second Industrial Revolution in particular led to new mechanical methods of propulsion , and the ability to construct ships from metal triggered an explosion in ship design.

[ 55 ] These led to the development of long-distance commercial ships and Ocean liners , as well as technological changes including the Marine steam engine , screw propellers, triple expansion engines and others.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Factors included the quest for more efficient ships, the end of long running and wasteful maritime conflicts, and the increased financial capacity of industrial powers created more specialized ships and other maritime vessels. Ship types built for entirely new functions that appeared by the 20th century included research ships , offshore support vessels (OSVs), Floating production storage and offloading (FPSOs), Pipe and cable laying ships , drill ships and Survey vessels .

[ 58 ] The late 20th century saw changes to ships that included the decline of ocean liners as air travel increased. The rise of container ships from the 1960s onwards dramatically changed the nature of commercial merchant shipping, as containerization led to larger ship sizes, dedicated container routes and the decline of general cargo vessels as well as tramp steaming.

[ 59 ] The late 20th century also saw a rise in cruise ships for tourism around the world.

[ 60 ] 21st century [ edit ] Colombo Express , a 8749 TEU container ship owned and operated by Hapag-Lloyd of Germany In 2016, there were more than 49,000 merchant ships , totaling almost 1.8 billion deadweight tons . Of these 28% were oil tankers , 43% were bulk carriers , and 13% were container ships .

[ 61 ] By 2019, the world's fleet included 51,684 commercial vessels with gross tonnage of more than 1,000 tons , totaling 1.96 billion tons.

[ 62 ] Such ships carried 11 billion tons of cargo in 2018, a sum that grew by 2.7% over the previous year.

[ 63 ] In terms of tonnage, 29% of ships were tankers , 43% are bulk carriers , 13% container ships and 15% were other types.

[ 64 ] In 2008, there were 1,240 warships operating in the world, not counting small vessels such as patrol boats . The United States accounted for 3 million tons worth of these vessels, Russia 1.35 million tons, the United Kingdom 504,660 tons and China 402,830 tons. The 20th century saw many naval engagements during the two world wars , the Cold War , and the rise to power of naval forces of the two blocs. The world's major powers have recently used their naval power in cases such as the United Kingdom in the Falkland Islands and the United States in Iraq .

The size of the world's fishing fleet is more difficult to estimate. The largest of these are counted as commercial vessels, but the smallest are legion.

Fishing vessels can be found in most seaside villages in the world. As of 2004, the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization estimated 4 million fishing vessels were operating worldwide.

[ 65 ] The same study estimated that the world's 29 million fishermen [ 66 ] caught 85,800,000 tonnes (84,400,000 long tons ; 94,600,000 short tons ) of fish and shellfish that year.

[ 67 ] In 2023, the number of ships globally grew by 3.4%.

[ 2 ] In 2024, new ships are increasingly being built with alternative fuel capability to increase sustainability and reduce carbon emissions.

[ 2 ] Alternative ship fuels include LNG , LPG , methanol , biofuel , ammonia and hydrogen among others.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] As of 2024, wind power for ships had received renewed interest for its potential to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Types of ships [ edit ] See also: Lists of ships , List of types of naval vessels , and List of boat types Various vessel types in the Port of Rotterdam Because ships are constructed using the principles of naval architecture that require same structural components, their classification is based on their function such as that suggested by Paulet and Presles, [ 74 ] which requires modification of the components. The categories accepted in general by naval architects are: [ 75 ] High-speed craft – Multihulls including wave piercers , small-waterplane-area twin hull (SWATH), surface effect ships and hovercraft , hydrofoil , wing in ground effect craft (WIG).

Off shore oil vessels – Platform supply vessels , pipe layers , accommodation and crane barges , non and semi-submersible drilling rigs , drill ships , production platforms , floating production storage and offloading units.

Fishing vessels Motorised fishing trawlers , trap setters , seiners , longliners , trollers & factory ships .

Traditional sailing and rowed fishing vessels and boats used for handline fishing Harbour work craft Cable layers Tugboats , dredgers , salvage vessels , tenders , pilot boats .

Floating dry docks , crane vessels , lighterships .

Dry cargo ships – tramp freighters , bulk carriers , cargo liners , container vessels , barge carriers , Ro-Ro ships , refrigerated cargo ships , timber carriers, livestock carriers & light vehicle carriers.

Liquid cargo ships – tankers , oil tankers , liquefied gas carriers , LNG carriers , chemical carriers .

Passenger ships Liners , cruise and special trade passenger (STP) ships Cross-channel, coastal and harbour ferries Luxury and cruising yachts and superyachts Sail training and sailing ships Galleys – biremes , triremes and quinquiremes Recreational boats and craft – rowed, masted and motorised craft Special-purpose vessels – weather and research vessels , deep sea survey vessels , and icebreakers .

Submarines – watercraft capable of independent operation underwater.

Naval ships Warships – aircraft carriers , amphibious warfare ships , battleships , battlecruisers , coastal defence ships , cruisers , destroyers , frigates , corvettes , patrol ships , minesweepers , etc.

Auxiliary ships – ammunition ships , replenishment oilers , repair ships , storeships , troopships , etc.

Hospital ships Some of these are discussed in the following sections.

Inland vessels [ edit ] Passenger ship of Köln-Düsseldorfer on the river Rhine Hurma , Hans and Voima at the Lake Saimaa in the harbour of Imatra , Finland , at a heritage ship meeting in 2009 Freshwater shipping may occur on lakes, rivers and canals. Ships designed for those body of waters may be specially adapted to the widths and depths of specific waterways. Examples of freshwater waterways that are navigable in part by large vessels include the Danube , Mississippi , Rhine , Yangtze and Amazon Rivers, and the Great Lakes .

Great Lakes [ edit ] Lake freighters , also called lakers, are cargo vessels that ply the Great Lakes . The most well-known is SS Edmund Fitzgerald , the latest major vessel to be wrecked on the Lakes. These vessels are traditionally called boats, not ships. Visiting ocean-going vessels are called "salties". Because of their additional beam , very large salties are never seen inland of the Saint Lawrence Seaway . Because the smallest of the Soo Locks is larger than any Seaway lock, salties that can pass through the Seaway may travel anywhere in the Great Lakes. Because of their deeper draft, salties may accept partial loads on the Great Lakes, "topping off" when they have exited the Seaway. Similarly, the largest lakers are confined to the Upper Lakes ( Superior , Michigan , Huron , Erie ) because they are too large to use the Seaway locks, beginning at the Welland Canal that bypasses the Niagara River .

Since the freshwater lakes are less corrosive to ships than the salt water of the oceans, lakers tend to last much longer than ocean freighters. Lakers older than 50 years are not unusual, and as of 2005, all were over 20 years of age.

[ 76 ] SS St. Marys Challenger , built in 1906 as William P Snyder , was the oldest laker still working on the Lakes until its conversion into a barge starting in 2013. Similarly, E.M. Ford , built in 1898 as Presque Isle , was sailing the lakes 98 years later in 1996. As of 2007 E.M. Ford was still afloat as a stationary transfer vessel at a riverside cement silo in Saginaw, Michigan .

Merchant ship [ edit ] Main article: Merchant ship Two modern container ships in San Francisco Merchant ships are ships used for commercial purposes and can be divided into four broad categories: fishing vessels , cargo ships , passenger ships , and special-purpose ships.

[ 77 ] The UNCTAD review of maritime transport categorizes ships as: oil tankers, bulk (and combination) carriers, general cargo ships, container ships, and "other ships", which includes " liquefied petroleum gas carriers, liquefied natural gas carriers, parcel (chemical) tankers, specialized tankers, reefers , offshore supply, tugs, dredgers , cruise , ferries , other non-cargo". General cargo ships include "multi-purpose and project vessels and roll-on/roll-off cargo".

[ 61 ] Modern commercial vessels are typically powered by a single propeller driven by a diesel or, less usually, gas turbine engine ., [ 78 ] but until the mid-19th century they were predominantly square sail rigged. The fastest vessels may use pump-jet engines .

[ citation needed ] Most commercial vessels such as container ships, have full hull-forms (higher Block coefficients ) to maximize cargo capacity.

[ 79 ] Merchant ships and fishing vessels are usually made of steel, although aluminum can be used on faster craft, and fiberglass or wood on smaller vessels.

[ 80 ] Commercial vessels generally have a crew headed by a sea captain , with deck officers and engine officers on larger vessels. Special-purpose vessels often have specialized crew if necessary, for example scientists aboard research vessels .

Fishing boats are generally small, often little more than 30 meters (98 ft) but up to 100 metres (330 ft) for a large tuna or whaling ship . Aboard a fish processing vessel , the catch can be made ready for market and sold more quickly once the ship makes port. Special purpose vessels have special gear. For example, trawlers have winches and arms, stern-trawlers have a rear ramp, and tuna seiners have skiffs. In 2004, 85,800,000 tonnes (84,400,000 long tons ; 94,600,000 short tons ) of fish were caught in the marine capture fishery.

[ 81 ] Anchoveta represented the largest single catch at 10,700,000 tonnes (10,500,000 long tons; 11,800,000 short tons).

[ 81 ] That year, the top ten marine capture species also included Alaska pollock , Blue whiting , Skipjack tuna , Atlantic herring , Chub mackerel , Japanese anchovy , Chilean jack mackerel , Largehead hairtail , and Yellowfin tuna .

[ 81 ] Other species including salmon , shrimp , lobster , clams , squid and crab , are also commercially fished. Modern commercial fishermen use many methods. One is fishing by nets , such as purse seine , beach seine, lift nets, gillnets , or entangling nets. Another is trawling , including bottom trawl .

Hooks and lines are used in methods like long-line fishing and hand-line fishing . Another method is the use of fishing trap .

Cargo ships transport dry and liquid cargo. Dry cargo can be transported in bulk by bulk carriers , packed directly onto a general cargo ship in break-bulk, packed in intermodal containers as aboard a container ship , or driven aboard as in roll-on roll-off ships . Liquid cargo is generally carried in bulk aboard tankers, such as oil tankers which may include both crude and finished products of oil, chemical tankers which may also carry vegetable oils other than chemicals and gas carriers , although smaller shipments may be carried on container ships in tank containers .

[ 82 ] Passenger ships range in size from small river ferries to very large cruise ships . This type of vessel includes ferries , which move passengers and vehicles on short trips; ocean liners , which carry passengers from one place to another; and cruise ships , which carry passengers on voyages undertaken for pleasure, visiting several places and with leisure activities on board, often returning them to the port of embarkation.

Riverboats and inland ferries are specially designed to carry passengers, cargo, or both in the challenging river environment. Rivers present special hazards to vessels. They usually have varying water flows that alternately lead to high speed water flows or protruding rock hazards. Changing siltation patterns may cause the sudden appearance of shoal waters, and often floating or sunken logs and trees (called snags) can endanger the hulls and propulsion of riverboats. Riverboats are generally of shallow draft, being broad of beam and rather square in plan, with a low freeboard and high topsides. Riverboats can survive with this type of configuration as they do not have to withstand the high winds or large waves that are seen on large lakes, seas, or oceans.

Albatun Dos , a tuna boat at work near Victoria, Seychelles Fishing vessels are a subset of commercial vessels, but generally small in size and often subject to different regulations and classification. They can be categorized by several criteria: architecture, the type of fish they catch, the fishing method used, geographical origin, and technical features such as rigging. As of 2004, the world's fishing fleet consisted of some 4 million vessels.

[ 65 ] Of these, 1.3 million were decked vessels with enclosed areas and the rest were open vessels.

[ 65 ] Most decked vessels were mechanized, but two-thirds of the open vessels were traditional craft propelled by sails and oars.

[ 65 ] More than 60% of all existing large fishing vessels [ k ] were built in Japan, Peru, the Russian Federation, Spain or the United States of America.

[ 83 ] Special purpose vessels [ edit ] Main article: Weather ship The weather ship MS Polarfront at sea.

A weather ship was a ship stationed in the ocean as a platform for surface and upper air meteorological observations for use in marine weather forecasting . Surface weather observations were taken hourly, and four radiosonde releases occurred daily.

[ 84 ] It was also meant to aid in search and rescue operations and to support transatlantic flights.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Proposed as early as 1927 by the aviation community, [ 86 ] the establishment of weather ships proved to be so useful during World War II that the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) established a global network of weather ships in 1948, with 13 to be supplied by the United States.

[ 85 ] This number was eventually negotiated down to nine.

[ 87 ] The weather ship crews were normally at sea for three weeks at a time, returning to port for 10-day stretches.

[ 84 ] Weather ship observations proved to be helpful in wind and wave studies, as they did not avoid weather systems like other ships tended to for safety reasons.

[ 88 ] They were also helpful in monitoring storms at sea, such as tropical cyclones .

[ 89 ] The removal of a weather ship became a negative factor in forecasts leading up to the Great Storm of 1987 .

[ 90 ] Beginning in the 1970s, their role became largely superseded by weather buoys due to the ships' significant cost.

[ 91 ] The agreement of the use of weather ships by the international community ended in 1990. The last weather ship was Polarfront , known as weather station M ("Mike"), which was put out of operation on 1 January 2010. Weather observations from ships continue from a fleet of voluntary merchant vessels in routine commercial operation.

Naval vessels [ edit ] American aircraft carrier USS Harry S. Truman and a replenishment ship Naval ships are diverse in types of vessel . They include: surface warships , submarines , and auxiliary ships .

Modern warships are generally divided into seven main categories: aircraft carriers , cruisers , destroyers , frigates , corvettes , submarines and amphibious warfare ships . The distinctions among cruisers, destroyers, frigates, and corvettes are not codified; the same vessel may be described differently in different navies.

Battleships were used during the Second World War and occasionally since then (the last battleships were removed from the U.S. Naval Vessel Register in March 2006), but were made obsolete by the use of carrier-borne aircraft and guided missiles .

[ 92 ] Most military submarines are either attack submarines or ballistic missile submarines . Until the end of World War II the primary role of the diesel/electric submarine was anti-ship warfare, inserting and removing covert agents and military forces, and intelligence-gathering. With the development of the homing torpedo , better sonar systems, and nuclear propulsion , submarines also became able to effectively hunt each other. The development of submarine-launched nuclear and cruise missiles gave submarines a substantial and long-ranged ability to attack both land and sea targets with a variety of weapons ranging from cluster munitions to nuclear weapons .

Most navies also include many types of support and auxiliary vessel, such as minesweepers , patrol boats , offshore patrol vessels , replenishment ships , and hospital ships which are designated medical treatment facilities.

[ 93 ] Fast combat vessels such as cruisers and destroyers usually have fine hulls to maximize speed and maneuverability.

[ 94 ] They also usually have advanced marine electronics and communication systems, as well as weapons.

Architecture [ edit ] Further information: Naval architecture Some components exist in vessels of any size and purpose. Every vessel has a hull of sorts. Every vessel has some sort of propulsion, whether it's a pole, an ox, or a nuclear reactor. Most vessels have some sort of steering system. Other characteristics are common, but not as universal, such as compartments, holds, a superstructure, and equipment such as anchors and winches.

Hull [ edit ] Main article: Hull (watercraft) A ship's hull endures harsh conditions at sea, as illustrated by this reefer ship in bad weather.

For a ship to float, its weight must be less than that of the water displaced by the ship's hull.

[ 95 ] There are many types of hulls, from logs lashed together to form a raft to the advanced hulls of America's Cup sailboats. A vessel may have a single hull (called a monohull design), two in the case of catamarans , or three in the case of trimarans . Vessels with more than three hulls are rare, but some experiments have been conducted with designs such as pentamarans. Multiple hulls are generally parallel to each other and connected by rigid arms.

Hulls have several elements. The bow is the foremost part of the hull. Many ships feature a bulbous bow . The keel is at the very bottom of the hull, extending the entire length of the ship. The rear part of the hull is known as the stern , and many hulls have a flat back known as a transom . Common hull appendages include propellers for propulsion, rudders for steering, and stabilizers to quell a ship's rolling motion. Other hull features can be related to the vessel's work, such as fishing gear and sonar domes .

Hulls are subject to various hydrostatic and hydrodynamic constraints. The key hydrostatic constraint is that it must be able to support the entire weight of the boat, and maintain stability even with often unevenly distributed weight. Hydrodynamic constraints include the ability to withstand shock waves, weather collisions and groundings.

Older ships and pleasure craft often have or had wooden hulls. Steel is used for most commercial vessels. Aluminium is frequently used for fast vessels, and composite materials are often found in sailboats and pleasure craft. Some ships have been made with concrete hulls .

Propulsion systems [ edit ] Main article: Marine propulsion A ship's engine room Propulsion systems for ships fall into three categories: human propulsion, sailing , and mechanical propulsion. Human propulsion includes rowing , which was used even on large galleys . Propulsion by sail generally consists of a sail hoisted on an erect mast, supported by stays and spars and controlled by ropes. Sail systems were the dominant form of propulsion until the 19th century. They are now generally used for recreation and competition, although experimental sail systems, such as the turbosails , rotorsails , and wingsails have been used on larger modern vessels for fuel savings.

Mechanical propulsion systems generally consist of a motor or engine turning a propeller , or less frequently, an impeller or wave propulsion fins .

Steam engines were first used for this purpose, but have mostly been replaced by two-stroke or four-stroke diesel engines, outboard motors, and gas turbine engines on faster ships.

Nuclear reactors producing steam are used to propel warships and icebreakers , and there have been attempts to use them to power commercial vessels (see NS Savannah ).

In addition to traditional fixed and controllable pitch propellers there are many specialized variations, such as contra-rotating and nozzle-style propellers. Most vessels have a single propeller, but some large vessels may have up to four propellers supplemented with transverse thrusters for maneuvring at ports. The propeller is connected to the main engine via a propeller shaft and, in case of medium- and high-speed engines, a reduction gearbox. Some modern vessels have a diesel–electric powertrain in which the propeller is turned by an electric motor powered by the ship's generators.

As environmental sustainability becomes a paramount concern, the maritime industry is exploring cleaner propulsion technologies. Alternatives like LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas), ammonia, and hydrogen are emerging as viable options. LPG is already utilized as fuel for long-distance shipping, [ 96 ] offering a cleaner option with a lower carbon footprint. Meanwhile, hydrogen and ammonia technologies are in development stages for long-haul applications, promising even more significant reductions in emissions and a step closer to achieving carbon-neutral shipping.

Steering systems [ edit ] The rudder and propeller on a newly built ferry For ships with independent propulsion systems for each side, such as manual oars or some paddles , [ l ] steering systems may not be necessary. In most designs, such as boats propelled by engines or sails, a steering system becomes necessary. The most common is a rudder, a submerged plane located at the rear of the hull. Rudders are rotated to generate a lateral force which turns the boat. Rudders can be rotated by a tiller , manual wheels, or electro-hydraulic systems.

Autopilot systems combine mechanical rudders with navigation systems.

Ducted propellers are sometimes used for steering.

Some propulsion systems are inherently steering systems. Examples include the outboard motor , the bow thruster , and the azimuth thruster .

Holds, compartments, and the superstructure [ edit ] Larger boats and ships generally have multiple decks and compartments. Separate berthings and heads are found on sailboats over about 25 feet (7.6 m). Fishing boats and cargo ships typically have one or more cargo holds. Most larger vessels have an engine room, a galley , and various compartments for work. Tanks are used to store fuel, engine oil, and fresh water. Ballast tanks are equipped to change a ship's trim and modify its stability.

Superstructures are found above the main deck. On sailboats, these are usually very low. On modern cargo ships, they are almost always located near the ship's stern. On passenger ships and warships, the superstructure generally extends far forward.

Equipment [ edit ] Shipboard equipment varies from ship to ship depending on such factors as the ship's era, design, area of operation, and purpose. Some types of equipment that are widely found include: [ citation needed ] Masts can be the home of antennas, navigation lights, radar transponders, fog signals, and similar devices often required by law.

Ground tackle comprises the anchor, its chain or cable, and connecting fittings.

[ 97 ] Cargo equipment such as cranes and cargo booms may be used to load and unload cargo and ship's stores.

Safety equipment such as lifeboats , liferafts , and survival suits are carried aboard many vessels for emergency use.

Design considerations [ edit ] Hydrostatics [ edit ] Main article: Fluid statics Ships float in the water at a level where mass of the displaced water equals the mass of the vessel, so that the downwards force of gravity equals the upward force of buoyancy . As a vessel is lowered into the water its weight remains constant but the corresponding weight of water displaced by its hull increases. If the vessel's mass is evenly distributed throughout, it floats evenly along its length and across its beam (width). A vessel's stability is considered in both this hydrostatic sense as well as a hydrodynamic sense, when subjected to movement, rolling and pitching, and the action of waves and wind. Stability problems can lead to excessive pitching and rolling, and eventually capsizing and sinking.

[ 98 ] Hydrodynamics [ edit ] Main article: Fluid dynamics Aerial view of the German battleship Schlesien , showing a 39° wake , characteristic of vessels passing through water.

Vessels move along the three axes: 1. heave, 2. sway, 3. surge, 4. yaw, 5. pitch, 6. roll The advance of a vessel through water is resisted by the water. This resistance can be broken down into several components, the main ones being the friction of the water on the hull and wave making resistance . To reduce resistance and therefore increase the speed for a given power, it is necessary to reduce the wetted surface and use submerged hull shapes that produce low amplitude waves. To do so, high-speed vessels are often more slender, with fewer or smaller appendages. The friction of the water is also reduced by regular maintenance of the hull to remove the sea creatures and algae that accumulate there.

Antifouling paint is commonly used to assist in this. Advanced designs such as the bulbous bow assist in decreasing wave resistance.

A simple way of considering wave-making resistance is to look at the hull in relation to its wake. At speeds lower than the wave propagation speed, the wave rapidly dissipates to the sides. As the hull approaches the wave propagation speed, however, the wake at the bow begins to build up faster than it can dissipate, and so it grows in amplitude . Since the water is not able to "get out of the way of the hull fast enough", the hull, in essence, has to climb over or push through the bow wave. This results in an exponential increase in resistance with increasing speed.

This hull speed is found by the formula: knots ≈ ≈ 1.34 × × L ft {\displaystyle {\mbox{knots}}\approx 1.34\times {\sqrt {L{\mbox{ft}}}}} or, in metric units: knots ≈ ≈ 2.5 × × L m {\displaystyle {\mbox{knots}}\approx 2.5\times {\sqrt {L{\mbox{m}}}}} where L is the length of the waterline in feet or meters.

When the vessel exceeds a speed/length ratio of 0.94, it starts to outrun most of its bow wave , and the hull actually settles slightly in the water as it is now only supported by two wave peaks. As the vessel exceeds a speed/length ratio of 1.34, the hull speed, the wavelength is now longer than the hull, and the stern is no longer supported by the wake, causing the stern to squat, and the bow rise. The hull is now starting to climb its own bow wave, and resistance begins to increase at a very high rate. While it is possible to drive a displacement hull faster than a speed/length ratio of 1.34, it is prohibitively expensive to do so. Most large vessels operate at speed/length ratios well below that level, at speed/length ratios of under 1.0.

For large projects with adequate funding, hydrodynamic resistance can be tested experimentally in a hull testing pool or using tools of computational fluid dynamics .

Vessels are also subject to ocean surface waves and sea swell as well as effects of wind and weather . These movements can be stressful for passengers and equipment, and must be controlled if possible. The rolling movement can be controlled, to an extent, by ballasting or by devices such as fin stabilizers . Pitching movement is more difficult to limit and can be dangerous if the bow submerges in the waves, a phenomenon called pounding. Sometimes, ships must change course or speed to stop violent rolling or pitching.

Lifecycle [ edit ] Lines plan for the hull of a basic cargo ship MS Freedom of the Seas under construction in a shipyard in Turku .

A ship will pass through several stages during its career. The first is usually an initial contract to build the ship, the details of which can vary widely based on relationships between the shipowners , operators, designers and the shipyard . Then, the design phase carried out by a naval architect. Then the ship is constructed in a shipyard. After construction, the vessel is launched and goes into service. Ships end their careers in a number of ways, ranging from shipwrecks to service as a museum ship to the scrapyard .

Design [ edit ] See also: Naval architecture A vessel's design starts with a specification, which a naval architect uses to create a project outline, assess required dimensions, and create a basic layout of spaces and a rough displacement. After this initial rough draft, the architect can create an initial hull design, a general profile and an initial overview of the ship's propulsion. At this stage, the designer can iterate on the ship's design, adding detail and refining the design at each stage.

The designer will typically produce an overall plan, a general specification describing the peculiarities of the vessel, and construction blueprints to be used at the building site. Designs for larger or more complex vessels may also include sail plans, electrical schematics, and plumbing and ventilation plans.

As environmental laws are becoming more strict, ship designers need to create their design in such a way that the ship, when it nears its end-of-term, can be disassembled or disposed easily and that waste is reduced to a minimum.

Construction [ edit ] Main article: Shipbuilding A ship launching at the Northern Shipyard in Gdańsk, Poland Ship construction takes place in a shipyard , and can last from a few months for a unit produced in series, to several years to reconstruct a wooden boat like the frigate Hermione , to more than 10 years for an aircraft carrier. During World War II , the need for cargo ships was so urgent that construction time for Liberty Ships went from initially eight months or longer, down to weeks or even days. Builders employed production line and prefabrication techniques such as those used in shipyards today.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] Hull materials and vessel size play a large part in determining the method of construction. The hull of a mass-produced fiberglass sailboat is constructed from a mold, while the steel hull of a cargo ship is made from large sections welded together as they are built.

Generally, construction starts with the hull, and on vessels over about 30 meters (98 ft), by the laying of the keel. This is done in a drydock or on land. Once the hull is assembled and painted, it is launched. The last stages, such as raising the superstructure and adding equipment and accommodation, can be done after the vessel is afloat.

Once completed, the vessel is delivered to the customer.

Ship launching is often a ceremony of some significance, and is usually when the vessel is formally named. A typical small rowboat can cost under US$100, $1,000 for a small speedboat, tens of thousands of dollars for a cruising sailboat, and about $2,000,000 for a Vendée Globe class sailboat. A 25 meters (82 ft) trawler may cost $2.5 million, and a 1,000-person-capacity high-speed passenger ferry can cost in the neighborhood of $50 million. A ship's cost partly depends on its complexity: a small, general cargo ship will cost $20 million, a Panamax -sized bulk carrier around $35 million, a supertanker around $105 million and a large LNG carrier nearly $200 million. The most expensive ships generally are so because of the cost of embedded electronics: a Seawolf -class submarine costs around $2 billion, and an aircraft carrier goes for about $3.5 billion.

In 2023, the majority of the world's ships (95% of global output) were built in just three countries: China , South Korea and Japan .

[ 2 ] Repair and conversion [ edit ] Able seaman using a needlegun scaler on a mooring winch.

Ships undergo nearly constant maintenance during their career, whether they be underway, pierside, or in some cases, in periods of reduced operating status between charters or shipping seasons.

Most ships, however, require trips to special facilities such as a drydock at regular intervals. Tasks often done at drydock include removing biological growths on the hull, sandblasting and repainting the hull, and replacing sacrificial anodes used to protect submerged equipment from corrosion. Major repairs to the propulsion and steering systems as well as major electrical systems are also often performed at dry dock.

Some vessels that sustain major damage at sea may be repaired at a facility equipped for major repairs, such as a shipyard. Ships may also be converted for a new purpose: oil tankers are often converted into floating production storage and offloading units .

End of service [ edit ] Main article: Ship disposal Workers drag steel plate ashore from beached ships in Chittagong , Bangladesh Most ocean-going cargo ships have a life expectancy of between 20 and 30 years. A sailboat made of plywood or fiberglass can last between 30 and 40 years. Solid wooden ships can last much longer but require regular maintenance. Carefully maintained steel-hulled yachts can have a lifespan of over 100 years.

As ships age, forces such as corrosion, osmosis, and rotting compromise hull strength, and a vessel becomes too dangerous to sail. At this point, it can be scuttled at sea or scrapped by shipbreakers . Ships can also be used as museum ships , or expended to construct breakwaters or artificial reefs .

Many ships do not make it to the scrapyard, and are lost in fires, collisions, grounding , or sinking at sea. The Allies lost some 5,150 ships during World War II .

[ 102 ] Measuring ships [ edit ] One can measure ships in terms of length overall , length between perpendiculars , length of the ship at the waterline , beam (breadth) , depth (distance between the crown of the weather deck and the top of the keelson), draft (distance between the highest waterline and the bottom of the ship) and tonnage . A number of different tonnage definitions exist and are used when describing merchant ships for the purpose of tolls, taxation, etc.

load line mark (left) and load lines (right) In Britain until Samuel Plimsoll 's Merchant Shipping Act of 1876 , ship-owners could load their vessels until their decks were almost awash, resulting in a dangerously unstable condition. Anyone who signed on to such a ship for a voyage and, upon realizing the danger, chose to leave the ship, could end up in jail . Plimsoll, a Member of Parliament , realised the problem and engaged some engineers to derive a fairly simple formula to determine the position of a line on the side of any specific ship's hull which, when it reached the surface of the water during loading of cargo, meant the ship had reached its maximum safe loading level. To this day, that mark, called the " Plimsoll mark ", " freeboard mark " or " load line mark ", [ 103 ] exists on ships' sides, and consists of a circle with a horizontal line through the centre. On the Great Lakes of North America the circle is replaced with a diamond. Because different types of water (summer, fresh, tropical fresh, winter north Atlantic) have different densities, subsequent regulations required painting a group of lines forward of the Plimsoll mark to indicate the safe depth (or freeboard above the surface) to which a specific ship could load in water of various densities. Hence the "ladder" of lines seen forward of the Plimsoll mark to this day. These are called the " load lines " [ 104 ] in the marine industry .

Ship pollution [ edit ] Ship pollution is the pollution of air and water by shipping . It is a problem that has been accelerating as trade has become increasingly globalized, posing an increasing threat to the world's oceans and waterways as globalization continues. It is expected that "shipping traffic to and from the United States is projected to double by 2020." [ 105 ] Because of increased traffic in ocean ports , pollution from ships also directly affects coastal areas. The pollution produced affects biodiversity , climate, food, and human health. However, the degree to which humans are polluting and how it affects the world is highly debated and has been a hot international topic for the past 30 years.

Oil spills [ edit ] Main article: Oil spill The tanker Exxon Valdez spilled 10,800,000 US gallons (8,993,000 imp gal; 40,880,000 L) of oil into Alaska's Prince William Sound .

[ 106 ] Oil spills have devastating effects on the environment. Crude oil contains polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) which are very difficult to clean up, and last for years in the sediment and marine environment.

[ 107 ] Marine species constantly exposed to PAHs can exhibit developmental problems, susceptibility to disease, and abnormal reproductive cycles.

By the sheer amount of oil carried, modern oil tankers must be considered something of a threat to the environment. An oil tanker can carry 2 million barrels (318,000 m 3 ) of crude oil, or 84,000,000 US gallons (69,940,000 imp gal; 318,000,000 L). This is more than six times the amount spilled in the widely known Exxon Valdez incident . In this spill, the ship ran aground and dumped 10,800,000 US gallons (8,993,000 imp gal; 40,880,000 L) of oil into the ocean in March 1989. Despite efforts of scientists, managers, and volunteers, over 400,000 seabirds , about 1,000 sea otters , and immense numbers of fish were killed.

[ 107 ] The International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation has researched 9,351 accidental spills since 1974.

[ 108 ] According to this study, most spills result from routine operations such as loading cargo, discharging cargo, and taking on fuel oil.

[ 108 ] 91% of the operational oil spills were small, resulting in less than 7 tons per spill.

[ 108 ] Spills resulting from accidents like collisions, groundings, hull failures, and explosions are much larger, with 84% of these involving losses of over 700 tons.

[ 108 ] Following the Exxon Valdez spill, the United States passed the Oil Pollution Act of 1990 (OPA-90), which included a stipulation that all tankers entering its waters be double-hulled by 2015. Following the sinkings of Erika (1999) and Prestige (2002), the European Union passed its own stringent anti-pollution packages (known as Erika I, II, and III), which require all tankers entering its waters to be double-hulled by 2010. The Erika packages are controversial because they introduced the new legal concept of "serious negligence".

[ 109 ] Ballast water [ edit ] Main article: Ballast water discharge and the environment A cargo ship pumps ballast water over the side When a large vessel such as a container ship or an oil tanker unloads cargo, seawater is pumped into other compartments in the hull to help stabilize and balance the ship. During loading, this ballast water is pumped out from these compartments.

[ 110 ] One of the problems with ballast water transfer is the transport of harmful organisms. Meinesz [ 111 ] believes that one of the worst cases of a single invasive species causing harm to an ecosystem can be attributed to a seemingly harmless planktonic organism .

Mnemiopsis leidyi , a species of comb jelly that inhabits estuaries from the United States to the Valdés peninsula in Argentina along the Atlantic coast, has caused notable damage in the Black Sea . It was first introduced in 1982, and thought to have been transported to the Black Sea in a ship's ballast water. The population of the comb jelly shot up exponentially and, by 1988, it was wreaking havoc upon the local fishing industry. "The anchovy catch fell from 204,000 tonnes (225,000 short tons ; 201,000 long tons ) in 1984 to 200 tonnes (220 short tons; 197 long tons) in 1993; sprat from 24,600 tonnes (27,100 short tons; 24,200 long tons) in 1984 to 12,000 tonnes (13,200 short tons; 11,800 long tons) in 1993; horse mackerel from 4,000 tonnes (4,410 short tons; 3,940 long tons) in 1984 to zero in 1993." [ 111 ] Now that the comb jellies have exhausted the zooplankton , including fish larvae, their numbers have fallen dramatically, yet they continue to maintain a stranglehold on the ecosystem . Recently the comb jellies have been discovered in the Caspian Sea . Invasive species can take over once occupied areas, facilitate the spread of new diseases , introduce new genetic material, alter landscapes and jeopardize the ability of native species to obtain food. "On land and in the sea, invasive species are responsible for about 137 billion dollars in lost revenue and management costs in the U.S. each year." [ 107 ] Ballast and bilge discharge from ships can also spread human pathogens and other harmful diseases and toxins potentially causing health issues for humans and marine life alike.

[ 112 ] Discharges into coastal waters, along with other sources of marine pollution, have the potential to be toxic to marine plants, animals, and microorganisms , causing alterations such as changes in growth, disruption of hormone cycles, birth defects, suppression of the immune system , and disorders resulting in cancer , tumors , and genetic abnormalities or even death.

[ 107 ] Exhaust emissions [ edit ] Exhaust stack on a container ship.

Exhaust emissions from ships are considered to be a significant source of air pollution . "Seagoing vessels are responsible for an estimated 14 percent of emissions of nitrogen from fossil fuels and 16 percent of the emissions of sulfur from petroleum uses into the atmosphere." [ 107 ] In Europe ships make up a large percentage of the sulfur introduced to the air, "as much sulfur as all the cars, lorries and factories in Europe put together".

[ 113 ] "By 2010, up to 40% of air pollution over land could come from ships." [ 113 ] Sulfur in the air creates acid rain which damages crops and buildings. When inhaled, sulfur is known to cause respiratory problems and increase the risk of a heart attack .

[ 113 ] Ship breaking [ edit ] Main article: Ship breaking Ship breaking or ship demolition is a type of ship disposal involving the breaking up of ships for scrap recycling , with the hulls being discarded in ship graveyards . Most ships have a lifespan of a few decades before there is so much wear that refitting and repair becomes uneconomical. Ship breaking allows materials from the ship, especially steel, to be reused.

Ship breaking near Chittagong , Bangladesh In addition to steel and other useful materials, however, ships (particularly older vessels) can contain many substances that are banned or considered dangerous in developed countries .

Asbestos and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are typical examples. Asbestos was used heavily in ship construction until it was finally banned in most of the developed world in the mid-1980s. Currently, the costs associated with removing asbestos, along with the potentially expensive insurance and health risks, have meant that ship-breaking in most developed countries is no longer economically viable. Removing the metal for scrap can potentially cost more than the scrap value of the metal itself. In most of the developing world, however, shipyards can operate without the risk of personal injury lawsuits or workers' health claims , meaning many of these shipyards may operate with high health risks. Furthermore, workers are paid very low rates with no overtime or other allowances. Protective equipment is sometimes absent or inadequate. Dangerous vapors and fumes from burning materials can be inhaled, and dusty asbestos-laden areas around such breakdown locations are commonplace.

Aside from the health of the yard workers, in recent years, ship breaking has also become an issue of major environmental concern . Many developing nations, in which ship breaking yards are located, have lax or no environmental law , enabling large quantities of highly toxic materials to escape into the environment and causing serious health problems among ship breakers, the local population and wildlife. Environmental campaign groups such as Greenpeace have made the issue a high priority for their campaigns.

[ 114 ] See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Transport portal Admiralty law Airship Auxiliary ship Chartering (shipping) Dynamic positioning Environmental impact of shipping Factory ship Ferry Flag state Fluyt Galleon Galley Glossary of nautical terms (A-L) Glossary of nautical terms (M-Z) Marine electronics Marine fuel management Maritime history Mother ship Nautical operations Naval architecture Naval ship Navy Nuclear marine propulsion Propulsion Sailing Sailor Ship burial Ship transport Ship watching Shipwreck Spaceship Train ferry Vessel safety survey Warship Watercraft Whaler Model ships Ship model Ship model basin Ship replica Lists List of fictional ships List of historical ship types List of Panamax ports List of largest cruise ships List of largest ships by gross tonnage List of longest ships Lists of ships Lists of shipwrecks Ship sizes Aframax Capesize Chinamax Handymax Handysize Maersk Triple E class Malaccamax Panamax Q-Max Seawaymax Suezmax Ultra Large Crude Carrier Valemax VLCC Notes [ edit ] ^ The 1815 Lloyd's Underwriters' Register used 12 different rig types. These were ship, sloop, snow, smack, schooner, schoot, brig, galliot, hoy, dogger, cutter and ketch. Translating these terms into our modern rig names is not necessarily straightforward as some represent something other than the current meaning. The Shipowner's Register of the same date also included barque, lugger and yacht. The barquentine did not come into use until the middle of the 19th century.

[ 11 ] : 21 [ 12 ] : 32 ^ All full-rigged ships have a fore and aft sail on the after-most mast (such as a spanker ). In later ships, square sails were set above this, but early in the period the mizzen may carry just a lateen fore-and-aft sail. This would still be categorised as "ship-rigged".

^ The distance by sea from Alexandria (the main Egyptian grain port during the Roman Empire) to Civitavecchia (the modern port for Rome) is 1,142 nautical miles (2,115 km; 1,314 mi).

[ 20 ] ^ The Chinese rudder has some substantial differences from the pintle and gudgeon-hung rudder that was adopted from Northern Europe into the Mediterranean some time after the middle of the 12th century. Chinese ships of this time did not even have a stern post on which to mount a rudder. Elsewhere, Arab shipwrights used a stern-post mounted rudder which would have been known to Mediterranean mariners before their adoption of the pintle and gudgeon system, but the Arab system used rope lashings between the sternpost and the rudder, not the metal of the Northern European system. The Arab system had no significant adoption in the Mediterranean and had the disadvantage of needing frequent inspection.

[ 34 ] : 7, 120–125 ^ In this context, this Northern European tradition refers to the Atlantic coast of Europe, extending through the North Sea and into the Baltic.

^ More technically, these bottom planks were fastened to the floor s.

^ This less well-known Northern European method may be a continuous tradition going back to the  Romano-Celtic period. "Romano-Celtic" is the term given to the shipbuilding tradition found during the Roman occupation of Celtic parts of Europe. This translates to archaeological sites in Britain, arguably including finds in continental Europe. This method certainly continued into the 17th century as the "bottom-based" construction method used in Dutch shipyards.

^ It is possible that the terminology used in the Mediterranean was not precise enough to differentiate between clinker-built ships and cogs, with the same word being applied to both.

^ Square sails had disappeared from the Mediterranean after the end of the classical period .

^ An example is the Newport medieval ship .

^ UNFAO defines a large fishing vessel as one with gross tonnage over 100 GT.

^ Almost all paddle steamers had a single engine with their paddles permanently coupled, without any clutches, and so could not be used for steering. Only a few examples with separate engines were steerable. For example, the Royal Navy operated diesel–electric harbour tugs with paddles into the 1970s for their superior manoeuvrability.

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Britannica – History of ships ^ a b c d "Review of Maritime Transport 2024" .

UNCTAD . 2024-10-22 . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ Cutler 1999, p. 620.

^ "Ship" .

Wharton's concise dictionary . Universal Law Publishing. 2009. p. 1168.

ISBN 978-81-7534-783-0 .

' Ship' means any vessel used for the carriage of goods by sea.

^ Goldstein, Jack (2014).

101 Amazing Facts about Ships and Boats . Andrews UK Limited. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-78333-525-1 .

^ Cutler, Thomas J. (October 2017).

"Bluejacket's Manual – Of Ships and Boats and ..." Naval History Magazine .

31 (5).

^ Fredrik C. Jonsson (2011).

Maritime sniper manual : precision fire from seaborne platforms . Paladin Press, U S.

ISBN 978-1-61004-669-5 .

OCLC 941718687 .

^ Ridley, Jonathan; Patterson, Christopher (2014).

Ship Stability, Powering and Resistance . Reeds Marine Engineering and Technology. Vol. 13. A&C Black. p. 784.

ISBN 978-1-4081-7614-6 .

^ Faltinsen, Odd M. (2005).

Hydrodynamics of High-Speed Marine Vehicles . Cambridge University Press. p. 454.

ISBN 978-0-521-84568-7 .

^ a b Williams, Charles Frederic (1895), "Vessel", in Merrill, John Houston; Williams, Charles Frederic; Michie, Thomas Johnson; Garland, David Shephard (eds.), Utmost care to Watercourses , The American and English Encyclopædia of Law, vol. 28, Edward Thompson Company, p. 440 ^ MacGregor, David R. (1984).

Merchant sailing ships. 1815–1850: supremacy of sail . London: Conway Maritime Press.

ISBN 0851772943 .

^ Bennett, Jenny (2005).

Sailing rigs: an illustrated guide (1. publ ed.). London: Chatham.

ISBN 1861762437 .

^ a b Reid, Phillip (2020).

The merchant ship in the British Atlantic, 1600–1800: continuity and innovation in a key technology . Leiden Boston: Brill.

ISBN 9789004424081 .

^ Underhill, Harold (1955).

Sailing Ship Rigs and Rigging with authentic plans of famous vessels of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . Glasgow: Brown, Son and Ferguson.

ISBN 0851741762 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Chief of Naval Operations (March 2001).

"The Saga of the Submarine: Early Years to the Beginning of Nuclear Power" . United States Navy. Archived from the original on January 14, 2009 . Retrieved 2008-10-03 .

^ Curzan, Anne (2003-04-24).

Gender Shifts in the History of English . Cambridge University Press. pp.

83– 132.

ISBN 978-1-139-43668-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Adams, Jonathan (2013).

A maritime archaeology of ships : innovation and social change in medieval and early modern Europe (1st ed.). Oxford, UK.

ISBN 978-1-84217-297-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Casson, Lionel (1995).

Ships and seamanship in the ancient world . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0-8018-5130-0 .

^ Jett, Stephen C. (2017).

Ancient ocean crossings : reconsidering the case for contacts with the pre-Columbian Americas . Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press.

ISBN 978-0-8173-1939-7 .

^ "Alexandria – Civitavecchia distance is 1142 NM – SeaRoutes" .

m.classic.searoutes.com . Retrieved 16 June 2022 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Horridge, Adrian (2006). Bellwood, Peter (ed.).

The Austronesians : historical and comparative perspectives . Canberra, ACT.

ISBN 978-0731521326 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Doran, Edwin Jr. (1974).

"Outrigger Ages" .

The Journal of the Polynesian Society .

83 (2): 130– 140. Archived from the original on 2020-01-18 . Retrieved 2019-09-29 .

^ a b Mahdi, Waruno (1999). "The Dispersal of Austronesian boat forms in the Indian Ocean". In Blench, Roger; Spriggs, Matthew (eds.).

Archaeology and Language III: Artefacts languages, and texts . One World Archaeology. Vol. 34. Routledge. pp.

144– 179.

ISBN 978-0415100540 .

^ Kirch, Patrick Vinton (2012).

A Shark Going Inland Is My Chief: The Island Civilization of Ancient Hawai'i . University of California Press. pp.

25– 26.

ISBN 9780520953833 .

^ Gallaher, Timothy (2014).

"The Past and Future of Hala ( Pandanus tectorius ) in Hawaii" . In Keawe, Lia O'Neill M.A.; MacDowell, Marsha; Dewhurst, C. Kurt (eds.).

ʻIke Ulana Lau Hala: The Vitality and Vibrancy of Lau Hala Weaving Traditions in Hawaiʻi . Hawai'inuiakea School of Hawaiian Knowledge; University of Hawai'i Press.

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.1.2571.4648 .

ISBN 9780824840938 .

^ a b Doran, Edwin B. (1981).

Wangka: Austronesian Canoe Origins . Texas A&M University Press.

ISBN 9780890961070 .

^ Dick-Read, Robert (2005).

The Phantom Voyagers: Evidence of Indonesian Settlement in Africa in Ancient Times . Thurlton.

^ Manguin, Pierre-Yves (1993). "Trading Ships of the South China Sea. Shipbuilding Techniques and Their Role in the History of the Development of Asian Trade Networks".

Journal of the Economic and Social History of the Orient : 253– 280.

^ Christie, Anthony (1957). "An Obscure Passage from the "Periplus: ΚΟΛΑΝΔΙΟϕΩΝΤΑ ΤΑ ΜΕΓΙΣΤΑ" ".

Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London .

19 : 345– 353.

doi : 10.1017/S0041977X00133105 .

S2CID 162840685 .

^ Hauser-Schäublin, Brigitta; Ardika, I Wayan, eds. (2008).

"Burials, Texts and Rituals: Ethnoarchaeological Investigations in North Bali, Indonesia" .

Göttinger Beiträge zur Ethnologie .

doi : 10.17875/gup2008-416 .

ISBN 978-3-940344-12-0 .

ISSN 2512-6814 .

^ Jákl, Jiří (2020).

"The Sea and Seacoast in Old Javanese Court Poetry: Fishermen, Ports, Ships, and Shipwrecks in the Literary Imagination" .

Archipel .

100 (100): 69– 90.

doi : 10.4000/archipel.2078 .

ISSN 0044-8613 .

S2CID 229391249 .

^ Manguin, Pierre-Yves (2021).

"The assembly of hulls in Southeast Asian shipbuilding traditions: from lashings to treenails" .

Archaeonautica .

21 (21): 137– 140.

doi : 10.4000/archaeonautica.2397 .

ISSN 0154-1854 .

S2CID 251869471 .

^ a b Tom, K.S. (1989).

Echoes from Old China: Life, Legends, and Lore of the Middle Kingdom . Honolulu: The Hawaii Chinese History Center of the University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 0-8248-1285-9 . pp. 103–104.

^ Mott, Lawrence V. (1997).

The development of the rudder: a technological tale . College Station: Texas A&M university press.

ISBN 0890967237 .

^ a b Pham, Charlotte Minh-Hà L. (2012). "Unit 14: Asian Shipbuilding (Training Manual for the UNESCO Foundation Course on the Protection and Management of the Underwater Cultural Heritage)".

Training Manual for the UNESCO Foundation Course on the Protection and Management of Underwater Cultural Heritage in Asia and the Pacific . Bangkok: UNESCO Bangkok, Asia and Pacific Regional Bureau for Education.

ISBN 978-92-9223-414-0 .

^ Maguin, Pierre-Yves (September 1980). "The Southeast Asian Ship: An Historical Approach".

Journal of Southeast Asian Studies .

11 (2): 266– 276.

doi : 10.1017/S002246340000446X .

JSTOR 20070359 .

S2CID 162220129 .

^ Johnstone, Paul (1980).

The Seacraft of Prehistory . Cambridge: Harvard University Press. pp.

93– 4.

ISBN 978-0674795952 .

^ Agatharchides (1912).

Periplus of the Erythraean Sea : Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century, Translated from the Greek and Annotated . in Wilfred Harvey Schoff (Secretary of the Commercial Museum of Philadelphia ) with a foreword by W.P. Wilson, Sc. Director, The Philadelphia Museums . New York: Longmans, Green, and Co. pp. 50, 57 (for quote).

^ Anzovin, item # 5393, p. 385 Reference to a ship with a name appears in an inscription of 2613 BC that recounts the shipbuilding achievements of the fourth-dynasty Egyptian pharaoh Sneferu. He was recorded as the builder of a cedarwood vessel called "Praise of the Two Lands." ^ Pulak, Cemal (1998). "The Uluburun shipwreck: an overview".

International Journal of Nautical Archaeology .

27 (3): 188.

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-9270.1998.tb00803.x .

^ Woodman, Richard (1987).

The History of the Ship . New York: Lyons Press. p. 16.

Cabotage refers to navigation along the coastline ^ Turnbull, Stephen (1996).

Samurai Warfare . London: Cassell & Co. p. 102.

ISBN 1-85409-280-4 .

^ Bowring, Philip (2019).

Empire of the Winds: The Global Role of Asia's Great Archipelago . London, New York: I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd.

ISBN 9781788314466 .

^ Averoes, Muhammad (2022).

"Re-Estimating the Size of Javanese Jong Ship" .

HISTORIA: Jurnal Pendidik Dan Peneliti Sejarah .

5 (1): 57– 64.

doi : 10.17509/historia.v5i1.39181 .

S2CID 247335671 .

^ Hill (June 1960). " Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai ".

Journal of the Malaysian Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society .

33 : p. 98 and 157: "Then he directed them to make ready all the equipment and munitions of war needed for an attack on the land of Pasai – about four hundred of the largest junks, and also many barges (malangbang) and galleys." See also Nugroho (2011). p. 270 and 286, quoting Hikayat Raja-Raja Pasai , 3: 98: " Sa-telah itu, maka di-suroh baginda musta'idkan segala kelengkapan dan segala alat senjata peperangan akan mendatangi negeri Pasai itu, sa-kira-kira empat ratus jong yang besar-besar dan lain daripada itu banyak lagi daripada malangbang dan kelulus ." (After that, he is tasked by His Majesty to ready all the equipment and all weapons of war to come to that country of Pasai, about four hundred large jongs and other than that much more of malangbang and kelulus.) ^ Bjerg, Line; Lind, John H.; Sindbæk, Søren Michael (2013).

From Goths to Varangians: Communication and Cultural Exchange between the Baltic and the Black Sea . Aarhus Universitetsforlag. p. 306.

ISBN 978-87-7124-425-0 .

^ Gawronski, Jerzy; Holk, André van; Schokkenbroek, Joost (2017-09-25).

Ships And Maritime Landscapes: Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Symposium on Boat and Ship Archaeology, Amsterdam 2012 . Barkhuis. p. 320.

ISBN 978-94-92444-29-5 .

^ Auguste Mayer's picture as described by the official website of the Musée national de la Marine (in French) Archived October 18, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Woodman, Richard (2009).

Masters Under God . Stroud, Gloucestershire: History Press Limited.

ISBN 978-0-7524-4820-6 .

OCLC 604940166 .

^ Aldcroft, Derek Howard (1983).

Transport in the Industrial Revolution . Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp.

1– 28.

ISBN 978-0-7190-0839-9 .

^ Corbett, E C B (1993). "4: The Screw Propeller and Merchant Shipping 1840–1865". In Gardiner, Robert; Greenhill, Dr Basil (eds.).

The Advent of Steam – The Merchant Steamship before 1900 . Conway Maritime Press. pp.

83– 105.

ISBN 0-85177-563-2 .

^ Jarvis, Adrian (1993). "9: Alfred Holt and the Compound Engine". In Gardiner, Robert; Greenhill, Dr Basil (eds.).

The Advent of Steam – The Merchant Steamship before 1900 . Conway Maritime Press. pp.

158– 159.

ISBN 0-85177-563-2 .

^ Griffiths, Denis (1993). "Chapter 5: Triple Expansion and the First Shipping Revolution". In Gardiner, Robert; Greenhill, Dr. Basil (eds.).

The Advent of Steam – The Merchant Steamship before 1900 . Conway Maritime Press Ltd. pp.

106– 126.

ISBN 0-85177-563-2 .

^ Gardiner, Robert J; Greenhill, Basil (1993).

Sail's Last Century : the Merchant Sailing Ship 1830–1930 . London: Conway Maritime Press.

ISBN 0-85177-565-9 .

^ Fox, Stephen (2004).

Transatlantic . Harper Collins.

ISBN 978-0-06-095549-6 .

^ Morton, Thomas D. (2008).

Reeds Vol 9: Steam Engineering Knowledge for Marine Engineers . Thomas Reed.

ISBN 978-0-7136-6736-3 .

^ Munro-Smith, Ross (2020).

Ships and naval architecture . London: Institute of Maritime Engineering, Science and Technology.

ISBN 978-1-85609-896-0 .

^ 21st century seamanship . Livingston: Witherby Publishing Group . 2015. p. 179.

ISBN 978-1-85609-632-4 .

^ Levinson, Marc (2016-04-05).

The Box . Princeton Oxford: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-17081-7 .

^ Dowling, Ross; Weeden, Clare (2017).

Cruise Ship Tourism, 2nd Edition . Wallingford Boston, MA: CABI.

ISBN 978-1-78064-608-4 .

^ a b Hoffmann, Jan; Asariotis, Regina; Benamara, Hassiba; Premti, Anila; Valentine, Vincent; Yousse, Frida (2016), "Review of Maritime Transport 2016" (PDF) , Review of Maritime Transport , United Nations: 104, ISBN 978-92-1-112904-5 , ISSN 0566-7682 ^ "UNCTAD Review of maritime transport 2019, p. 37" .

^ UNCTAD Review of maritime transport 2019, p. 7.

^ UNCTAD Review of maritime transport 2019, p. 29.

^ a b c d UNFAO, 2007, p. 25.

^ UNFAO 2005, p. 6.

^ UNFAO 2005, p. 9.

^ "WhatsNewNews" .

International Maritime Organization . 2023-03-09 . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ "Alternative fuels: the options" .

DNV . 2020-01-01 . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ Wang, Qiuwen; Zhang, Hu; Huang, Jiabei; Zhang, Pengfei (2023-01-04).

"The use of alternative fuels for maritime decarbonization: Special marine environmental risks and solutions from an international law perspective" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

9 . Frontiers Media SA.

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2022.1082453 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Leicester, John (2 December 2024).

"Climate solution: Sails make a comeback in shipping, to dent its huge carbon footprint" . Washington Post . Retrieved 4 December 2024 .

^ Favino, Caterina.

"Navigating Towards Sustainability: Wind-Powered Cargo Ships and the Future of the Shipping Industry" .

Earth.org . Retrieved 4 December 2024 .

^ Kennedy, Pagan.

"The Climate Crisis Gives Sailing Ships a Second Wind" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 4 December 2024 .

^ Paulet, Dominique; Presles, Dominique (1999).

Architecture navale, connaissance et pratique (in French). Paris: Éditions de la Villette.

ISBN 978-2-903539-46-7 .

^ "Naval architecture" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-09-04 .

^ Office of Data and Economic Analysis, 2006, p. 2.

^ UNCTAD 2007, p. xii uses a similar, but slightly more detailed classification system.

^ "Different Types of Marine Propulsion Systems Used in the Shipping World" .

www.marineinsight.com . 25 August 2019 . Retrieved 2020-05-14 .

^ 21st century seamanship . Livingston: Witherby Publishing Group . 2015. p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-85609-632-4 .

^ 21st century seamanship . Livingston: Witherby Publishing Group . 2015. p. 434.

ISBN 978-1-85609-632-4 .

^ a b c UNFAO, 2007, p. 11.

^ Gubbins, Edmund J. (1986).

The Shipping Industry: The Technology and Economics of Specialisation . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-2-88124-063-8 .

^ UNFAO, 2007, p. 28.

^ a b c Malcolm Francis Willoughby (June 1980).

The U.S. Coast Guard in World War II . Arno Press. pp.

127– 30.

ISBN 978-0-405-13081-6 .

^ a b "Britain's First Weather Ship" .

Popular Mechanics . Vol. 89, no. 1. Hearst Magazines. January 1948. p. 136.

ISSN 0032-4558 .

^ George Lee Dowd, Jr. (August 1927).

"The First Plane to Germany" .

Popular Science . Vol. 111, no. 2. Popular Science Publishing Company, Inc. p. 121.

^ Hans Ulrich Roll (1965).

Physics of the marine atmosphere . Academic Press. pp.

14 –15.

ISBN 978-0-12-593650-7 .

^ Stanislaw R. Massel (1996).

Ocean surface waves: their physics and prediction . World Scientific. pp.

369– 71.

ISBN 978-981-02-2109-6 .

^ Carl O. Erickson (March 1967).

"Some Aspects of the Development of Hurricane Dorothy" (PDF) .

Monthly Weather Review .

95 (3): 121– 30.

Bibcode : 1967MWRv...95..121E .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.395.1891 .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0493(1967)095<0121:SAOTDO>2.3.CO;2 . Retrieved 2011-01-18 .

^ "Romeo Would Have Spied the Storm" .

New Scientist . Vol. 116, no. 1583. IPC Magazines. 1987-10-22. p. 22.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ National Research Council (U.S.). Ocean Science Committee, National Research Council (U.S.). Study Panel on Ocean Atmosphere Interaction (1974).

The role of the ocean in predicting climate: a report of workshops conducted by Study Panel on Ocean Atmosphere Interaction under the auspices of the Ocean Science Committee of the Ocean Affairs Board, Commission on Natural Resources, National Research Council . National Academies. p. 40.

^ With the addition of corvettes, this is the categorization used at United States Navy .

"U.S. Navy Ships" . United States Navy. Archived from the original on 2008-04-10 . Retrieved 2008-04-20 .

^ Hospital Ship [ permanent dead link ] (definition via WordNet , Princeton University ) ^ Cutler, 1999, p. 224.

^ "Boats – Why do they float?" . Better Planet Education (formerly YPTE).

Archived from the original on Dec 31, 2012 . Retrieved 16 September 2024 .

^ "LPG Propulsion Explained" .

BW LPG . Retrieved 2024-04-04 .

^ "Ground tackle definition" .

Collins English Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2024 . Retrieved 2021-03-06 .

^ Chakraborty, Soumya (2021-01-09).

"Ship Stability – What Makes a Ship Unstable?" .

Marine Insight . Retrieved 2021-10-13 .

^ Sawyer, L.A. and Mitchell, W.H.

The Liberty Ships: The History of the "Emergency" Type Cargo Ships Constructed in the United States During the Second World War, pp. 7–10, 2nd Edition, Lloyd's of London Press Ltd., London. 1985.

ISBN 1-85044-049-2 .

^ Jaffee, Capt. Walter W. (1997).

The Lane Victory: The Last Victory Ship in War and Peace (2nd ed.). Palo Alto, California: Glencannon Press. pp.

4– 9, 15– 32.

ISBN 0-9637586-9-1 .

^ Herman, Arthur (2012).

Freedom's Forge: How American Business Produced Victory in World War II . New York: Random House. pp.

135– 36, 178– 80.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6964-4 .

^ Albion, Robert Greenhalgh, Pope, Jennie Barnes (1968).

Sea Lanes in Wartime – The American Experience 1775–1945; 2nd edition . Archon Books.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ CLL 1966 , pp. 172–174, Regulation 5.

^ CLL 1966 , pp. 174–178, Regulation 6.

^ Watson, T. (30 August 2004).

"Ship pollution clouds USA's skies" .

USAtoday.com . Retrieved November 1, 2006 .

^ "Frequently asked questions about the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill" . State of Alaska. Archived from the original on 2006-09-25.

^ a b c d e Panetta, L.E. (Chair) (2003). America's living oceans: charting a course for sea change [Electronic Version, CD] Pew Oceans Commission.

^ a b c d "International Tanker Owners Pollution Federation Statistics" . Itopf.com. 2005-06-09. Archived from the original on 2020-12-16 . Retrieved 2009-04-21 .

^ European Parliament (2005).

Directive 2005/35/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 7 September 2005 on ship-source pollution and on the introduction of penalties for infringements . Retrieved 2008-02-22 .

^ McGrath, Matt (2013-05-05).

"Scientists map global routes of ship-borne invasive species" .

BBC News . Retrieved 4 May 2015 .

^ a b Meinesz, A. (2003). Deep Sea Invasion.

The Impact of Invasive Species . PBS: NOVA. Retrieved November 26, 2006, from https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/algae/impact.html ^ National Research Council, Committee on the Ocean's Role in Human Health, Ocean Studies Board, Commission on Geosciences, Environment, and Resources. (1999).

From monsoons to microbes: understanding the ocean's role in human health . Washington, DC: National Academy Press ^ a b c Harrabin, R. (25 June 2003).

"EU Faces Ship Clean-up Call" .

BBC News . Retrieved November 1, 2006 .

^ "Shipbreaking" . Greenpeace. March 16, 2006. Archived from the original on October 12, 2002 . Retrieved 2007-08-27 .

Sources [ edit ] Anzovin, Steven (2000).

Famous First Facts (International ed.). H.W. Wilson Company.

ISBN 978-0-8242-0958-2 .

Bowditch, Nathaniel (2002).

The American Practical Navigator . Bethesda, MD: National Imagery and Mapping Agency .

ISBN 978-0-939837-54-0 . Archived from the original on 2007-06-24.

Central Intelligence Agency (2007).

CIA World Factbook 2008 . Skyhorse Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-60239-080-5 . Retrieved 2008-02-22 .

Chatterton, Edward Keble (1915).

Sailing Ships and Their Story: The Story of Their Development from the Earliest Times to the Present Day . Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company.

Cotterill, Charles Clement; Little, Edward Delanoy (1868).

Ships and sailors, ancient and modern . London: Seeley, Jackson and Halliday.

Cutler, Thomas J. (1999).

The Bluejacket's Manual (Bluejacket's Manual, 22nd ed) . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-065-6 .

Cutler, Thomas J. (December 2003).

Dutton's Nautical Navigation (15th ed.). Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press.

ISBN 978-1-55750-248-3 .

" Knock Nevis (7381154)" .

Miramar Ship Index . Retrieved 2016-05-17 .

Fisheries and Aquacultures Department (2007).

"The Status of the Fishing Fleet" .

The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2006 . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. Archived from the original on 2008-04-12 . Retrieved 2008-04-20 .

Georgen, William (2005).

Stability and Trim for the Ship's Officer . Centreville, MD: Cornell Maritime Press.

ISBN 978-0-87033-564-8 .

Hayler, William B.; Keever, John M. (2003).

American Merchant Seaman's Manual . Cornell Maritime Pr.

ISBN 978-0-87033-549-5 .

Huber, Mark (2001).

Tanker operations: a handbook for the person-in-charge (PIC) . Cambridge, MD: Cornell Maritime Press.

ISBN 978-0-87033-528-0 .

Lavery, Brian (2004).

Ship: The Epic Story of Maritime Adventure (Smithsonian) . New York: DK Publishing Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7566-0496-7 .

Maloney, Elbert S. (December 2003).

Chapman Piloting and Seamanship (64th ed.). New York: Hearst Communications.

ISBN 978-1-58816-089-8 .

Martin, William Robert (1911).

"Navigation" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

284– 298.

Office of Data and Economic Analysis (July 2006).

"World Merchant Fleet 2001–2005" (PDF) . United States Maritime Administration. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 21, 2007.

Overseas Shipholding Group (2008-02-22).

"Overseas Shipholding Group Fleet List" . Overseas Shipholding Group. Archived from the original on 2008-12-09.

Sawyer, L.A.; Mitchell, W.O. (1987).

Sailing ship to supertanker: the hundred-year story of British Esso and its ships . Lavenham, Suffolk: Terence Dalton.

ISBN 978-0-86138-055-8 .

Singh, Baljit (July 11, 1999).

"The world's biggest ship" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 2008-04-07 .

Turpin, Edward A.; McEwen, William A. (1980).

Merchant Marine Officers' Handbook (4th ed.). Centreville, MD: Cornell Maritime Press.

ISBN 978-0-87033-056-8 .

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (2006).

Review of Maritime Transport, 2006 (PDF) . New York and Geneva: United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-28 . Retrieved 2008-04-17 .

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) (2007).

Review of Maritime Transport, 2007 (PDF) . New York and Geneva: United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-12-07 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

Stopford, Martin (1997).

Maritime economics . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-15309-6 .

Watts, Philip (1911).

"Ship" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

880– 970.

Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization (1966).

"International Convention on Load Lines, 1966 (with annexes)" (PDF) .

United Nations Treaty Series . Vol. 640. London. pp.

133– 300.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) v t e Fishing vessels Commercial Commercial fishing boats Drifters Factory ships Fishing fleet Longliners Research vessels Seiners Trawlers Whalers Traditional Traditional fishing boats Armadahan Awang Bagan Bago Bangka Basnigan Bawley Bigiw Bokkura Brixham trawler Caïque Camakau Cape Islander Chasse-marée Chhot Coble Coracle Couta Currach Dhoni Dogger Dugout Falkuša Felucca Fembøring Ferilla Fifie Frejgatina Friendship sloop Gableboat Galway hooker Herring buss Ipanitika Jongkong Jangada Jukung Junkun Kajjik Kaep Kakap Kolae Korkor Kulibo Lakana Lepa Lepa-lepa Lis-alis Londe Lugger Luzzu Mackinaw Mayang Monterey clipper Nobby Nordland Ontang Orembai Owong Paduwang Pajala Panineman Paopao Paraw Patorani Pelang Perahu payang Peter boat Pirogue Poveiro Pump boat Reed boat Sandeq Salambaw Sampan Sgoth Shad boat Sixareen Smack Sneakbox Takia Tatara Tataya Va'a Vinta Voadeira Wa Waka Well smack Tipnol Yawl Yoal Dories Banks Cape Ann Gloucester McKenzie River Swampscott Oyster boats Bugeye Buy-boat Deadrise Log canoe Pungy Schooners Sharpie Skipjack Recreational Bass boat Farley Builders and designers Philip C. Bolger Category v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category v t e Modern merchant ships Overviews Ship Cargo ship Cargo Maritime transport Freight transport Merchant marine Maritime history Shipping line Dry cargo Barge Bulk carrier Car float Chain boat Coastal trading vessel Collier Container ship Heavy-lift ship Hopper barge Lake freighter Lighter aboard ship Livestock carrier Reefer ship Roll-on/roll-off (RORO) Train ferry Tankers Chemical tanker Floating production storage and offloading (FPSO) Gas carrier Hydrogen tanker LNG carrier LPG carrier LEG carrier Oil tanker Passenger Cable ferry Cargo liner Cruise ship Cruiseferry Ferry Narrowboat Ocean liner Roll-on/roll-off (RORO) Train ferry Support Anchor handling tug supply vessel Diving support vessel Emergency tow vessel Fireboat Platform supply vessel Pusher Salvage tug Tender Tugboat Other types Cable layer Crane vessel Dredger Drillship Fishing vessel Floating restaurant Icebreaker Merchant submarine Narco-submarine Pipe-laying ship Research vessel Riverboat Semi-submersible Snagboat Related Nautical operations Affreightment Admiralty law International Chamber of Shipping List of merchant navy capacity by country v t e Types of sailing vessels and rigs Overviews Age of Sail Maritime history Age of Discovery Sailing rigs Bermuda rig Crab claw Fore-and-aft rig Gaff rig Gunter rig Junk rig Lateen rig Ljungström rig Lug rig Mast aft rig Pinisi rig Square rig Tanja rig By sailing rigs Barque Barquentine Brig Brigantine Catboat Cutter Full-rigged ship Jackass-barque Ketch Mistico Schooner Sloop Snow Yawl Multihull vessels ʻalia Amatasi Baurua Bigiw Camakau Catamaran Drua Guilalo Jukung Kaep Kalia Karakoa Kora kora Lakatoi Lanong Outrigger canoe Pahi Paraw Pentamaran Proa Quadrimaran Takia Tepukei Tipairua Tongiaki Trimaran Ungalawa Va'a-tele Vaka katea Vinta Wa Naval and merchant sailing ships and other vessels (by origin date) Ancient Balangay Boita Borobudur ship Dhow Fire ship Galley Penteconter Bireme Trireme Quadriremes Tessarakonteres Dromon Junk K'un-lun po Lepa Mtepe Uru Post-classical Balinger Benawa Birlinn Bomb vessel Cog Hulk Jong Knarr Koch Kondura Longship Malangbang Shitik Tongkang Zabra 15th c.

Carrack Chinese treasure ship Caravel Ghurab Lancaran Hoy Trabaccolo 16th c.

Crommesteven Galiot Galleon Galleass Ghali Flyboat Fluyt Full-rigged pinnace Lorcha Man-of-war Manchua Panokseon Patache Speronara Square-rigged caravel ( round or de armada ) Xebec 17th c.

Bermuda sloop Corvette Frigate Galeas Koff Pink Polacca Ship of the line 18th c.

Bilander Chialoup Chinaman Baltimore Clipper East Indiaman Gallivat Garay Grab Gundalow Lanong Padewakang Post ship 74-gun Ship of the line Sloop-of-war Toop Trincadour Slave ship West Indiaman 19th c.

Blackwall frigate Clipper Down Easter Golekan Iron-hulled sailing ship Warship Janggolan Lambo Leti leti Palari Tamar West Country Windjammer 20th c.

Montagu whaler Nordic Folkboat Fishing vessels Bagan Bago Barca-longa Falkuša Felucca Fifie Gableboat Herring buss Jangada Jukung Lugger Masula Mayang Patorani Nordland Sixareen Sgoth Smack Tartane Well smack Yoal Recreational vessels Dinghy Ljungström sailboat Mast aft rig Pocket cruiser Sailing hydrofoil Sailing yacht Sportsboat Trailer sailer Wharrams Windsurfer Yacht Special terms Inflatable Lashed lug Razee Sewn Tall ship Treenailed ULDB Other types Bristol Channel pilot cutter Floating restaurant Fusta Mersey flat Norfolk punt Norfolk wherry Pausik Pinnace (ship's boat) Pram Scow Sneakbox Thames sailing barge Wherry Related Nautical operations v t e Naval ships and warships in 19th and 20th centuries Naval ship classes in service submarine auxiliary Operational zones Brown-water navy Green-water navy Blue-water navy Gun placement Broadside Central battery Casemate Turrets Aircraft carriers Aircraft cruiser Amphibious assault ship Anti-submarine warfare carrier Balloon carrier Battlecarrier CAM ship Escort carrier Fighter catapult ship Fleet carrier Flight deck cruiser Helicopter carrier Light aircraft carrier Merchant aircraft carrier Seaplane tender Supercarrier Battleships Coastal defence ship Dreadnought Fast battleship Pre-dreadnought battleship Super-dreadnought ( Standard-type battleship ) Treaty battleship Cruisers Armored cruiser Battlecruiser Guided missile cruiser Heavy cruiser Pocket battleship Light cruiser Merchant raider Protected cruiser Scout cruiser Strike cruiser Torpedo cruiser Unprotected cruiser Escort Aviso Convoy rescue ship Destroyer Destroyer escort Destroyer leader Escort destroyer Escorteur Frigate Guided-missile destroyer Kaibōkan Sloop Transport Amphibious transport dock Amphibious warfare ship Attack transport Dock landing ship Landing craft Landing craft carrier Landing Craft Support Landing Ship Heavy Landing ship, infantry Landing Ship Logistics Landing Ship Medium Landing Ship, Tank Landing Ship Vehicle Troopship Patrol craft Armed boarding steamer Armed yacht Coastal motor boat Corvette Gunboat Harbour defence motor launch Motor launch Naval drifter Naval trawler Ocean boarding vessel Patrol boat Q-ship Submarine chaser Torpedo boat Fast attack craft E-boat MAS MGB Missile boat MTB MTM MTSM PT boat Shin'yō Mine warfare Danlayer Destroyer minesweeper Mine countermeasures vessel Mine planter Minehunter Minelayer Minesweeper Command and support Amenities ship Ammunition ship Auxiliary repair dock Auxiliary ship Collier Combat stores ship Command ship Crane vessel Depot ship Destroyer tender Dispatch boat Fast combat support ship Flotilla leader General stores issue ship Hospital ship Joint support ship Naval tugboat Net laying ship Repair ship Replenishment oiler Submarine tender Submarines Attack submarine Ballistic missile submarine Coastal submarine Cruise missile submarine Cruiser submarine Deep-submergence vehicle DSRV Fleet submarine Human torpedo Midget submarine Submarine aircraft carrier Wet sub Miscellaneous Armed merchantman Arsenal ship Barracks ship Breastwork monitor Capital ship Drone carrier Flagship Floating battery Littoral combat ship Monitor Mother ship River monitor Related Ship types Sailing vessels Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Artists KulturNav Other NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐jvrfr
Cached time: 20250818132015
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.786 seconds
Real time usage: 2.048 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19759/1000000
Revision size: 114915/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 367809/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14742/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 464926/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.982/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13887040/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1541.627      1 -total
 42.76%  659.206      3 Template:Reflist
 23.19%  357.454     70 Template:Cite_book
 11.19%  172.484     19 Template:Cite_web
  9.31%  143.545     32 Template:R/superscript
  7.52%  115.926     23 Template:Rp
  6.14%   94.639      6 Template:Navbox
  4.65%   71.666     96 Template:R/where
  4.63%   71.442     12 Template:Cite_journal
  4.35%   67.020      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27008:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132015 and revision id 1303830650. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ship&oldid=1303830650 " Category : Ships Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with dead external links from June 2017 CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 08:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ship 154 languages Add topic

