Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Measurements Toggle Measurements subsection 1.1 Income 1.1.1 Income distribution within individual countries 1.2 Wealth 1.2.1 Wealth distribution between countries 1.2.2 Wealth distribution within individual countries 1.3 Consumption 1.3.1 Consumption distribution between countries 1.3.2 Consumption distribution within individual countries 2 Factors proposed to affect economic inequality Toggle Factors proposed to affect economic inequality subsection 2.1 Labour market 2.2 Taxes 2.3 Education 2.4 Economic liberalism, deregulation and decline of unions 2.5 Technology 2.5.1 Automation 2.6 Globalization 2.7 Gender pay gap 2.8 Race 2.8.1 Westernized Nations 2.8.2 Latin America 2.8.3 Africa 2.8.4 Asia 2.9 Economic development 2.10 Wealth concentration 2.11 Rent seeking 2.12 Finance industry 2.13 Global warming and climate change 2.14 Politics 2.15 Cognitive biases 3 Mitigating factors Toggle Mitigating factors subsection 3.1 Policy responses intended to mitigate 4 Effects 5 Perspectives Toggle Perspectives subsection 5.1 Socialist perspectives 5.2 Meritocracy 5.3 Liberal perspectives 5.4 Social justice arguments 5.5 Effects on social welfare 5.6 Capabilities approach 5.7 Societal acceptance 5.8 Public perception and accuracy thereof 5.9 Arguments that economic inequality is not a problem 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Historical 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Economic inequality 45 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Basa Bali Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distribution of income or wealth between different groups For the more general social form, see Social inequality .

For other uses, see Inequality .

"Rich and poor" redirects here. For other uses, see Rich and Poor .

Global map of countries by high inequality (based on Gini index), 2022, according to the Poverty and Inequality Platform (PIP) [ 1 ] <30 30–35 35–40 40–45 45–50 50+ Global share of wealth by wealth group, Credit Suisse, 2021 Share of income of the top 1% for selected developed countries, 1975 to 2015 Economic inequality is an umbrella term for three concepts: income inequality , how the total sum of money paid to people is distributed among them; wealth inequality , how the total sum of wealth owned by people is distributed among the owners; and consumption inequality , how the total sum of money spent by people is distributed among the spenders. Each of these can be measured between two or more nations, within a single nation, or between and within sub-populations (such as within a low-income group, within a high-income group and between them, within an age group and between inter-generational groups, within a gender group and between them etc, either from one or from multiple nations).

[ 2 ] Income inequality metrics are used for measuring income inequality, [ 3 ] the Gini coefficient being a widely used one. Another type of measurement is the Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index , which is a statistic composite index that takes inequality into account.

[ 4 ] Important concepts of equality include equity , equality of outcome , and equality of opportunity .

Historically , there has been a long-run trend towards greater economic inequality over time. The exceptions to this during the modern era are the declines in economic inequality during the two World Wars and amid the creation of modern welfare states after World War II.

[ 5 ] Whereas globalization has reduced the inequality between nations, it has increased the inequality within most nations.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Income inequality between nations peaked in the 1970s, when world income was distributed bimodally into "rich" and "poor" countries. Since then, income levels across countries have been converging, with most people now living in middle-income countries .

[ 6 ] [ 10 ] However, inequality within most nations has risen significantly in the last 30 years, particularly among advanced countries .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Research has generally linked economic inequality to political and social instability, including revolution , democratic breakdown and civil conflict .

[ 6 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Research suggests that greater inequality hinders economic growth and macroeconomic stability, and that inequality of land and human capital reduce growth more than inequality of income.

[ 6 ] [ 14 ] Inequality is at the center stage of economic policy debate across the globe, as government tax and spending policies have significant effects on income distribution.

[ 6 ] In advanced economies, taxes and transfers decrease income inequality by one-third, with most of this being achieved via public social spending (such as pensions and family benefits).

[ 6 ] While the "optimum" amount of economic inequality is widely debated, there is a near-universal belief that complete economic equality (Gini of zero) would be undesirable and unachievable.

[ 15 ] : 1 Measurements [ edit ] The Gini coefficient (also known as the Gini index or Gini ratio), is a measure of statistical dispersion intended to represent the income inequality, wealth inequality, or consumption inequality within a nation or a social group. It measures the inequality among the values of a frequency distribution, such as levels of income. A Gini coefficient of 0 reflects perfect equality, where all income or wealth values are the same, while a Gini coefficient of 1 (or 100%) reflects maximal inequality among values, a situation where a single individual has all the income or wealth while all others have none.

Oxfam 's 2021 report on global inequality said that the COVID-19 pandemic has increased economic inequality substantially; the wealthiest people across the globe were impacted the least by the pandemic and their fortunes recovered quickest, with billionaires seeing their wealth increase by $3.9 trillion, while at the same time the number of people living on less than $5.50 a day likely increased by 500 million.

[ 16 ] According to economist Joseph Stiglitz , the pandemic's "most significant outcome" will be rising economic inequality in the United States and between the developed and developing world.

[ 17 ] The 2024 Oxfam report found a significant increase in inequality as roughly five billion people have become poorer while at the same time the fortunes of the five richest individuals have doubled. The report warned that current trends are paving the way for the world's first trillionaire within a decade and global poverty eradication being postponed for 229 years.

[ 18 ] Oxfam's 2025 report shows that over the last year billionaire wealth increased from $13 trillion to $15 trillion primarily through inheritance , monopoly and powerful connections, and predicts there will be at least five trillionaires in the next decade, while at the same time the number of people living in poverty has barely changed since 1990, with 44% of the global population living on less than $6.85 per day.

[ 19 ] In 2016, the world's billionaires increased their combined global wealth to a record $6 trillion.

[ 20 ] In 2017, they increased their collective wealth to $8.9 trillion.

[ 21 ] The existing data and estimates suggest a large increase in international (and more generally inter-macroregional) components between 1820 and 1960. It might have slightly decreased since that time at the expense of increasing inequality within countries.

[ 22 ] The United Nations Development Programme in 2014 asserted that greater investments in social security, jobs, and laws that protect vulnerable populations are necessary to prevent widening income inequality.

[ 23 ] According to a 2020 study, global earnings inequality has decreased substantially since 1970. During the 2000s and 2010s, the share of earnings by the world's poorest half doubled.

[ 24 ] Two researchers claim that global income inequality is decreasing due to strong economic growth in developing countries.

[ 25 ] According to a January 2020 report by the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , economic inequality between states had declined, but intrastate inequality has increased for 70% of the world population over the period 1990–2015.

[ 26 ] In 2015, the OECD reported in 2015 that income inequality is higher than it has ever been within OECD member nations and is at increased levels in many emerging economies.

[ 27 ] According to a June 2015 report by the International Monetary Fund (IMF): Widening income inequality is the defining challenge of our time. In advanced economies, the gap between the rich and poor is at its highest level in decades. Inequality trends have been more mixed in emerging markets and developing countries (EMDCs), with some countries experiencing declining inequality, but pervasive inequities in access to education, health care, and finance remain.

[ 28 ] In October 2017, the IMF warned that inequality within nations, in spite of global inequality falling in recent decades, has risen so sharply that it threatens economic growth and could result in further political polarization . The Fund's Fiscal Monitor report said that "progressive taxation and transfers are key components of efficient fiscal redistribution." [ 29 ] In October 2018, Oxfam published a Reducing Inequality Index which measured social spending, tax and workers' rights to show which countries were best at closing the gap between the rich and the poor.

[ 30 ] The 2022 World Inequality Report , a four-year research project organized by the economists Lucas Chancel , Thomas Piketty , Emmanuel Saez , and Gabriel Zucman , shows that "the world is marked by a very high level of income inequality and an extreme level of wealth inequality" and that these inequalities "seem to be about as great today as they were at the peak of western imperialism in the early 20th century." According to the report, the bottom half of the population owns 2% of global wealth, while the top 10% owns 76% of it. The top 1% owns 38%.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Globally in 2023, this is how much after-tax annual income it took, in U.S. dollars, for someone to be in the top 1% of income earners: [ 34 ] Single adult with no children: $60,000 Two adults with one child: $130,000 Two adults with two children: $160,000 Income [ edit ] Income distribution within individual countries [ edit ] Countries' income inequality according to their most recent reported Gini index values as of 2018.

[ 35 ] Main articles: Income inequality metrics , List of countries by income inequality , and Income distribution In 1820, the ratio between the income of the top and bottom 20 percent of the world's population was three to one. By 1991, it was eighty-six to one.

[ 36 ] A 2011 study titled "Divided we Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising" by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) sought to explain the causes for this rising inequality by investigating economic inequality in OECD countries; it concluded that the following factors played a role: [ 37 ] Changes in the structure of households can play an important role. Single-headed households in OECD countries have risen from an average of 15% in the late 1980s to 20% in the mid-2000s, resulting in higher inequality.

[ 38 ] Assortative mating refers to the phenomenon of people marrying people with similar background, for example doctors marrying other doctors rather than nurses. OECD found out that 40% of couples where both partners work belonged to the same or neighboring earnings deciles compared with 33% some 20 years before.

[ 38 ] In the bottom percentiles, number of hours worked has decreased.

[ 38 ] The main reason for increasing inequality seems to be the difference between the demand for and supply of skills.

[ 38 ] The study made the following conclusions about the level of economic inequality: Income inequality in OECD countries is at its highest level for the past half century. The ratio between the bottom 10% and the top 10% has increased from 1:7 to 1:9 in 25 years.

[ 38 ] There are tentative signs of a possible convergence of inequality levels towards a common and higher average level across OECD countries.

[ 38 ] With very few exceptions ( France , Japan , and Spain ), the wages of the 10% best-paid workers have risen relative to those of the 10% lowest paid.

[ 38 ] A 2011 OECD study investigated economic inequality in Argentina , Brazil , China , India , Indonesia , Russia , and South Africa . It concluded that key sources of inequality in these countries include "a large, persistent informal sector , widespread regional divides (e.g., urban-rural ), gaps in access to education, and barriers to employment and career progression for women." [ 38 ] Countries by the inequality-adjusted Human Development Index .

Income inequality is measured by Gini coefficient (expressed in percent %) that is a number between 0 and 1. Here 0 expresses perfect equality, meaning that everyone has the same income, whereas 1 represents perfect inequality, meaning that one person has all the income and others have none. A Gini index value above 50% is considered high; countries including Brazil, Colombia, South Africa, Botswana, and Honduras can be found in this category. A Gini index value of 30% or above is considered medium; countries including Vietnam, Mexico, Poland, the United States, Argentina, Russia and Uruguay can be found in this category. A Gini index value lower than 30% is considered low; countries including Austria, Germany, Denmark, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, and Ukraine can be found in this category.

[ 39 ] In the low-income inequality category (below 30%) is a wide representation of countries previously being part of Soviet Union or its satellites, like Slovakia, Czech Republic, Ukraine and Hungary.

In 2012 the Gini index for income inequality for whole European Union was only 30.6%.

Income distribution can differ from wealth distribution within each country. The wealth inequality is also measured in Gini index. There the higher Gini index signify greater inequality within the wealth distribution in country, 0 means total wealth equality and 1 represents situation, where everyone has no wealth, except an individual that has everything.  For instance, countries like Denmark, Norway and Netherlands, all belonging to the last category (below 30%, low-income inequality) also have very high Gini index in wealth distribution, ranging from 70% up to 90%.

Wealth [ edit ] Wealth distribution between countries [ edit ] Countries by total wealth (2022) Wealth distribution within individual countries [ edit ] Main articles: List of countries by wealth per adult § By country , and Distribution of wealth The wealth is calculated by various factors, for instance: liabilities , debts , exchange rates and their expected development, real estate prices, human resources , natural resources and technical advancements, etc.

Consumption [ edit ] Main article: Consumption distribution In economics , the consumption distribution or consumption inequality is an alternative to the income distribution or wealth distribution for judging economic inequality, comparing levels of consumption rather than income or wealth .

[ 40 ] This is an important measure of inequality as the basic utility of the wealth or income is the expenditure.

[ 41 ] People experience the inequality directly in consumption, rather than income or wealth.

[ 42 ] Consumption distribution between countries [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2025 ) Consumption distribution within individual countries [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2025 ) Factors proposed to affect economic inequality [ edit ] There are various reasons for economic inequality within societies, including both global market functions (such as trade, development, and regulation) as well as social factors (including gender, race, and education).

[ 43 ] Recent growth in overall income inequality, at least within the OECD countries, has been driven mostly by increasing inequality in wages and salaries.

[ 37 ] Economist Thomas Piketty argues that widening economic disparity is an inevitable phenomenon of free market capitalism when the rate of return of capital (r) is greater than the rate of growth of the economy (g).

[ 44 ] According to an IMF report in 2016, after reviewing four decades of neoliberalism , it had warned that certain neoliberal policies including privatization, public spending cuts, and deregulation, have resulted in "increased inequality" and are stunting economic growth globally.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Labour market [ edit ] Main articles: Labour economics , Capitalism , Marxism , and Neoclassical economics In modern market economies , if competition is imperfect; information unevenly distributed; opportunities to acquire education and skills unequal; market failure results. Many such imperfect conditions exist in virtually every market. According to Joseph Stiglitz this means that there is an enormous potential role for government to correct such market failures.

[ 47 ] In the United States, real wages are flat over the past 40 years for occupations across income and education levels, e.g., auto mechanics, cashiers, doctors, and software engineers.

[ 48 ] However, stock ownership favors higher income and education levels, [ 49 ] thereby resulting in disparate investment income.

Taxes [ edit ] Main articles: Income tax and Progressive tax Another cause is the rate at which income is taxed coupled with the progressivity of the tax system. A progressive tax is a tax by which the tax rate increases as the taxable base amount increases.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] In a progressive tax system, the level of the top tax rate will often have a direct impact on the level of inequality within a society, either increasing it or decreasing it, provided that income does not change as a result of the change in tax regime. Additionally, steeper tax progressivity applied to social spending can result in a more equal distribution of income across the board.

[ 52 ] Tax credits such as the Earned Income Tax Credit in the US can also decrease income inequality.

[ 53 ] The difference between the Gini index for an income distribution before taxation and the Gini index after taxation is an indicator for the effects of such taxation.

[ 54 ] Education [ edit ] Main article: Education Ivy-Plus university admissions rates vary with the income of the students' parents, with the acceptance rate of the top 0.1% income percentile being almost twice as much as other students.

[ 55 ] A 1916 ad for a vocational school appealed to Americans' belief in the possibility of self-betterment, as well as threatening economic insecurity through lack of education and the consequences of downward mobility in the income inequality during the Industrial Revolution An important factor in the creation of inequality is variation in individuals' access to education.

[ 56 ] Education, especially in an area where there is a high demand for workers, creates high wages for those with this education.

[ 57 ] However, increases in education first increase and then decrease growth as well as income inequality. As a result, those who are unable to afford an education, or choose not to pursue optional education, generally receive much lower wages. The justification for this is that a lack of education leads directly to lower incomes, and thus lower aggregate saving and investment. Conversely, quality education raises incomes and promotes growth because it helps to unleash the productive potential of the poor.

[ 58 ] Access to education was in turn influenced by land inequalities. In the less industrialized parts of 19th century Europe, for example, landowners still held more political power than industrialists. These landowners did not benefit from educating their workers as much as industrialists did, since "educated workers have more incentives to migrate to urban, industrial areas than their less educated counterparts." [ 59 ] Consequently, lower incentives to promote education in regions where land inequality was high led to lower levels of numeracy in these regions.

[ 59 ] Economic liberalism, deregulation and decline of unions [ edit ] Main articles: Economic liberalism , Deregulation , and Labor unions in the United States John Schmitt and Ben Zipperer (2006) of the CEPR point to economic liberalism and the reduction of business regulation along with the decline of union membership as one of the causes of economic inequality. In an analysis of the effects of intensive Anglo-American liberal policies in comparison to continental European liberalism, where unions have remained strong, they concluded "The U.S. economic and social model is associated with substantial levels of social exclusion, including high levels of income inequality, high relative and absolute poverty rates, poor and unequal educational outcomes, poor health outcomes, and high rates of crime and incarceration. At the same time, the available evidence provides little support for the view that U.S.-style labor market flexibility dramatically improves labor-market outcomes. Despite popular prejudices to the contrary, the U.S. economy consistently affords a lower level of economic mobility than all the continental European countries for which data is available." [ 60 ] More recently, the International Monetary Fund has published studies which found that the decline of unionization in many advanced economies and the establishment of neoliberal economics have fueled rising income inequality.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Contrary to the proponents of neoliberalism, trickle-down economics have been proven to not be effective in resolving economic inequalities but have instead worsened it.

[ 63 ] Technology [ edit ] Main articles: Information Age and Information technology The growth in importance of information technology has been credited with increasing income inequality.

[ 64 ] Technology has been called "the main driver of the recent increases in inequality" by Erik Brynjolfsson, of MIT .

[ 65 ] In arguing against this explanation, Jonathan Rothwell notes that if technological advancement is measured by high rates of invention, there is a negative correlation between it and inequality. Countries with high invention rates – "as measured by patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty" – exhibit lower inequality than those with less. In one country, the United States, "salaries of engineers and software developers rarely reach" above $390,000/year (the lower limit for the top 1% earners).

[ 66 ] Some researchers, such as Juliet B. Schor, highlight the role of for-profit online sharing economy platforms as an accelerator of income inequality and calls into question their supposed contribution in empowering outsiders of the labour market.

[ 67 ] Taking the example of TaskRabbit, a labour service platform, she shows that a large proportion of providers already have a stable full-time job and participate part-time in the platform as an opportunity to increase their income by diversifying their activities outside employment, which tends to restrict the volume of work remaining for the minority of platform workers.

In addition, there is an important phenomenon of labour substitution as manual tasks traditionally performed by workers without a degree (or just a college degree) integrated into the labour market in the traditional economy sectors are now performed by workers with a high level of education (in 2013, 70% of TaskRabbit's workforce held a bachelor's degree, 20% a master's degree and 5% a PhD).

[ 68 ] The development of platforms, which are increasingly capturing demand for these manual services at the expense of non-platform companies, may therefore benefit mainly skilled workers who are offered more earning opportunities that can be used as supplemental or transitional work during periods of unemployment.

It has also been proposed that information technologies contribute to "winner take most" market concentration, reducing the need for labor across competing suppliers.

[ 69 ] Market concentration drives down labor's share of the GDP, increasing the wealth of capital and thereby exacerbating inequality.

Automation [ edit ] Economists have linked automation to increases in economic inequality, as automation raises the returns to wealth and contributes to stagnating wages at the lower end of the wage distribution.

[ 70 ] Several economists have suggested that automation has increased income inequality by causing low skill jobs to be replaced with machines operated by technologically skilled workers, thereby reducing the demand for unskilled labor while increasing the demand for skilled labor.

[ 15 ] : 1 Globalization [ edit ] Main articles: Globalization and International inequality " Elephant curve ": Change in real income between 1988 and 2008 at various income percentiles of global income distribution.

[ 71 ] Trade liberalization may shift economic inequality from a global to a domestic scale.

[ 72 ] When rich countries trade with poor countries, the low-skilled workers in the rich countries may see reduced wages as a result of the competition, while low-skilled workers in the poor countries may see increased wages. Trade economist Paul Krugman estimates that trade liberalisation has had a measurable effect on the rising inequality in the United States . He attributes this trend to increased trade with poor countries and the fragmentation of the means of production , resulting in low skilled jobs becoming more tradeable.

[ 73 ] Anthropologist Jason Hickel contends that globalization and " structural adjustment " set off the " race to the bottom ", a significant driver of surging global inequality. Another driver Hickel mentions is the debt system which advanced the need for structural adjustment in the first place.

[ 74 ] Gender pay gap [ edit ] Main article: Gender inequality The gender gap in median earnings of full-time employees according to the OECD 2015 [ 75 ] In many countries, there is a gender pay gap in favor of males in the labor market . Several factors other than discrimination contribute to this gap. On average, women are more likely than men to consider factors other than pay when looking for work and may be less willing to travel or relocate.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Thomas Sowell , in his book Knowledge and Decisions , claims that this difference is due to women not taking jobs due to marriage or pregnancy. A U.S. Census's report stated that in US once other factors are accounted for there is still a difference in earnings between women and men.

[ 78 ] A study done on three post-soviet countries Armenia , Georgia , and Azerbaijan reveals that gender is one of the driving forces of income inequality, and being female has a significant negative effect on income when other factors are held equal. The results show more than 50% gender pay gap in all three countries.

[ 79 ] These findings are because usually employers tend to avoid hiring women because of possible maternity leave. Other reason for this can be occupational segregation , which implies that women are usually accumulated in lower-paid positions and sectors, such as social services and education.

Race [ edit ] Main article: Social inequality There is also a globally recognized disparity in the wealth, income, and economic welfare of people of different races. In many nations, data exists to suggest that members of certain racial demographics experience lower wages, fewer opportunities for career and educational advancement, and intergenerational wealth gaps .

[ 80 ] Studies have uncovered the emergence of what is called "ethnic capital", by which people belonging to a race that has experienced discrimination are born into a disadvantaged family from the beginning and therefore have less resources and opportunities at their disposal.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] The universal lack of education, technical and cognitive skills, and inheritable wealth within a particular race is often passed down between generations, compounding in effect to make escaping these racialized cycles of poverty increasingly difficult.

[ 82 ] Additionally, ethnic groups that experience significant disparities are often also minorities, at least in representation though often in number as well, in the nations where they experience the harshest disadvantage. As a result, they are often segregated either by government policy or social stratification, leading to ethnic communities that experience widespread gaps in wealth and aid.

[ 83 ] Redlining intentionally excluded black Americans from accumulating intergenerational wealth. The effects of this exclusion on black Americans' health continue to play out daily, generations later, in the same communities. This is evident currently in the disproportionate effects that COVID-19 has had on the same communities which the HOLC redlined in the 1930s. Research published in September 2020 overlaid maps of the highly affected COVID-19 areas with the HOLC maps, showing that those areas marked "risky" to lenders because they contained minority residents were the same neighborhoods most affected by COVID-19. The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) looks at inequities in the social determinants of health like concentrated poverty and healthcare access that are interrelated and influence health outcomes with regard to COVID-19 as well as quality of life in general for minority groups. The CDC points to discrimination within health care, education, criminal justice, housing, and finance, direct results of systematically subversive tactics like redlining which led to chronic and toxic stress that shaped social and economic factors for minority groups, increasing their risk for COVID-19. Healthcare access is similarly limited by factors like a lack of public transportation, child care, and communication and language barriers which result from the spatial and economic isolation of minority communities from redlining. Educational, income, and wealth gaps that result from this isolation mean that minority groups' limited access to the job market may force them to remain in fields that have a higher risk of exposure to the virus, without options to take time off. Finally, a direct result of redlining is the overcrowding of minority groups into neighborhoods that do not boast adequate housing to sustain burgeoning populations, leading to crowded conditions that make prevention strategies for COVID-19 nearly impossible to implement.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] As a general rule, races which have been historically and systematically colonized (typically indigenous ethnicities) continue to experience lower levels of financial stability in the present day. The global South is considered to be particularly victimized by this phenomenon, though the exact socioeconomic manifestations change across different regions.

[ 80 ] Westernized Nations [ edit ] While the progression of civil rights movements and justice reform has improved access to education and other economic opportunities in politically advanced nations, racial income and wealth disparity still exists.

[ 91 ] In the United States for example, African American populations are more likely to drop out of high school and college, are typically employed for fewer hours at lower wages, have lower than average intergenerational wealth, and are more likely to use welfare as young adults than their white counterparts.

[ 92 ] The racial wealth gap in the US has been maintained throughout history. In 1863, two years prior to emancipation from slavery, Black people owned 0.5 percent of the US national wealth, while in 2019 it is just over 1.5 percent.

[ 93 ] Mexican-Americans, while suffering less debilitating socioeconomic factors than black Americans, experience deficiencies in the same areas when compared to whites and have not assimilated financially to the level of stability experienced by white Americans as a whole.

[ 94 ] These experiences are the effects of the measured disparity due to race in countries like the US, where studies show that in comparison to whites, blacks suffer from drastically lower levels of upward mobility , higher levels of downward mobility, and poverty that is more easily transmitted to offspring as a result of the disadvantage stemming from the era of slavery and post-slavery racism that has been passed through racial generations to the present.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] These are lasting financial inequalities that apply in varying magnitudes to most non-white populations in nations such as the US, the UK, France, Spain, Australia, etc.

[ 80 ] Latin America [ edit ] In the countries of the Caribbean, Central America, and South America, many ethnicities continue to deal with the effects of European colonization, and in general nonwhites tend to be noticeably poorer than whites in this region. In many countries with significant populations of indigenous races and those of Afro-descent (such as Mexico, Colombia, Chile, etc.) income levels can be roughly half as high as those experiences by white demographics, and this inequity is accompanied by systematically unequal access to education, career opportunities, and poverty relief. This region of the world, apart from urbanizing areas like Brazil and Costa Rica, continues to be understudied and often the racial disparity is denied by Latin Americans who consider themselves to be living in post-racial and post-colonial societies far removed from intense social and economic stratification despite the evidence to the contrary.

[ 98 ] Africa [ edit ] African countries, too, continue to deal with the effects of the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade , which set back economic development as a whole for blacks of African citizenship more than any other region. The degree to which colonizers stratified their holdings on the continent on the basis of race has had a direct correlation in the magnitude of disparity experienced by nonwhites in the nations that eventually rose from their colonial status. Former French colonies, for example, see much higher rates of income inequality between whites and nonwhites as a result of the rigid hierarchy imposed by the French who lived in Africa at the time.

[ 99 ] Another example is found in South Africa, which, still reeling from the socioeconomic impacts of Apartheid , experiences some of the highest racial income and wealth inequality in all of Africa.

[ 95 ] In these and other countries like Nigeria, Zimbabwe, and Sierra Leone, movements of civil reform have initially led to improved access to financial advancement opportunities, but data [ when?

] shows that for nonwhites this progress is either stalling or erasing itself in the newest generation of blacks that seek education and improved transgenerational wealth. The economic status of one's parents continues to define and predict the financial futures of African and minority ethnic groups.

[ 100 ] [ needs update ] Asia [ edit ] Asian regions and countries such as China, the Middle East, and Central Asia have been vastly understudied in terms of racial disparity, but even here the effects of Western colonization provide similar results to those found in other parts of the globe.

[ 80 ] Additionally, cultural and historical practices such as the caste system in India leave their marks as well. While the disparity is greatly improving in the case of India, there still exists social stratification between peoples of lighter and darker skin tones that cumulatively result in income and wealth inequality, manifesting in many of the same poverty traps seen elsewhere.

[ 101 ] Economic development [ edit ] Main article: Kuznets curve A Kuznets curve Economist Simon Kuznets argued that levels of economic inequality are in large part the result of stages of development . According to Kuznets, countries with low levels of development have relatively equal distributions of wealth. In the early stages, individual sectors or industries are developed first, which leads to an unequal distribution of income and wealth, resulting in growing inequality within a country. As the economy progresses and development takes place in more economic sectors, eventually attracting more workers, economic inequality decreases.

[ 102 ] Although the Kuznets curve described the development of inequality well at the time of its publication, there is now a growing number of critical voices questioning the link between inequality and development.

[ 103 ] Wealth concentration [ edit ] Main articles: Wealth concentration , Billionaire , and Oligarchy Wealth concentration is the process by which, under certain conditions, newly created wealth concentrates in the possession of already-wealthy individuals or entities. Accordingly, those who already hold wealth have the means to invest in new sources of creating wealth or to otherwise leverage the accumulation of wealth, and thus they are the beneficiaries of the new wealth. Over time, wealth concentration can significantly contribute to the persistence of inequality within society.

Thomas Piketty in his book Capital in the Twenty-First Century argues that the fundamental force for divergence is the usually greater return of capital (r) than economic growth (g), and that larger fortunes generate higher returns.

[ 104 ] Rent seeking [ edit ] Main article: Rent-seeking Economist Joseph Stiglitz argues that rather than explaining concentrations of wealth and income, market forces should serve as a brake on such concentration, which may better be explained by the non-market force known as " rent-seeking ". While the market will bid up compensation for rare and desired skills to reward wealth creation, greater productivity, etc., it will also prevent successful entrepreneurs from earning excess profits by fostering competition to cut prices, profits and large compensation.

[ 105 ] A better explainer of growing inequality, according to Stiglitz, is the use of political power generated by wealth by certain groups to shape government policies financially beneficial to them. This process, known to economists as rent-seeking, brings income not from creation of wealth but from "grabbing a larger share of the wealth that would otherwise have been produced without their effort".

[ 106 ] Finance industry [ edit ] Jamie Galbraith argues that countries with larger financial sectors have greater inequality, and the link is not an accident.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ why?

] Global warming and climate change [ edit ] Scaling the effect of wealth to the national level: richer (developed) countries emit more CO 2 per person than poorer (developing) countries.

[ 109 ] Emissions are roughly proportional to GDP per person, though the rate of increase diminishes with average GDP/pp of about $10,000.

Though total CO 2 emissions (size of pie charts) differ substantially among high-emitting regions, the pattern of higher income classes emitting more than lower income classes is consistent across regions.

[ 110 ] The world's top 1% of emitters emit over 1000 times more than the bottom 1%.

[ 110 ] A 2019 study published in PNAS found that global warming plays a role in increasing economic inequality between countries, boosting economic growth in developed countries while hampering such growth in developing nations of the Global South . The study says that 25% of gap between the developed world and the developing world can be attributed to global warming.

[ 111 ] A 2020 report by Oxfam and the Stockholm Environment Institute says that the wealthiest 10% of the global population were responsible for more than half of global carbon dioxide emissions from 1990 to 2015, which increased by 60%.

[ 112 ] According to a 2020 report by the UNEP , overconsumption by the rich is a significant driver of the climate crisis , and the wealthiest 1% of the world's population are responsible for more than double the greenhouse gas emissions of the poorest 50% combined.

Inger Andersen , in the foreword to the report, said "this elite will need to reduce their footprint by a factor of 30 to stay in line with the Paris Agreement targets." [ 113 ] A 2022 report by Oxfam found that the business investments of the wealthiest 125 billionaires emit 393 million metric tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions annually.

[ 114 ] In July 2023, a letter sent to the United Nations secretary general António Guterres and World Bank president Ajay Banga by a group of over 200 economists from 67 countries, including Jayati Ghosh , Joseph Stiglitz and Thomas Piketty, warned that if the sharp increase in economic inequality is not reversed, it will "entrench poverty and increase the risk of climate breakdown." [ 115 ] According to UNCTAD 's World Investment Report, poorer countries would need $4 trillion per year to accomplish the SDGs by 2030, up from $1.5 trillion in 2015. $1.7 trillion in green energy investment is required each year, while the majority of green foreign direct investment continues to flow to established nations.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Politics [ edit ] Joseph Stiglitz argues in The Price of Inequality (2012) that the economic inequality is inevitable and permanent, because it is caused by the great amount of political power the richest have.

[ 47 ] He wrote, "While there may be underlying economic forces at play, politics have shaped the market, and shaped it in ways that advantage the top at the expense of the rest." Cognitive biases [ edit ] Research has shown that biased decision-making does not alone explain a significant proportion of inequality, therefore inequality cannot be explained by cognitive biases of a specific sub-population, such as temporal discounting (i.e., not preferring immediate funds over larger future gains), overestimation (i.e. thinking you are better than you are at making decisions), over-placement (i.e. thinking you are better than the average person at making decisions), and extremeness aversion (i.e. taking the 'middle option' simply because it seems safer than the highest or lowest).

[ 118 ] Mitigating factors [ edit ] Social connectedness to people of higher income levels is a strong predictor of upward income mobility.

[ 119 ] However, data shows substantial social segregation correlating with economic income groups.

[ 119 ] Countries with a left-leaning legislature generally have lower levels of inequality.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] Many factors constrain economic inequality – they may be divided into two classes: market driven, and government sponsored. The relative merits and effectiveness of each approach is a subject of debate: Market forces outside of government intervention that can reduce economic inequality include: propensity to spend : with rising wealth & income, a person may spend more. In an extreme example, if one person owned everything, they would immediately need to hire people to maintain their properties, thus reducing the wealth concentration .

[ 122 ] On the other hand, high-income persons have higher propensity to save.

[ 123 ] Robin Maialeh then shows that increasing economic wealth decreases propensity to spend and increases propensity to invest which consequently leads to even greater growth rate of already rich agents.

[ 124 ] Typical government initiatives intended to reduce economic inequality include: Public education : increasing the supply of skilled labor and reducing income inequality due to education differentials.

[ 125 ] Progressive taxation : the rich are taxed proportionally more than the poor, reducing the amount of income inequality in society if the change in taxation does not cause changes in income.

[ 126 ] Research shows that since 1300, the only periods with significant declines in wealth inequality in Europe were the Black Death and the two World Wars.

[ 127 ] Historian Walter Scheidel posits that, since the Stone Age, only extreme violence, catastrophes and upheaval in the form of total war , Communist revolutions , the French Revolution , pestilence and state collapse have significantly reduced inequality.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] He has stated that "only all-out thermonuclear war might fundamentally reset the existing distribution of resources" and that "peaceful policy reform may well prove unequal to the growing challenges ahead." [ 130 ] [ 131 ] However, Scheidel also stated that "There is certainly room for incremental change, that's what the example of Latin America shows in the past 15 years or so." [ 129 ] Policy responses intended to mitigate [ edit ] A 2011 OECD study makes a number of suggestions to its member countries, including: [ 38 ] Well-targeted income-support policies.

Facilitation and encouragement of access to employment.

Better job-related training and education for the low-skilled ( on-the-job training ) would help to boost their productivity potential and future earnings.

Better access to formal education.

Progressive taxation reduces absolute income inequality when the higher rates on higher-income individuals are paid and not evaded , and transfer payments and social safety nets result in progressive government spending .

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] Wage ratio legislation has also been proposed as a means of reducing income inequality. The OECD asserts that public spending is vital in reducing the ever-expanding wealth gap .

[ 135 ] Deferred investment programs that increase stock ownership amongst lower income levels can supplement income to compensate wage stagnation.

[ 48 ] The economists Emmanuel Saez and Thomas Piketty recommend much higher top marginal tax rates on the wealthy, up to 50 percent, 70 percent or even 90 percent.

[ 136 ] Ralph Nader , Jeffrey Sachs , the United Front Against Austerity, among others, call for a financial transaction tax (also known as the Robin Hood tax ) to bolster the social safety net and the public sector.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] The Economist wrote in December 2013: "A minimum wage, providing it is not set too high, could thus boost pay with no ill effects on jobs....America's federal minimum wage, at 38% of median income, is one of the rich world's lowest. Some studies find no harm to employment from federal or state minimum wages, others see a small one, but none finds any serious damage." [ 139 ] General limitations on and taxation of rent-seeking are popular across the political spectrum.

[ 140 ] Public policy responses addressing causes and effects of income inequality in the US include: progressive tax incidence adjustments, strengthening social safety net provisions such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children , welfare , the food stamp program , Social Security , Medicare , and Medicaid , organizing community interest groups , increasing and reforming higher education subsidies, increasing infrastructure spending, and placing limits on and taxing rent-seeking .

[ 141 ] A 2017 study in the Journal of Political Economy by Daron Acemoglu , James Robinson and Thierry Verdier argues that American "cutthroat" capitalism and inequality gives rise to technology and innovation that more "cuddly" forms of capitalism cannot.

[ 142 ] As a result, "the diversity of institutions we observe among relatively advanced countries, ranging from greater inequality and risk-taking in the United States to the more egalitarian societies supported by a strong safety net in Scandinavia, rather than reflecting differences in fundamentals between the citizens of these societies, may emerge as a mutually self-reinforcing world equilibrium. If so, in this equilibrium, 'we cannot all be like the Scandinavians,' because Scandinavian capitalism depends in part on the knowledge spillovers created by the more cutthroat American capitalism." [ 142 ] A 2012 working paper by the same authors, making similar arguments, was challenged by Lane Kenworthy , who posited that, among other things, the Nordic countries are consistently ranked as some of the world's most innovative countries by the World Economic Forum 's Global Competitiveness Index , with Sweden ranking as the most innovative nation, followed by Finland, for 2012–2013; the U.S. ranked sixth.

[ 143 ] There are however global initiative like the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 10 which aims to garner international efforts in reducing economic inequality considerably by 2030.

[ 144 ] Effects [ edit ] Main article: Effects of economic inequality A lot of research has been done about the effects of economic inequality on different aspects in society: Health : For long time the higher material living standards lead to longer life, as those people were able to get enough food, water and access to warmth. British researchers Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate Pickett have found higher rates of health and social problems ( obesity , mental illness , homicides , teenage births , incarceration , child conflict, drug use) in countries and states with higher inequality.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Their research included 24 developed countries, including most U.S. states, and found that in the more developed countries, such as Finland and Japan, the health issues are much lower than in states with rather higher inequality rates, such as Utah and New Hampshire. Some studies link a surge in " deaths of despair ", suicide, drug overdoses and alcohol related deaths, to widening income inequality.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Conversely, other research did not find these effects or concluded that research suffered from issues of confounding variables.

[ 149 ] Social goods : British researchers Richard G. Wilkinson and Kate Pickett have found lower rates of social goods ( life expectancy by country , educational performance, trust among strangers , women's status , social mobility , even numbers of patents issued) in countries and states with higher inequality.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Social cohesion : Research has shown an inverse link between income inequality and social cohesion. In more equal societies, people are much more likely to trust each other, measures of social capital (the benefits of goodwill, fellowship, mutual sympathy and social connectedness among groups who make up a social units) suggest greater community involvement.

Happiness : According to the 2019 World Happiness Report , increasing socioeconomic inequality, along with rising healthcare costs, surging addiction rates, and an unhealthy work–life balance , are causes of unhappiness around the world.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Crime : The cross national research shows that in societies with less economic inequality the homicide rates are consistently lower.

[ 152 ] A 2016 study finds that interregional inequality increases terrorism.

[ 153 ] Other research has argued inequality has little effect on crime rates.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] Welfare : Studies have found evidence that in societies where inequality is lower, population-wide satisfaction and happiness tend to be higher.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Poverty: Study made by Jared Bernstein and Elise Gould suggest, that the poverty in the United States could have been reduced by the lowering of economic inequality for the past few decades.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Debt : Income inequality has been the driving factor in the growing household debt , [ 162 ] [ 163 ] as high earners bid up the price of real estate and middle income earners go deeper into debt trying to maintain what once was a middle class lifestyle.

[ 164 ] Economic growth : A 2016 meta-analysis found that "the effect of inequality on growth is negative and more pronounced in less developed countries than in rich countries", though the average impact on growth was not significant. The study also found that wealth inequality is more pernicious to growth than income inequality.

[ 14 ] Civic participation : Higher income inequality led to less of all forms of social, cultural, and civic participation among the less wealthy.

[ 165 ] Political instability : Studies indicate that economic inequality leads to greater political instability, including an increased risk of democratic breakdown [ 12 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] [ 169 ] and civil conflict.

[ 170 ] [ 13 ] A significant impact of inequality on civil war probability has been found through anthropometric methods.

[ 171 ] Political party responses: One study finds that economic inequality prompts attempts by left-leaning politicians to pursue redistributive policies while right-leaning politicians seek to repress the redistributive policies.

[ 172 ] Perspectives [ edit ] Socialist perspectives [ edit ] Socialists attribute the vast disparities in wealth to the private ownership of the means of production by a class of owners, creating a situation where a small portion of the population lives off unearned property income by virtue of ownership titles in capital equipment, financial assets and corporate stock. By contrast, the vast majority of the population is dependent on income in the form of a wage or salary. In order to rectify this situation, socialists argue that the means of production should be socially owned so that income differentials would be reflective of individual contributions to the social product.

[ 173 ] Marxian economics attributes rising inequality to job automation and capital deepening within capitalism. The process of job automation conflicts with the capitalist property form and its attendant system of wage labor . In this analysis, capitalist firms increasingly substitute capital equipment for labor inputs (workers) under competitive pressure to reduce costs and maximize profits. Over the long term, this trend increases the organic composition of capital , meaning that less workers are required in proportion to capital inputs, increasing unemployment (the " reserve army of labour "). This process exerts a downward pressure on wages. The substitution of capital equipment for labor (mechanization and automation) raises the productivity of each worker, resulting in a situation of relatively stagnant wages for the working class amidst rising levels of property income for the capitalist class.

[ 174 ] Marxist socialists ultimately predict the emergence of a communist society based on the common ownership of the means of production, where each individual citizen would have free access to the articles of consumption ( From each according to his ability, to each according to his need ). According to Marxist philosophy, equality in the sense of free access is essential for freeing individuals from dependent relationships, thereby allowing them to transcend alienation .

[ 175 ] Meritocracy [ edit ] Meritocracy favors an eventual society where an individual's success is a direct function of his merit, or contribution. Economic inequality would be a natural consequence of the wide range in individual skill, talent and effort in human population.

David Landes stated that the progression of Western economic development that led to the Industrial Revolution was facilitated by men advancing through their own merit rather than because of family or political connections.

[ 176 ] Liberal perspectives [ edit ] Most modern social liberals , including centrist or left-of-center political groups, believe that the capitalist economic system should be fundamentally preserved, but the status quo regarding the income gap must be reformed. Social liberals favor a capitalist system with active Keynesian macroeconomic policies and progressive taxation (to even out differences in income inequality). Research indicates that people who hold liberal beliefs tend to see greater income inequality as morally wrong.

[ 177 ] However, contemporary classical liberals and libertarians generally do not take a stance on wealth inequality, but believe in equality under the law regardless of whether it leads to unequal wealth distribution. In 1966 Ludwig von Mises , a prominent figure in the Austrian School of economic thought, explains: The liberal champions of equality under the law were fully aware of the fact that men are born unequal and that it is precisely their inequality that generates social cooperation and civilization. Equality under the law was in their opinion not designed to correct the inexorable facts of the universe and to make natural inequality disappear. It was, on the contrary, the device to secure for the whole of mankind the maximum of benefits it can derive from it. Henceforth no man-made institutions should prevent a man from attaining that station in which he can best serve his fellow citizens.

Robert Nozick argued that government redistributes wealth by force (usually in the form of taxation), and that the ideal moral society would be one where all individuals are free from force. However, Nozick recognized that some modern economic inequalities were the result of forceful taking of property, and a certain amount of redistribution would be justified to compensate for this force but not because of the inequalities themselves.

[ 178 ] John Rawls argued in A Theory of Justice [ 179 ] that inequalities in the distribution of wealth are only justified when they improve society as a whole, including the poorest members. Rawls does not discuss the full implications of his theory of justice. Some see Rawls's argument as a justification for capitalism since even the poorest members of society theoretically benefit from increased innovations under capitalism; others believe only a strong welfare state can satisfy Rawls's theory of justice.

[ 180 ] Classical liberal Milton Friedman believed that if government action is taken in pursuit of economic equality then political freedom would suffer. In a famous quote, he said: A society that puts equality before freedom will get neither. A society that puts freedom before equality will get a high degree of both.

Economist Tyler Cowen has argued that though income inequality has increased within nations, globally it has fallen over the 20 years leading up to 2014. He argues that though income inequality may make individual nations worse off, overall, the world has improved as global inequality has been reduced.

[ 181 ] Social justice arguments [ edit ] Patrick Diamond and Anthony Giddens (professors of Economics and Sociology, respectively) hold that 'pure meritocracy is incoherent because, without redistribution, one generation's successful individuals would become the next generation's embedded caste, hoarding the wealth they had accumulated'.

[ 182 ] They also state that social justice requires redistribution of high incomes and large concentrations of wealth in a way that spreads it more widely, in order to "recognize the contribution made by all sections of the community to building the nation's wealth." (Patrick Diamond and Anthony Giddens , June 27, 2005, New Statesman) [ 183 ] Pope Francis stated in his Evangelii gaudium , that "as long as the problems of the poor are not radically resolved by rejecting the absolute autonomy of markets and financial speculation and by attacking the structural causes of inequality, no solution will be found for the world's problems or, for that matter, to any problems." [ 184 ] He later declared that "inequality is the root of social evil." [ 185 ] When income inequality is low, aggregate demand will be relatively high, because more people who want ordinary consumer goods and services will be able to afford them, while the labor force will not be as relatively monopolized by the wealthy.

[ 186 ] Effects on social welfare [ edit ] In most western democracies, the desire to eliminate or reduce economic inequality is generally associated with the political left . One practical argument in favor of reduction is the idea that economic inequality reduces social cohesion and increases social unrest , thereby weakening the society. There is evidence that this is true (see inequity aversion ) and it is intuitive, at least for small face-to-face groups of people.

[ 187 ] Alberto Alesina , Rafael Di Tella , and Robert MacCulloch find that inequality negatively affects happiness in Europe but not in the United States.

[ 188 ] It has also been argued that economic inequality invariably translates to political inequality, which further aggravates the problem. Even in cases where an increase in economic inequality makes nobody economically poorer, an increased inequality of resources is disadvantageous, as increased economic inequality can lead to a power shift due to an increased inequality in the ability to participate in democratic processes.

[ 189 ] According to Paul and Moser, countries with high income inequality and poor unemployment protections experience worse mental health outcomes among the unemployed.

[ 190 ] Capabilities approach [ edit ] Further information: Capability approach The capabilities approach – sometimes called the human development approach – looks at income inequality and poverty as form of "capability deprivation".

[ 191 ] Unlike neoliberalism , which "defines well-being as utility maximization", economic growth and income are considered a means to an end rather than the end itself.

[ 192 ] Its goal is to "wid[en] people's choices and the level of their achieved well-being" [ 193 ] through increasing functioning (the things a person values doing), capabilities (the freedom to enjoy functionings) and agency (the ability to pursue valued goals).

[ 194 ] When a person's capabilities are lowered, they are in some way deprived of earning as much income as they would otherwise. An old, ill man cannot earn as much as a healthy young man; gender roles and customs may prevent a woman from receiving an education or working outside the home. There may be an epidemic that causes widespread panic, or there could be rampant violence in the area that prevents people from going to work for fear of their lives.

[ 191 ] As a result, income inequality increases, and it becomes more difficult to reduce the gap without additional aid.

Societal acceptance [ edit ] A 2022 study published in Perspectives on Psychological Science found that in countries where neoliberal institutions have significant influence over policies, the psychology of those population are shaped to have both a higher tolerance of large levels of income inequality, and prefer it over more egalitarian outcomes.

[ 195 ] According to a January 2025 Pew Research Center report, the majority of adults across 36 countries say that economic inequality is a major problem, along with the undue political influence of the wealthy.

[ 196 ] Public perception and accuracy thereof [ edit ] In the US, a 2011 study found that there is a significant difference in the measured wealth distribution and the public's understanding of it. The actual wealth going to the top quintile in 2011 was around 84%, whereas the average amount of wealth that the general public estimated to go to the top quintile was around 58%.

[ 197 ] Arguments that economic inequality is not a problem [ edit ] The majority of researchers who analyze economic inequality argue that today's levels are problematic and deserve some mitigation.

[ 15 ] There are however, some who disagree, and feel that current levels of inequality are necessary because it encourages individuals to gain useful skills and take risks, thereby encouraging growth and innovation, which are necessary for progress.

[ 15 ] Some have also argued that economic inequality is a natural and fair outcome in market economies, in which the rewards are distributed based on different economic contributions because individuals have different attitudes and talents.

[ 15 ] Many who feel that economic inequality is not a significant issue are associated with conservative or libertarian think tanks funded by corporations and the wealthy [ 198 ] like The Heritage Foundation , the Manhattan Institute , the Cato Institute or the American Enterprise Institute , who may also feel that policies which would reduce inequality are direct attacks on their favored version of capitalism, laissez-faire capitalism .

[ 15 ] : 1 In addition, some feel that economic inequality has not actually increased significantly.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Capital accumulation Anti-capitalism Aporophobia Class struggle Criticism of capitalism Cycle of poverty Donor Class Economic anxiety Economic democracy Economic equilibrium Economic migrant Economic security Equal opportunity Geography and wealth Great Divergence , disproportionate economic advancement of Europe Historic recurrence Human Development Index Humanistic economics Income distribution Income inequality metrics Inequality for All International inequality List of sovereign states by wealth inequality List of countries by income inequality List of countries by wealth per adult Occupy movement Paradise Papers Poverty map Poverty reduction Precariat Precarious work Public university Rent-seeking Social inequality Spatial inequality Tax haven The Greatest of All Plagues Theories of poverty Wealth concentration Wealth distribution References [ edit ] ^ Haddad, Cameron Nadim; Mahler, Daniel Gerszon; Diaz-Bonilla, Carolina; Hill, Ruth; Lakner, Christoph; Ibarra, Gabriel Lara (June 17, 2024).

"Inside the World Bank's new inequality indicator: The number of countries with high inequality" . World Bank . Retrieved October 25, 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ventura, Luca (June 6, 2023).

"World Wealth Distribution And Income Inequality 2022" .

Global Finance Magazine .

^ Trapeznikova, Ija (2019).

"Measuring income inequality" .

IZA World of Labor .

doi : 10.15185/izawol.462 .

^ Human Development Reports.

Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index (IHDI) Archived July 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine .

United Nations Development Programme . Retrieved: March 3, 2019.

^ Alfani, Guido (2023).

As Gods Among Men: A History of the Rich in the West . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-22712-2 .

^ a b c d e f g "Introduction to Inequality" .

IMF . Retrieved May 9, 2022 .

^ a b Bourguignon, François (2015).

The Globalization of Inequality . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691160528 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

^ a b Hung, Ho-Fung (2021). "Recent Trends in Global Economic Inequality".

Annual Review of Sociology .

47 (1): 349– 367.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-soc-090320-105810 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

S2CID 235574406 .

^ a b Flaherty, Thomas M.; Rogowski, Ronald (2021).

"Rising Inequality As a Threat to the Liberal International Order" .

International Organization .

75 (2): 495– 523.

doi : 10.1017/S0020818321000163 .

ISSN 0020-8183 .

^ "Parametric estimations of the world distribution of income" . January 22, 2010.

^ MacCulloch, Robert (2005). "Income Inequality and the Taste for Revolution".

The Journal of Law and Economics .

48 (1): 93– 123.

doi : 10.1086/426881 .

JSTOR 10.1086/426881 .

S2CID 154993058 .

^ a b Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A. (2005).

Economic Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511510809 .

ISBN 978-0521855266 .

^ a b Cederman, Lars-Erik; Gleditsch, Kristian Skrede; Buhaug, Halvard (2013).

Inequality, Grievances, and Civil War . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9781139084161 .

ISBN 978-1107017429 .

^ a b Neves, Pedro Cunha; Afonso, Óscar; Silva, Sandra Tavares (2016). "A Meta-Analytic Reassessment of the Effects of Inequality on Growth".

World Development .

78 : 386– 400.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2015.10.038 .

^ a b c d e f g Peterson, E. Wesley F. (December 2017).

"Is Economic Inequality Really a Problem? A Review of the Arguments" .

Social Sciences .

6 (4): 147.

doi : 10.3390/socsci6040147 .

ISSN 2076-0760 .

^ Clifford, Catherine (January 26, 2021).

"The '1%' are the main drivers of climate change, but it hits the poor the hardest: Oxfam report" .

CNBC . Retrieved February 14, 2021 .

^ Joseph, Stiglitz (March 1, 2022).

"COVID Has Made Global Inequality Much Worse" .

Scientific American . Retrieved August 3, 2022 .

^ Neate, Rupert (January 14, 2024).

"World's five richest men double their money as poorest get poorer" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

^ Roach, April (January 19, 2025).

"Billionaire wealth surges to 'unimaginable' levels in 2024 as Oxfam predicts emergence of five trillionaires within a decade" .

CNBC . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ Neate, Rupert (October 26, 2017).

"World's witnessing a new Gilded Age as billionaires' wealth swells to $6tn" .

The Guardian . Retrieved October 27, 2017 .

^ Neate, Rupert (October 26, 2018).

"World's billionaires became 20% richer in 2017, report reveals" .

The Guardian . Retrieved November 5, 2018 .

^ Novotný, Josef (2007). "On the measurement of regional inequality: Does spatial dimension of income inequality matter?".

The Annals of Regional Science .

41 (3): 563– 580.

Bibcode : 2007ARegS..41..563N .

doi : 10.1007/s00168-007-0113-y .

S2CID 51753883 .

^ Mark Anderson (July 24, 2014).

Jobs and social security needed as income inequality widens, UNDP warn .

The Guardian .

Retrieved July 24, 2014.

^ Hammar, Olle; Waldenström, Daniel (2020).

"Global Earnings Inequality, 1970–2018" .

The Economic Journal .

130 (632): 2526– 2545.

doi : 10.1093/ej/ueaa109 .

S2CID 157907204 .

^ Hellebrandt, Tomáš; Mauro, Paolo (2015).

The Future of Worldwide Income Distribution .

Peterson Institute for International Economics .

^ "Rising inequality affecting more than two-thirds of the globe, but it's not inevitable: new UN report" .

UN News . January 21, 2020 . Retrieved September 6, 2020 .

^ Improving job quality and reducing gender gaps are essential to tackling growing inequality .

OECD , May 21, 2015.

^ Era Dabla-Norris; Kalpana Kochhar; Nujin Suphaphiphat; Frantisek Ricka; Evridiki Tsounta (June 15, 2015).

Causes and Consequences of Income Inequality : A Global Perspective . International Monetary Fund. Retrieved June 16, 2015.

^ Dunsmuir, Lindsay (October 11, 2017).

"IMF calls for fiscal policies that tackle rising inequality" .

Reuters . Retrieved October 30, 2017 .

^ Lawson, Max; Martin, Matthew (October 9, 2018).

"The Commitment to Reducing Inequality Index 2018" . Oxfam . Retrieved November 13, 2018 .

^ Kaplan, Juliana; Kiersz, Andy (December 7, 2021).

"A huge study of 20 years of global wealth demolishes the myth of 'trickle-down' and shows the rich are taking most of the gains for themselves" .

Business Insider . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ Elliott, Larry (December 7, 2021).

"Global inequality 'as marked as it was at peak of western imperialism' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ "World Inequality Report 2022" . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ Lots of Americans are in the global 1%. A tenth of their income could transform the world.

, Vox, September 15, 2023, Archive ^ "GINI index (World Bank estimate) | Data" .

data.worldbank.org . Retrieved July 23, 2020 .

^ Hunt, Michael (2004).

The World Transformed: 1945 to the Present . Boston: Bedford/St. Martin's. pp.

442 .

ISBN 978-0312245832 .

^ a b Gurría, Angel (December 5, 2011).

Press Release for Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising (Report). OECD.

doi : 10.1787/9789264119536-en .

ISBN 9789264111639 . Retrieved December 16, 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising . OECD. 2011. p. 32-33.

doi : 10.1787/9789264119536-en .

ISBN 978-9264119536 .

Finally, changes in household structures (assortative mating and increases in single-headed households) increased household earnings inequality, albeit to a lesser extent than often suggested (Figure 7). These patterns hold true for all countries ^ "Country Comparison: Distribution of family income – Gini index" .

The World Factbook . CIA. Archived from the original on June 4, 2011 . Retrieved May 8, 2017 .

^ OECD Framework for Statistics on the Distribution of Household Income, Consumption and Wealth . Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. 2013 – via OECD iLibrary.

^ Attanasio, Orazio P.; Pistaferri, Luigi (April 2016).

"Consumption Inequality" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

30 (2): 3– 28.

doi : 10.1257/jep.30.2.3 .

^ "Consumption Inequality: What's in Your Shopping Basket? | JPMorgan Chase Institute" .

www.jpmorganchase.com .

^ Neckerman, Kathryn M.; Torche, Florencia (July 18, 2007).

"Inequality: Causes and Consequences" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

33 (1): 335– 357.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.soc.33.040406.131755 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

^ Piketty, Thomas (2014).

Capital in the Twenty-First Century .

Belknap Press .

ISBN 067443000X p. 571 ^ Stone, Jon (May 27, 2016).

"Neoliberalism is increasing inequality and stunting economic growth, the IMF says" .

The Independent . Retrieved August 20, 2023 .

^ Ostry, Jonathan D.; Loungani, Prakash; Furceri, Davide (June 2016).

"Neoliberalism: Oversold?" .

Finance & Development . International Monetary Fund . Retrieved August 20, 2023 .

^ a b Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (Kindle ed.). Norton. p. 34.

ISBN 9780393088694 .

^ a b Kausik, B. N. (May 3, 2022).

"Income Inequality, Cause and Cure" .

Challenge .

65 ( 3– 4): 93– 105.

arXiv : 2201.10726 .

doi : 10.1080/05775132.2022.2046883 .

ISSN 0577-5132 .

S2CID 246285783 .

^ Parker, Kim; Fry, Richard (March 25, 2020).

"More than half of U.S. households have some investment in the stock market" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved April 21, 2022 .

^ Britannica Concise Encyclopedia : Tax levied at a rate that increases as the quantity subject to taxation increases.

^ Princeton University WordNet [ permanent dead link ] : (n) progressive tax (any tax in which the rate increases as the amount subject to taxation increases) ^ Alesina, Alberto; Dani Rodrick (May 1994).

"Distributive Politics and Economic Growth" .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

109 (2): 465– 490.

doi : 10.2307/2118470 .

JSTOR 2118470 .

^ Hatch, Megan E.; Rigby, Elizabeth (2015). "Laboratories of (In)equality? Redistributive Policy and Income Inequality in the American States".

Policy Studies Journal .

43 (2): 163– 187.

doi : 10.1111/psj.12094 .

^ Shlomo Yitzhaki (1998).

"More than a Dozen Alternative Ways of Spelling Gini" (PDF) .

Economic Inequality .

8 : 13– 30.

^ Chetty, Raj; Deming, David J.; Friedman, John N. (July 2023).

"Diversifying Society's Leaders? The Determinants and Consequences of Admission to Highly Selective Colleges" (PDF) . Opportunity Insights. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 31, 2023.

Figure 3. "Ivy-Plus" refers to Ivy League schools plus others with similar prestige, rankings or selectivity.

^ Becker, Gary S.; Murphy, Kevin M. (May 2007).

"The Upside of Income Inequality" . The America. Archived from the original on January 2, 2014 . Retrieved January 8, 2014 .

^ Bosworth, Barry; Burtless, Gary; Steuerle, C. Eugene (December 1999).

Lifetime Earnings Patterns, the Distribution of Future Social Security Benefits, and the Impact of Pension Reform (PDF) (report no. CRR WP 1999-06). Chestnut Hill, MA: Center for Retirement Research at Boston College. p. 43. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 19, 2010 . Retrieved October 1, 2012 .

^ Shealy, Craig N. (November 1, 2009).

"An Interview With Education for Sustainable Development "Young Voices": Beliefs and Values From the Next Generation of ESD Leaders" .

Beliefs and Values .

1 (2): 135– 141.

doi : 10.1891/1942-0617.1.2.135 (inactive July 6, 2025).

ISSN 1942-0617 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b Baten, Jörg; Hippe, Ralph (2017). "Geography, land inequality and regional numeracy in Europe in historical perspective".

Journal of Economic Growth .

^ Schmitt, John and Ben Zipperer. 2006. " Is the U.S. a Good Model for Reducing Social Exclusion in Europe?

" CEPR ^ Michael Hiltzik (March 25, 2015).

IMF agrees: Decline of union power has increased income inequality .

Los Angeles Times .

Retrieved March 26, 2015.

^ IMF: The last generation of economic policies may have been a complete failure .

Business Insider.

May 2016.

^ Srikanth, Anagha (December 17, 2020).

"Huge new study shows trickle-down economics makes inequality worse, researchers say" .

The Hill . Retrieved August 20, 2023 .

^ Basu, Kaushik (January 6, 2016).

"Is technology making inequality worse?" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved November 17, 2017 .

^ Rotman, David (October 21, 2014).

"Technology and Inequality" .

MIT Technology Review . Retrieved November 17, 2017 .

^ Rothwell, Jonathan (November 17, 2017).

"Myths of the 1 Percent: What's Putting People at the Top" .

The New York Times . The New York Times . Retrieved November 17, 2017 .

^ Schor, Juliet B. (February 10, 2017).

"Does the sharing economy increase inequality within the eighty percent?: findings from a qualitative study of platform providers" .

Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society .

10 (2): 263– 279.

doi : 10.1093/cjres/rsw047 .

ISSN 1752-1378 .

^ Newton, Casey (May 23, 2013).

"Temping fate: can TaskRabbit go from side gigs to real jobs?" .

The Verge . Retrieved April 30, 2021 .

^ Autor, David; Dorn, David; Katz, Lawrence F; Patterson, Christina; Van Reenen, John (May 1, 2020). "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms*".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

135 (2): 645– 709.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjaa004 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

^ Moll, Benjamin; Rachel, Lukasz; Restrepo, Pascual (2022).

"Uneven Growth: Automation's Impact on Income and Wealth Inequality" .

Econometrica .

90 (6): 2645– 2683.

doi : 10.3982/ECTA19417 .

ISSN 0012-9682 .

^ "SOF/Heyman | The Society of Fellows and Heyman Center for the Humanities" .

SOF/Heyman .

^ "Economic Focus".

The Economist . London. April 19, 2008. p. 81.

^ Slaughter, Matthew J.; Swagel, Phillip (September 1997).

"Does Globalization Lower Wages and Export Jobs?" .

Economic Issues . 11. International Monetary Fund . Retrieved June 18, 2022 .

^ Hickel, Jason (2018).

The Divide: A Brief Guide to Global Inequality and its Solutions . Windmill Books. pp.

175– 176.

ISBN 978-1786090034 .

^ OECD .

OECD Employment Outlook 2008 – Statistical Annex Archived December 6, 2008, at the Wayback Machine . OECD, Paris, 2008, p. 358.

^ "Are Women Earning More Than Men?" .

Forbes . May 12, 2006. Archived from the original on December 10, 2008.

^ Lukas, Carrie (April 3, 2007).

"A Bargain At 77 Cents To a Dollar" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ Weinberg, Daniel H (May 2004).

"Evidence From Census 2000 About Earnings by Detailed Occupation for Men and Women" (PDF) . Retrieved February 21, 2017 .

^ Habibov, Nazim (2012).

"Income inequality and its driving forces in transitional countries: evidence from Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia" .

Journal of Comparative Social Welfare .

28 (3): 209– 211.

doi : 10.1080/17486831.2012.749504 .

S2CID 153681101 .

^ a b c d Brady, David; Burton, Linda M., eds. (April 5, 2017). "The Oxford Handbook of the Social Science of Poverty".

Oxford Handbooks Online .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199914050.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0199914050 .

^ Becker, Gary S.; Tomes, Nigel (December 1979). "An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income and Intergenerational Mobility".

Journal of Political Economy .

87 (6): 1153– 1189.

doi : 10.1086/260831 .

ISSN 0022-3808 .

S2CID 153939481 .

^ a b Borjas, George (July 1991). Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility (Report). Cambridge, MA.

doi : 10.3386/w3788 .

^ Economic Mobility Project: An Initiative of the Pew Charitable Trusts . 2010.

[ page needed ] [ ISBN missing ] ^ "Mapping Inequality." Digital Scholarship Lab, dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/.

^ Richardson, Jason; Mitchell, Bruce C.; Meier, Helen C.S.; Lynch, Emily; Edlebi, Jad (September 10, 2020).

"Redlining and Neighborhood Health" . NCRC.

^ Myers, JoAnne (2020).

The good citizen: the markers of privilege in America .

doi : 10.4324/9781351006705 .

ISBN 978-1-351-00669-9 .

OCLC 1111653987 .

S2CID 211349002 .

[ page needed ] ^ Badger, Emily (May 10, 2019).

"Can the Racial Wealth Gap Be Closed Without Speaking of Race?" .

The New York Times .

^ Danaei, Goodarz; Rimm, Eric B.; Oza, Shefali; Kulkarni, Sandeep C.; Murray, Christopher J. L.; Ezzati, Majid (2010).

"The Promise of Prevention: The Effects of Four Preventable Risk Factors on National Life Expectancy and Life Expectancy Disparities by Race and County in the United States" .

PLOS Medicine .

7 (3): e1000248.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000248 .

PMC 2843596 .

PMID 20351772 .

^ Howell, Brittani (June 24, 2020).

"How Redlining, Racism Harm Black Americans' Health" .

WYSO .

^ CDC (April 30, 2020).

"Communities, Schools, Workplaces, & Events" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Archived from the original on August 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 9, 2020 .

^ Bloome, D.; Western, B. (December 1, 2011). "Cohort Change and Racial Differences in Educational and Income Mobility".

Social Forces .

90 (2): 375– 395.

doi : 10.1093/sf/sor002 .

ISSN 0037-7732 .

S2CID 16514651 .

^ Herring, Cedric; Conley, Dalton (March 2000). "Being Black, Living in the Red: Race, Wealth, and Social Policy in America".

Contemporary Sociology .

29 (2): 349.

doi : 10.2307/2654395 .

ISSN 0094-3061 .

JSTOR 2654395 .

^ "Why the racial wealth gap persists, more than 150 years after emancipation" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 5, 2024 .

^ Vallejo, Jody Agius (December 2010). "Generations of exclusion: Mexican Americans, assimilation and race".

Latino Studies .

8 (4): 572– 574.

doi : 10.1057/lst.2010.45 .

ISSN 1476-3435 .

S2CID 143814091 .

^ a b Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (August 1, 2002).

"The Inheritance of Inequality" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

16 (3): 3– 30.

doi : 10.1257/089533002760278686 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

^ Bhattacharya, Debopam; Mazumder, Bhashkar (2010). "A Nonparametric Analysis of Black-White Differences in Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States".

Quantitative Economics .

2 (3): 335– 379.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1066819 .

hdl : 10419/150324 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 55109224 .

^ Hertz, Tom (December 31, 2009), Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert; Osborne Groves, Melissa (eds.), "Chapter Five. Rags, Riches, and Race The Intergenerational Economic Mobility of Black and White Families in the United States", Unequal Chances , Princeton: Princeton University Press, pp.

165– 191, doi : 10.1515/9781400835492.165 , ISBN 978-1400835492 ^ de Ferranti, David; Perry, Guillermo E.; Ferreira, Francisco; Walton, Michael (2004).

Inequality in Latin America .

doi : 10.1596/0-8213-5665-8 .

ISBN 978-0821356654 .

^ Bossuroy, Thomas; Cogneau, Denis (April 18, 2013). "Social Mobility in Five African Countries".

Review of Income and Wealth .

59 : S84 – S110 .

doi : 10.1111/roiw.12037 .

hdl : 10.1111/roiw.12037 .

ISSN 0034-6586 .

S2CID 154317227 .

^ Peil, Margaret (January 1990). "Intergenerational mobility through education: Nigeria, Sierra Leone and Zimbabwe".

International Journal of Educational Development .

10 (4): 311– 325.

doi : 10.1016/s0738-0593(09)90008-6 .

ISSN 0738-0593 .

^ Hnatkovska, Viktoria; Lahiri, Amartya; Paul, Sourabh B. (2013). "Breaking the Caste Barrier: Intergenerational Mobility in India".

Journal of Human Resources .

48 (2): 435– 473.

doi : 10.1353/jhr.2013.0012 .

ISSN 1548-8004 .

S2CID 13341683 .

^ Korpi, Walter; Palme, Joakim (1998).

"The Paradox of Redistribution and Strategies of Equality: Welfare State Institutions, Inequality, and Poverty in the Western Countries" .

American Sociological Review .

63 (5): 661– 687.

ISSN 0003-1224 .

JSTOR 2657333 .

^ Milanović, Branko (2018).

Global inequality: a new approach for the age of globalization (1st Harvard University Press paperback ed.). Cambridge, MA; London: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-98403-5 .

^ pp. 384 Table 12.2, U.S. university endowment size vs. real annual rate of return ^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (June 4, 2012). The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (pp. 30–31, 35–36). Norton. Kindle Edition.

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (p. 32). Norton. Kindle Edition.

^ James K. Galbraith, Inequality and Instability: A Study of the World Economy Just before the Great Crisis (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012).

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future , p. 334. Norton. Kindle Edition.

^ Stevens, Harry (March 1, 2023).

"The United States has caused the most global warming. When will China pass it?" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 1, 2023.

^ a b Cozzi, Laura; Chen, Olivia; Kim, Hyeji (February 22, 2023).

"The world's top 1% of emitters produce over 1000 times more CO2 than the bottom 1%" .

iea.org . International Energy Agency (IEA).

Archived from the original on March 3, 2023.

"Methodological note: ... The analysis accounts for energy-related CO2, and not other greenhouse gases, nor those related to land use and agriculture." ^ Uchoa, Pablo (May 6, 2019).

"How global warming has made the rich richer" .

BBC . Retrieved June 5, 2019 .

^ Harvey, Fiona (September 20, 2020).

"World's richest 1% cause double CO2 emissions of poorest 50%, says Oxfam" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 22, 2020 .

^ McGrath, Matt (December 10, 2020).

"Climate change: Global 'elite' will need to slash high-carbon lifestyles" .

BBC . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Ward-Glenton, Hannah (November 8, 2022).

"Billionaires emit a million times more greenhouse gases than the average person: Oxfam" .

CNBC . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

^ Elliott, Larry.

"Top economists call for action on runaway global inequality" .

The Guardian . Retrieved July 19, 2023 .

^ "WORLD INVESTMENT REPORT 2023" .

UN Trade & development .

^ "UNSDG | Developing countries face staggering $4 trillion investment gap in SDGs" .

unsdg.un.org . Retrieved June 27, 2024 .

^ Ruggeri, Kai; Ashcroft-Jones, S.; Abate Romero Landini, G. (June 26, 2023).

"The persistence of cognitive biases in financial decisions across economic groups" .

Scientific Reports .

13 (1): 10329.

Bibcode : 2023NatSR..1310329R .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-023-36339-2 .

PMC 10293260 .

PMID 37365245 .

^ a b Data from Chetty, Raj; Jackson, Matthew O.; Kuchler, Theresa; Stroebel, Johannes; et al. (August 1, 2022).

"Social capital I: measurement and associations with economic mobility" .

Nature .

608 (7921): 108– 121.

Bibcode : 2022Natur.608..108C .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-022-04996-4 .

PMC 9352590 .

PMID 35915342 .

Charted in Leonhardt, David (August 1, 2022).

" 'Friending Bias' / A large new study offers clues about how lower-income children can rise up the economic ladder" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2022.

^ Bradley, David; Huber, Evelyne; Moller, Stephanie; Nielsen, François; Stephens, John D. (2011).

"Distribution and Redistribution in Postindustrial Democracies" (PDF) .

World Politics .

55 (2): 193– 228.

doi : 10.1353/wp.2003.0009 .

hdl : 10419/160937 .

S2CID 873271 .

^ Huber, Evelyne; Nielsen, François; Pribble, Jenny; Stephens, John D. (2006). "Politics and Inequality in Latin America and the Caribbean".

American Sociological Review .

71 (6): 943– 963.

doi : 10.1177/000312240607100604 .

JSTOR 25472438 .

S2CID 144270746 .

^ García-Peñalosa, Cecilia ; Turnovsky, Stephen J. (2007). "Growth, Income Inequality, and Fiscal Policy: What Are the Relevant Trade-offs?".

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking .

39 ( 2– 3): 369– 394.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.186.2754 .

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-2879.2007.00029.x .

^ Carroll, Christopher; Slacalek, Jiri; Kiichi, Tokuoka; White, Matthew (2017).

"The distribution of wealth and the marginal propensity to consume" .

Quantitative Economics .

8 (3): 977– 1020.

doi : 10.3982/QE694 .

hdl : 10419/195559 .

^ Maialeh, Robin (2019).

"Why Market Imperatives Invigorate Economic Inequality? Cobb-Douglas Utility Remodelled" .

Panoeconomicus .

66 (2): 145– 163.

doi : 10.2298/PAN160220031M .

^ Keller, Katarina R.I. (2010).

"How Can Education Policy Improve Income Distribution?: An Empirical Analysis of Education Stages and Measures on Income Inequality" .

The Journal of Developing Areas .

43 (2): 51– 77.

doi : 10.1353/jda.0.0052 .

JSTOR 40376250 .

^ Clark, J. R.; Lawson, Robert A. (2008). "The Impact of Economic Growth, Tax Policy and Economic Freedom on Income Inequality".

The Journal of Private Enterprise .

SSRN 2566842 .

^ Alfani, Guido (January 15, 2017).

"The top rich in Europe in the long run of history (1300 to present day)" .

VoxEU.org . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ Scheidel, Walter (February 23, 2017).

"Inequality Has Historically Been Leveled Only By Terrible Violence And Upheaval" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved March 30, 2017 .

^ a b Taylor, Matt (February 22, 2017).

"One Recipe for a More Equal World: Mass Death" .

Vice . Retrieved April 7, 2017 .

^ Porter, Eduardo (December 6, 2016).

"A Dilemma for Humanity: Stark Inequality or Total War" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 30, 2017 .

^ Scheidel, Walter (2017).

The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century . Princeton: Princeton University Press . pp. 438, 444.

ISBN 978-0691165028 .

^ Moyes, P (1988). "A note on minimally progressive taxation and absolute income inequality".

Social Choice and Welfare .

5 ( 2– 3): 227– 234.

doi : 10.1007/BF00735763 .

S2CID 189918945 .

^ Pickett and Wilkinson, The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better , 2011 ^ Duncan, Denvil; Klara Sabirianova Peter (October 2012).

"Unequal Inequalities: Do Progressive Taxes Reduce Income Inequality?" (PDF) . Institute for the Study of Labor.

^ Wealth Gap Widens In Rich Countries As Austerity Threatens To Worsen Inequality: OECD .

The Huffington Post .

Retrieved May 14, 2013 ^ Annie Lowrey (April 16, 2012).

For Two Economists, the Buffett Rule Is Just a Start .

The New York Times.

Retrieved August 17, 2013.

^ Nader, Ralph (April 18, 2013).

Time for a Sales Tax on Wall Street Financial Transactions .

The Huffington Post .

Retrieved June 5, 2013.

^ Erika Eichelberger (October 30, 2013).

Economists to Congress: It's Time for a "Robin Hood Tax" on the Rich .

Mother Jones .

Retrieved November 15, 2013.

^ "The logical floor" .

The Economist . December 14, 2013.

^ Konczal, Mike (March 30, 2013).

"How an anti-rentier agenda might bring liberals, conservatives together" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved April 6, 2013 .

^ Grusky, David B. (March–April 2013).

"What to Do about Inequality" .

Boston Review . Archived from the original on April 20, 2013 . Retrieved April 6, 2013 .

^ a b Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A.; Verdier, Thierry (2017). "Asymmetric Growth and Institutions in an Interdependent World".

Journal of Political Economy .

125 (5): 1245– 1305.

doi : 10.1086/693038 .

hdl : 1721.1/118645 .

S2CID 154662416 .

^ Lane, Kenworthy (2015).

Social Democratic America . US: Oxford University Press . pp.

88– 93.

ISBN 978-0190230951 .

^ "Goal 10 targets" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ a b "The Spirit Level" .

equalitytrust.org.uk . Archived from the original on May 31, 2015 . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ a b Pickett, KE; Wilkinson, RG (March 2015). "Income inequality and health: a causal review".

Social Science & Medicine .

128 : 316– 326.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.12.031 .

PMID 25577953 .

^ Woodward, Aylin (November 30, 2019).

"Life expectancy in the US keeps going down, and a new study says America's worsening inequality could be to blame" .

Business Insider . Archived from the original on December 18, 2019 . Retrieved December 18, 2019 .

^ Coughlan, Sean; Brown, David (May 14, 2019).

"Inequality driving 'deaths of despair' " .

BBC . Retrieved December 18, 2019 .

^ Antony, Jürgen, and Torben Klarl. "Estimating the income inequality-health relationship for the United States between 1941 and 2015: Will the relevant frequencies please stand up?." The Journal of the Economics of Ageing . 17 (2020): 100275.

^ Conley, Julia (March 20, 2019).

"Social Democratic Nations Rank Happiest on Global Index (Again). US Ranking Falls (Again)" .

Common Dreams . Retrieved August 21, 2023 .

^ "World Happiness Report 2019" (PDF) .

^ Neapolitan, Jerome L (1999). "A comparative analysis of nations with low and high levels of violent crime".

Journal of Criminal Justice .

27 (3): 259– 274.

doi : 10.1016/S0047-2352(98)00064-6 .

^ Ezcurra, Roberto; Palacios, David (2016). "Terrorism and spatial disparities: Does interregional inequality matter?".

European Journal of Political Economy .

42 : 60– 74.

doi : 10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2016.01.004 .

^ Kang, Songman (2015). "Inequality and crime revisited: Effects of local inequality and economic segregation on crime".

Journal of Population Economics .

29 (2): 593– 626.

doi : 10.1007/s00148-015-0579-3 .

S2CID 155852321 .

^ Corvalana, Alejandro, and Matteo Pazzonab. "Does Inequality Really Increase Crime? Theory and Evidence." In Technical Report. 2019.

^ Richard Layard (March 3–5, 2003).

"Happiness: Has Social Science A Clue?" (PDF) .

Lionel Robbins Memorial Lectures . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 3, 2013.

^ Blanchard 2000 ; Oswald 2003 , [ verification needed ] .

^ Blanchard, Olivier (2000).

Macroeconomics (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River N.J: Prentice-Hall.

OCLC 42454429 .

[ verification needed ] ^ Oswald, Andrew J. (2003).

"How Much do External Factors Affect Wellbeing? A Way to Use 'Happiness Economics' to Decide" (PDF) .

The Psychologist .

16 : 140– 141.

[ verification needed ] ^ Bernstein, Jared (January 13, 2014).

"Poverty and Inequality, in Charts" .

Economix Blog . Retrieved April 30, 2021 .

^ "No Matter How We Measure Poverty, the Poverty Rate Would Be Much Lower If Economic Growth Were More Broadly Shared" .

Economic Policy Institute . Retrieved April 30, 2021 .

^ "Conservative Inequality Denialism," by Timothy Noah The New Republic (October 25, 2012) ^ The Way Forward Archived July 11, 2012, at archive.today By Daniel Alpert, Westwood Capital; Robert Hockett, Professor of Law, Cornell University; and Nouriel Roubini, Professor of Economics, New York University, New America Foundation, October 10, 2011 ^ Plumer, Brad (March 27, 2013).

" 'Trickle-down consumption': How rising inequality can leave everyone worse off" .

Washington Post . Retrieved March 27, 2013 .

^ Bram Lancee and Hermanvande Werfhorst (2011) "Income Inequality and Participation: A Comparison of 24 European Countries" Archived July 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine GINI Discussion Paper No. 6 (Amsterdam Centre for Inequality Studies) ^ Alesina, Alberto; Perotti, Roberto (1996).

"Income distribution, political instability, and investment" .

European Economic Review .

40 (6): 1203– 1228.

doi : 10.1016/0014-2921(95)00030-5 .

S2CID 51838517 .

^ Robert C. Lieberman; Suzanne Mettler; Thomas B. Pepinsky; Kenneth M. Roberts; Richard Valelly (June 2019).

"The Trump Presidency and American Democracy: A Historical and Comparative Analysis" .

Perspectives on Politics .

17 (2): 470– 479.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592718003286 .

^ Walder, D.; Lust, E. (2018).

"Unwelcome Change: Coming to Terms with Democratic Backsliding" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

21 (1): 93– 113.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050517-114628 .

^ Huq, Aziz; Ginsburg, Tom (2018).

"How to Lose a Constitutional Democracy" .

UCLA Law Review .

65 : 78– 169.

^ Baten, Joerg; Mumme, Christina (December 1, 2013).

"Does inequality lead to civil wars? A global long-term study using anthropometric indicators (1816–1999)" .

European Journal of Political Economy .

32 : 56– 79.

doi : 10.1016/j.ejpoleco.2013.06.007 .

ISSN 0176-2680 .

^ Christina Mumme and Jörg Baten (2014). "Civil War Determinants From a Long-Term Perspective: Was There Impact Of Anthropometric Deprivation From 1816–1999?".

European Review of Political Economy .

32 : 56– 79.

^ Connell, Brendan J.; Dorr, Dalton C.; Shin, Adrian J. (March 6, 2021). "Inequality and the Partisan Political Economy".

Representation .

57 (4): 575– 601.

doi : 10.1080/00344893.2021.1883100 .

ISSN 0034-4893 .

S2CID 233845379 .

^ Barbara Goodwin.

Using Political Ideas . West Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., 2007. p. 107.

^ Wood, John Cunningham (1996).

Karl Marx's Economics: Critical Assessments I and II . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415087148 .

^ Oldrich Kyn.

"The Normative View of Marxian Theory on Income Distribution under Socialism" . Archived from the original on March 14, 2015 . Retrieved November 30, 2013 .

^ Landes, David. S. (1969).

The Unbound Prometheus: Technological Change and Industrial Development in Western Europe from 1750 to the Present . Cambridge & New York: Press Syndicate of the University of Cambridge.

ISBN 978-0521094184 .

^ O'Donnell, Michael, and Serena Chen. "Political Ideology, the Moralizing of Income Inequality, and Its Social Consequences." Available at SSRN 3253666 (2018).

^ Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, state, and utopia . Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0631197805 .

OCLC 1120103788 .

^ Rawls, John (2005).

A Theory of Justice . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674017726 .

^ Barry, Brian (1975).

The liberal theory of justice : a critical examination of the principal doctrines in A theory of justice by John Rawls . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0198245092 .

OCLC 476228713 .

^ Cowen, Tyler (July 19, 2014).

"Income Inequality Is Not Rising Globally. It's Falling" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 26, 2014 .

^ Li, Robert (July 1, 2011).

'KILLING THE NOOB' A thesis on Meritocracy and what it has to do with Massive Multiplayer Online Role Playing Games (Bachelor of Arts with Honours thesis). Swinburne University of Technology.

^ Anthony Giddens (June 27, 2005).

"NS Essay – 'Accumulation of wealth is unjust where it arises not from hard work and risk-taking enterprise, but from brute luck factors such as returns from property. Inheritance is a form of brute-luck inequality' " .

New Statesman . Archived from the original on December 9, 2007.

^ John Nichols (December 2, 2013).

Pope: "King Money" Culture is Hurting Young and Old .

Moyers & Company .

Retrieved December 8, 2013.

^ Andrew Brown (April 28, 2014).

Pope Francis condemns inequality, thus refusing to play the game .

The Guardian.

Retrieved May 27, 2014.

^ The Economics of Welfare | Arthur Cecil Pigou ^ "inequity - Traduction anglais-arabe | PONS" .

fr.pons.com . Retrieved June 18, 2022 .

^ "Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and Americans Different?" . Archived from the original on February 1, 2014.

^ The relation between economic inequality and political inequality is explained by Robert Alan Dahl in the chapters The Presence of a Market Economy (p. 63), The Distribution of Political Resources (p. 84) und Market Capitalism and Human Dispositions (p. 87) in On Political Equality , 2006, 120 pages, Yale University Press, ISBN 978-0300126877 ^ "The toll of job loss" .

www.apa.org . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ a b Amartya Sen (1999). "Poverty as Capability Deprivation".

Development as Freedom . New York: Anchor Books.

^ Fukuda-Parr, Sakiko (2003). "The Human Development Paradigm: Operationalizing Sen's Ideas on Capabilities".

Feminist Economics .

9 ( 2– 3): 301– 317.

doi : 10.1080/1354570022000077980 .

S2CID 18178004 .

^ UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (January 1, 1990).

Human Deuelopment Report 1990 (PDF) (Report). Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.

Via Human Deuelopment Reports ^ Deneulin, Séverine ; Alkire, Sabina (2009), "The human development and capability approach", in Deneulin, Séverine ; Shahani, Lila (eds.), An introduction to the human development and capability approach freedom and agency , Sterling, VA & Ottawa, Ontario: Earthscan International Development Research Centre, pp.

22– 48, ISBN 978-1844078066 ^ Communications, NYU Web.

"Neoliberal Policies, Institutions Have Prompted Preference for Greater Inequality, New Study Finds" .

www.nyu.edu . Retrieved August 20, 2023 .

^ Wike, Richard; et al. (January 9, 2025).

"Economic Inequality Seen as Major Challenge Around the World" . Pew Research Center . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ Norton, Michael I.; Ariely, Dan (2011). "Building a Better America – One Wealth Quintile at a Time".

Perspectives on Psychological Science .

6 (1): 9– 12.

doi : 10.1177/1745691610393524 .

PMID 26162108 .

S2CID 2013655 .

^ Stilwell, Frank (2019).

The Political Economy of Inequality .

Polity . pp.

240– 241.

ISBN 978-1509528653 .

Further reading [ edit ] Books Alfani, Guido; Tullio, Matteo Di (2019).

The Lion's Share: Inequality and the Rise of the Fiscal State in Preindustrial Europe . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108568043 .

ISBN 978-1-108-56804-3 .

Atkinson, Anthony B.

; Bourguignon, François (2000).

Handbook of income distribution . Amsterdam & New York: Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0444816313 .

Atkinson, Anthony B.

(2015).

Inequality: What Can Be Done?

Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0674504763 Barro, Robert J.

; Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2003) [1995].

Economic growth (2nd ed.). Massachusetts: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262025539 .

Giddens, Anthony ; Diamond, Patrick (2005).

The new egalitarianism . Polity.

ISBN 978-0745634319 .

Gilens, Martin (2012).

Affluence and influence: Economic inequality and political power in America . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691162423 .

Gradín, Carlos; Leibbrandt, Murray; Tarp, Finn, eds. (2021).

Inequality In The Developing World . WIDER Studies in Development Economics. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198863960 .

John, K (2023).

Foundations of Real-World Economics (3rd Edition) Section 9.1 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-84789-5 .

Lambert, Peter J. (2001).

The distribution and redistribution of income (3rd ed.). Manchester, NY: Manchester University Press Palgrave.

ISBN 978-0719057328 .

Page, Benjamin I.; Jacobs, Lawrence R. (2009).

Class war?: What Americans really think about economic inequality . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226644554 .

Ribeiro, Marcelo Byrro (2020).

Income Distribution Dynamics of Economic Systems: An Econophysical Approach .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1107092532 .

Salverda, Wiemer; Nolan, Brian; Smeeding, Timothy M. (2009).

The Oxford handbook of economic inequality . Oxford & New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199231379 .

Scheidel, Walter (2017).

The Great Leveler: Violence and the History of Inequality from the Stone Age to the Twenty-First Century . Princeton: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0691165028 .

Schmidtz, David (2006).

The elements of justice . Cambridge & New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521539364 .

Sen, Amartya (1999).

Development as Freedom . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198297581 .

Sen, Amartya ; Foster, James E. (1997).

On economic inequality . Radcliffe Lectures. Oxford & New York: Clarendon Press Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198281931 .

Wilkinson, Richard G.

(2005).

The impact of inequality: how to make sick societies healthier . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415372695 .

Wilkinson, Richard G.

; Pickett, Kate (2009).

The spirit level: why more equal societies almost always do better . London: Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-1846140396 .

Articles Ahamed, Liaquat (September 2, 2019). "Widening Gyre: The rise and fall and rise of economic inequality".

The New Yorker . pp.

26– 29.

[T]here seems to [be] some sort of cap on inequality – a limit to the economic divisions a country can ultimately cope with.

Alesina, Alberto; Di Tella, Rafael; MacCulloch, Robert (2004). "Inequality and happiness: Are Europeans and Americans different?".

Journal of Public Economics .

88 ( 9– 10): 2009– 2042.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.203.664 .

doi : 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2003.07.006 .

Andersen, Robert (2012).

"Support for Democracy in Cross-national Perspective: The Detrimental Effect of Economic Inequality" (PDF) .

Research in Social Stratification and Mobility .

30 (4): 389– 402.

doi : 10.1016/j.rssm.2012.04.002 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved May 12, 2019 .

Andersen, Robert; Fetner, Tina (2008). "Economic Inequality and Intolerance: Attitudes toward Homosexuality in 35 Democracies".

American Journal of Political Science .

52 (4): 942– 958.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2008.00352.x .

hdl : 11375/22293 .

JSTOR 25193859 .

Barro, Robert J. (1991). "Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

106 (2): 407– 443.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.312.3126 .

doi : 10.2307/2937943 .

JSTOR 2937943 .

Barro, Robert J. (2000). "Inequality and Growth in a Panel of Countries".

Journal of Economic Growth .

5 (1): 5– 32.

doi : 10.1023/A:1009850119329 .

S2CID 2089406 .

Cousin, Bruno; Chauvin, Sébastien (2021).

"Is there a global super-bourgeoisie?" Sociology Compass 15 (6): 1–15.

Cousin, Bruno; Shamus Khan ; Ashley Mears (2018).

"Theoretical and methodological pathways for research on elites" Socio-Economic Review 16 (2): 225–249.

Galor, Oded; Zeira, Joseph (1993). "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics".

The Review of Economic Studies .

60 (1): 35– 52.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.636.8225 .

doi : 10.2307/2297811 .

JSTOR 2297811 .

Godechot, Olivier et al. (2024). " The Great Separation: Top Earner Segregation at Work in Advanced Capitalist Economies ".

American Journal of Sociology .

Goudarzi, Shahrzad; Badaan, Vivienne; Knowles, Eric D. (May 10, 2022).

"Neoliberalism and the Ideological Construction of Equity Beliefs" .

Perspectives on Psychological Science .

17 (5): 1431– 1451.

doi : 10.1177/17456916211053311 .

PMID 35536556 .

S2CID 237727224 .

Hatch, Megan E.; Rigby, Elizabeth (2015). "Laboratories of (In)equality? Redistributive Policy and Income Inequality in the American States".

Policy Studies Journal .

43 (2): 163– 187.

doi : 10.1111/psj.12094 .

Kaldor, Nicholas (1955). "Alternative Theories of Distribution".

The Review of Economic Studies .

23 (2): 83– 100.

doi : 10.2307/2296292 .

JSTOR 2296292 .

Kenworthy, Lane (2010). "Rising Inequality, Public Policy, and America's Poor".

Challenge .

53 (6): 93– 109.

doi : 10.2753/0577-5132530606 .

JSTOR 27896630 .

S2CID 154630590 .

Kenworthy, Lane (2017).

"Why the Surge in Income Inequality?" .

Contemporary Sociology .

46 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1177/0094306116681789 .

S2CID 151979382 .

Osnos, Evan , "Oligarch-in-Chief: The greed of the Trump Administration has galvanized America's ultra-rich – and their opponents", The New Yorker , 2 June 2025, pp. 32–39.

García-Peñalosa, Cecilia ; Turnovsky, Stephen J. (2007). "Growth, Income Inequality, and Fiscal Policy: What Are the Relevant Trade-offs?".

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking .

39 ( 2– 3): 369– 394.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.186.2754 .

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-2879.2007.00029.x .

Pigou, Arthur C.

(1932) [1920], "Part I, Chapter VIII: Economic welfare and changes in the distribution of the national dividend (section I.VIII.3) ", in Pigou, Arthur C.

(ed.), The economics of welfare (4th ed.), London: Macmillan and Co., OCLC 302702 .

Sala-i-Martin, X. (2006). "The World Distribution of Income: Falling Poverty and ... Convergence, Period".

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

121 (2): 351– 397.

doi : 10.1162/qjec.2006.121.2.351 .

JSTOR 25098796 .

Seguino, Stephanie (2000). "Gender Inequality and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Analysis".

World Development .

28 (7): 1211– 1230.

doi : 10.1016/S0305-750X(00)00018-8 .

Smeeding, Timothy M.; Thompson, Jeffrey P. (2011). "Recent Trends in Income Inequality". In Immervoll, Herwig; Peichl, Andreas; Tatsiramos, Konstantinos (eds.).

Who Loses in the Downturn? Economic Crisis, Employment and Income Distribution . Research in Labor Economics. Vol. 32. pp.

1– 50.

doi : 10.1108/S0147-9121(2011)0000032004 .

ISBN 978-0857247490 .

Solow, Robert M. (1956).

"A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

70 (1): 65– 94.

doi : 10.2307/1884513 .

hdl : 10338.dmlcz/143862 .

JSTOR 1884513 .

Stewart, Alexander J.; McCarty, Nolan; Bryson, Joanna J. (2020).

"Polarization under rising inequality and economic decline" .

Science Advances .

6 (50): eabd4201.

arXiv : 1807.11477 .

Bibcode : 2020SciA....6.4201S .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abd4201 .

PMC 7732181 .

PMID 33310855 .

S2CID 216144890 .

Historical [ edit ] Crayen, Dorothee; Joerg, Baten (2010).

"New evidence and new methods to measure human capital inequality before and during the industrial revolution: France and the US in the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries" .

Economic History Review .

63 (2): 452– 478.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2009.00499.x .

Hoffman, Philip T. (2002).

"Real inequality in Europe since 1500" .

Journal of Economic History .

62 (2): 322– 355.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.824.3130 .

doi : 10.1017/S0022050702000529 .

Lindert, Peter H.; Steven, Nafziger (2014).

"Russian inequality on the eve of revolution" .

Journal of Economic History .

74 (3): 767– 798.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.701.8331 .

doi : 10.1017/S002205071400059X .

Milanovic, Branko (2024). " How rich were the rich? An empirically-based taxonomy of pre-industrial bases of wealth ".

Explorations in Economic History .

93 : 101592.

Morrisson, Christian; Wayne, Snyder (2000). "The income inequality of France in historical perspective".

European Review of Economic History .

4 (1): 59– 83.

doi : 10.1017/S1361491600000149 .

S2CID 33000439 .

Nicolini, Esteban A.; Ramos Palencia, Fernando (2016). "Decomposing income inequality in a backward pre-industrial economy: Old Castile (Spain) in the middle of the eighteenth century".

Economic History Review .

69 (3): 747– 772.

doi : 10.1111/ehr.12122 .

S2CID 154988112 .

Piketty, Thomas; Emmanuel, Saez (2006).

"The evolution of top incomes: a historical and international perspective" (PDF) .

American Economic Review .

96 (2): 200– 205.

doi : 10.1257/000282806777212116 . Archived from the original (PDF) on December 26, 2011.

Piketty, Thomas; Emmanuel, Saez (2003).

"Income inequality in the United States, 1913–1998" .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

118 (1): 1– 41.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.160.1932 .

doi : 10.1162/00335530360535135 .

Saito, Osamu (2015).

"Growth and inequality in the great and little divergence debate: a Japanese perspective; Covers 1600–1868 with comparison to Stuart England and Mughal India" .

Economic History Review .

68 (2): 399– 419.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.160.1932 .

doi : 10.1111/ehr.12071 .

Stewart, Frances (2016). "Changing perspectives on inequality and development".

Studies in Comparative International Development .

51 (1): 60– 80.

doi : 10.1007/s12116-016-9222-x .

Sutch, Richard (2017).

"The One Percent across Two Centuries: A Replication of Thomas Piketty's Data on the Concentration of Wealth in the United States" (PDF) .

Social Science History .

41 (4): 587– 613.

doi : 10.1017/ssh.2017.27 .

Van, Zanden; Jan, Luiten (1995).

"Tracing the beginning of the Kuznets curve: Western Europe during the early modern period" (PDF) .

Economic History Review .

48 (4): 643– 664.

doi : 10.2307/2598128 .

JSTOR 2598128 .

Wei, Yehua Dennis (2017).

"Geography of inequality in Asia" (PDF) .

Geographical Review .

107 (2): 263– 275.

Bibcode : 2017GeoRv.107..263W .

doi : 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2016.12212.x .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Economic inequality .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Income inequality .

Bowles, Samuel; Carlin, Wendy (2020).

"Inequality as experienced difference: A reformulation of the Gini coefficient" .

Economics Letters .

186 108789.

doi : 10.1016/j.econlet.2019.108789 .

ISSN 0165-1765 .

v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐779wd
Cached time: 20250812014001
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.427 seconds
Real time usage: 2.650 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16080/1000000
Revision size: 149583/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 539666/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 33609/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 46/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 771707/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.647/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10619854/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2316.244      1 -total
 54.69% 1266.701      1 Template:Reflist
 25.38%  587.973     87 Template:Cite_journal
 11.92%  276.001     39 Template:Cite_web
 10.03%  232.243     40 Template:Cite_book
  8.89%  205.813     36 Template:Cite_news
  4.99%  115.503      1 Template:Sfnm
  3.42%   79.300     10 Template:Fix
  3.35%   77.616      4 Template:Navbox
  3.34%   77.378      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:370432:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014001 and revision id 1305299126. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_inequality&oldid=1305299126 " Categories : Distribution of wealth Economic globalization Economic inequality Libertarian theory Occupy Wall Street Population concepts Social inequality Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2022 Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Articles to be expanded from February 2025 All articles to be expanded Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2021 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from April 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2019 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 06:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic inequality 45 languages Add topic

