Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot Toggle Plot subsection 1.1 Continuity 2 Production Toggle Production subsection 2.1 Casting 3 Broadcast and reception Toggle Broadcast and reception subsection 3.1 Critical reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Doctor Falls 6 languages Español Français 日本語 Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2017 Doctor Who episode 275b – "The Doctor Falls" Doctor Who episode Cast Doctor Peter Capaldi – Twelfth Doctor Companions Pearl Mackie – Bill Potts Matt Lucas – Nardole Others Michelle Gomez – Missy John Simm – The Master Samantha Spiro – Hazran Briana Shann – Alit Rosie Boore – Gazron Simon Coombs – Rexhill Stephanie Hyam – Heather Nicholas Briggs – Voice of the Cybermen David Bradley – First Doctor Production Directed by Rachel Talalay Written by Steven Moffat Produced by Peter Bennett Executive producer(s) Steven Moffat Brian Minchin Music by Murray Gold Series Series 10 Running time 2nd of 2-part story, 60 minutes First broadcast 1 July 2017 ( 2017-07-01 ) Chronology ← Preceded by " World Enough and Time " Followed by → " Twice Upon a Time " List of episodes (2005–present) " The Doctor Falls " is the twelfth and final episode of the tenth series , and 843rd episode overall, of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was written by Steven Moffat , directed by Rachel Talalay , and was broadcast on 1 July 2017 on BBC One . It is the second episode of a two-part story, the first part being " World Enough and Time ".

As a continuation of the previous episode, "The Doctor Falls" concludes the first televised multi- Master story of the show, as well as the origin of the Mondasian Cybermen . In the episode, the Doctor must save himself and the remaining human population of a gigantic colony ship from Mondas, while also dealing with two different incarnations of the Master at once. The episode features a cameo from the First Doctor , now portrayed by David Bradley . He had previously played William Hartnell , the original First Doctor actor, in the 2013 Doctor Who docudrama An Adventure in Space and Time .

The episode was watched by 5.30 million viewers and received much critical praise, with many deeming it a satisfying end to the tenth series. Aspects of the episode that were met with the most praise were Moffat’s script, Talalay’s direction and Capaldi’s performance.

Plot [ edit ] Continuing from the previous episode, the Master and Missy capture the Doctor, but he had earlier surreptitiously reprogrammed the Cybernet to target Time Lords as well, forcing them to flee.

Nardole arrives in a commandeered shuttlecraft to rescue them. The Doctor is electrocuted by a Cyberman, but is saved by Bill.

A Mondasian Cyberman, on display at a Doctor Who exhibition They evacuate to a higher level of the ship containing a solar farm populated by children and a few adults. The Doctor recovers, but suppresses the early signs of regeneration . Bill initially remains unaware of her transformation, her strong mind acting like a perception filter, until one of the children inadvertently reveals the truth to her. Bill sheds a tear, which the Doctor calls a hopeful sign. Missy and the Master discover a camouflaged lift. They call for it, but an upgraded Cyberman arrives, which the group destroys. The Doctor warns that the time dilation affords the Cybermen more time to evolve and strategize.

Nardole discovers the floor directly below the solar farm contains fuel pipes. He is able to trigger controlled explosions, which are used to defeat the Cybermen's initial attack. The Doctor instructs Nardole to lead the human community to a solar farm on another floor and remain there to safeguard them. Bill stays to fight with the Doctor. Despite the Doctor's impassioned plea, Missy and the Master abandon him, intending to take the lift to the lowest level and escape in the Master's TARDIS . Missy, however, changes her mind and stabs the Master. He retaliates by shooting her in the back with his laser screwdriver to prevent her regeneration, and leaves her to die.

An army of Cybermen arrive, but are warded off by the Doctor until he falls after being shot. Surrounded, the Doctor ignites all the fuel pipes, engulfing the farm in a fireball and destroying the Cybermen. As Bill kneels beside the unconscious Doctor, Heather appears, having found Bill through her tears. She saves Bill by transforming her into an oil entity like herself. They carry the Doctor inside his TARDIS, and Heather invites Bill to explore the universe with her, but also assures Bill that she can turn her human again if Bill desires. Bill bids a tearful farewell to the Doctor, hoping to see him again, and then leaves to travel with Heather.

The TARDIS arrives in a snowy landscape and the Doctor awakens, and starts regenerating. Refusing to keep continually changing, he emerges and seemingly stops his regeneration. Within, the cloister bell sounds an alarm as the Doctor encounters his original incarnation .

Continuity [ edit ] During the final battle, the Doctor lists the various sites of his encounters with Cybermen: Mondas ( The Tenth Planet ), Telos ( The Tomb of the Cybermen ), Planet 14 ( The Invasion ), Voga ( Revenge of the Cybermen ), Canary Wharf (" Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday "), and the Moon ( The Moonbase ).

[ 1 ] He also mentions Marinus, a reference to the events of Grant Morrison 's Sixth Doctor comic The World Shapers , in which that planet's Voord evolve into Cybermen (though that story also suggests that Mondas, Planet 14, and Marinus are all the same planet).

[ 2 ] Missy mentions that the Doctor once died in a fall, referring to events in Logopolis (1981), in which one of her previous incarnations causes the Fourth Doctor to fall from a radio telescope tower.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] The Doctor flashes back to several of his former companions from the revived series, who each say "Doctor", similar to what the Fourth Doctor experienced prior to his regeneration in Logopolis .

[ 1 ] When the Doctor awakens, he quotes himself from previous regenerations: "Sontarans perverting the course of human history" (the Fourth Doctor in Robot ), "I don't want to go!" (the Tenth Doctor in " The End of Time "), "When the Doctor was me..." (the Eleventh Doctor in " The Time of the Doctor "), and "It's starting. I'm regenerating!" (the Tenth Doctor in " The Stolen Earth ").

[ 4 ] The First Doctor's dialogue "You may be a doctor, but I am the Doctor. The original, you might say" references lines spoken by the Fourth Doctor to Harry Sullivan in Robot , and by the First Doctor to Tegan Jovanka in The Five Doctors .

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] Production [ edit ] The read through for this episode took place on 21 February 2017.

[ 1 ] On 6 March 2017 the BBC stated that the work on the final two episodes of the series had begun, " World Enough and Time " and this episode, with Rachel Talalay returning to direct her third consecutive series finale.

[ 5 ] Filming for the episodes and the series as a whole concluded on 7 April 2017.

[ 6 ] The final scene involving David Bradley was filmed as part of the filming of the Christmas Special in June 2017.

[ 7 ] Casting [ edit ] David Bradley appeared at the episode's conclusion as the First Doctor. He had previously portrayed William Hartnell , the First Doctor's actor, in the docudrama An Adventure in Space and Time and appeared as the villain Solomon in " Dinosaurs on a Spaceship ", [ 1 ] as well as voicing the character of Shansheeth Blue in Death of the Doctor in the Doctor Who spin-off series The Sarah Jane Adventures .

[ 8 ] Michelle Gomez had previously announced that she was exiting the role of Missy following the conclusion of series ten .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Broadcast and reception [ edit ] The episode was watched by 3.75 million viewers overnight, an audience share of 25.3%.

[ 11 ] The episode received 5.30 million views overall, and it received an Appreciation Index of 83.

[ 12 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Professional ratings Aggregate scores Source Rating Rotten Tomatoes (Average Score) 9.3/10 [ 13 ] Rotten Tomatoes (Tomatometer) 100% [ 13 ] Review scores Source Rating The A.V. Club A [ 14 ] Entertainment Weekly A− [ 15 ] SFX [ 16 ] TV Fanatic [ 17 ] IndieWire A− [ 18 ] IGN 7.9 [ 19 ] Vulture [ 20 ] Radio Times [ 21 ] Daily Mirror [ 22 ] The Daily Telegraph [ 23 ] "The Doctor Falls" received overwhelmingly positive reviews, with most reviewers finding it a fitting end to the tenth series.

[ 24 ] The episode holds a score of 100% on Rotten Tomatoes , with the site consensus reading "'The Doctor Falls' offers a dramatic and satisfying end for this iteration of the show's ever-evolving hero." [ 13 ] Praise was directed at Moffat's script, Talalay's direction, and Capaldi's performance.

Alasdair Wilkins from The A.V. Club called the episode a "perfect finale", saying that the Twelfth Doctor is a Doctor who knows who he is, portrayed by an actor who knows exactly how he wants to play the part of the character, both of which are played into the narrative of the story and blending into the storyline of the Doctor refusing to regenerate. He complimented how the multiple storylines of the series were wrapped up and brought to a satisfying conclusion, as well as respecting the reality of the character's emotions, which were performed with only a couple of small missteps.

[ 14 ] Scott Collura of IGN also praised the dynamic between the two Masters, describing the relationship as a mixture of "brother-sister and boyfriend-girlfriend" and its resultant complexities, and how the intentions of the previous incarnation of the Master was to draw Missy back into the traditional evil manner of the character. He stated that the story made enough sense that "Moffat doesn't really even need to write it on the page". He complimented the appearance of David Bradley as the First Doctor, but stated that extending the storyline of the regeneration out over the two episodes of the finale, as well as the Christmas special, was a great concept but did not work in the context of the episode.

[ 19 ] Giving the episode a perfect score, Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times singled out the performances as one of the strong points about the episode, saying that Capaldi, Simm and Gomez worked perfectly well together within the episode. He stated that Capaldi was as magnificent as he had been through the series, and that "The Doctor Falls" was an episode dedicated to him, and how he "stands tall" among the competition of Simm's and Gomez's acting. He stated that Simm's Master was not the "loon" that was portrayed seven years ago, but complimented him nonetheless, and that Gomez's portrayal of Missy and the character's soul-searching was "simply superb".

[ 21 ] Daniel Jackson of the Daily Mirror also gave the episode a perfect score, and felt the episode was an immensely satisfying conclusion with great storytelling and epic performances, stating that with all the teasers, build up and trailers that had been released in preparation for the episode, "The Doctor Falls" could have resulted in failure, but he complimented how well it turned out. He stated that the episode was an "immensely satisfying, packed, heart string tugging" conclusion to the series, that was the result of "clever storytelling and tremendous acting". He stated that Capaldi and his performance in the episode "simply shines", and that the Twelfth Doctor had never had a better episode through his era.

[ 22 ] The episode received a nomination in the Best Special and Visual Effects category at the 2019 BAFTA Cymru Awards .

[ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Series 10, Doctor Who – The Doctor Falls: The Fact File – BBC One" .

BBC . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Dillon-Trenchard, Pete (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who series 10: The Doctor Falls geeky spots and Easter eggs" .

Den of Geek!

. Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ a b "Doctor Who series 10: The Doctor Falls geeky spots and Easter eggs" . Den of Geek. July 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Ling, Thomas (1 July 2017).

"The 7 best Doctor Who callbacks and hidden references in series 10 finale The Doctor Falls" .

Radio Times .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ "Original Mondasian Cybermen return to Doctor Who!" .

BBC . 6 March 2017 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ @bbcdoctorwho (7 April 2017).

"It's a wrap! The Series 10 shoot comes to an end, and here's one of today's boards, illustrated by Peter Capaldi!" ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on 7 April 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2017 – via Twitter .

^ "Steven Moffat & Rachel Talalay – The Aftershow – Doctor Who: The Fan Show" .

BBC . 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ "Sarah Jane Guide" .

News In Time And Space Ltd . 31 May 2015 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Fitzpatrick, Kevin (16 May 2017).

" 'Doctor Who' Star Michelle Gomez Leaving After Season 10" .

ScreenCrush . Retrieved 2 November 2024 .

^ Shepard, Jack (16 May 2017).

"Doctor Who: Michelle Gomez confirms Missy leaving after series 10 finale" .

The Independent . Retrieved 1 November 2024 .

^ "The Doctor Falls – Overnight Viewing Figures" .

Doctor Who News . 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ Ainsworth, John (2019). Wright, Mark (ed.). "World Enough and Time / The Doctor Falls and Twice Upon a Time".

Doctor Who: The Complete History .

89 (276).

Panini Comics , Hachette Partworks : 60, 122.

^ a b c "Doctor Who, Series 10, Episode 12, The Doctor Falls" .

Rotten Tomatoes . Retrieved 14 May 2024 .

^ a b Wilkins, Alasdair (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who offers a pitch-perfect finale" .

The A.V. Club . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Serrao, Nivea (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who finale recap: 'The Doctor Falls' " .

Entertainment Weekly . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Delahunty-Light, Zoe (2 July 2017).

"Doctor Who S10.12 review: "An hour's worth of shining character performances" " .

GamesRadar . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Wiedel, Kathleen (2 July 2017).

"Doctor Who Season 10 Episode 13 Review: The Doctor Falls" .

TV Fanatic . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Nguyen, Hanh (1 July 2017).

" 'Doctor Who' Review: Killer Finale Hints at a Female Doctor and Delivers Some Major Time Lord Plot Twists" .

IndieWire . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ a b Collura, Scott (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who: "The Doctor Falls" Review" .

IGN . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Ruediger, Ross (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who Season-Finale Recap: Where I Stand Is Where I Fall" .

New York . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ a b Mulkern, Patrick (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who finale review: the Doctor falls but the magnificent Peter Capaldi stands tall" .

Radio Times . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ a b Jackson, Daniel (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who Series 10 Episode 12 The Doctor Falls review: An immensely satisfying conclusion with great storytelling and epic performances" .

Daily Mirror . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Gee, Catherine (1 July 2017).

"Doctor Who: The Doctor Falls, review: Peter Capaldi got the series finale he always wanted" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ "The Doctor Falls – Reaction" .

Doctor Who News . 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ "Nominations announced for the 2019 British Academy Cymru Awards" .

BAFTA . 5 September 2019 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Twelfth Doctor .

"The Doctor Falls" at the BBC Doctor Who homepage "The Doctor Falls" on Tardis Wiki , the Doctor Who Wiki "The Doctor Falls" at IMDb v t e Doctor Who episodes Original series Season 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 Film Missing episodes Revived series Series 1 2 3 4 2008–2010 specials 5 6 7 2013 specials 8 9 10 11 12 13 2022 specials 2023 specials 14 15 Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Smile " " Thin Ice " " Knock Knock " " Oxygen " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " The Lie of the Land " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Christmas and New Year's specials Supplementary episodes Missing episodes Links to related articles v t e Doctor Who episodes by Steven Moffat Ninth Doctor " The Empty Child " / " The Doctor Dances " Tenth Doctor " The Girl in the Fireplace " " Blink " " Silence in the Library " / " Forest of the Dead " Eleventh Doctor Series 5 " The Eleventh Hour " " The Beast Below " " The Time of Angels " / " Flesh and Stone " " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " Series 6 Special " A Christmas Carol " " The Impossible Astronaut " / " Day of the Moon " " A Good Man Goes to War " " Let's Kill Hitler " " The Wedding of River Song " Series 7 Special " The Doctor, the Widow and the Wardrobe " " Asylum of the Daleks " " The Angels Take Manhattan " Special " The Snowmen " " The Bells of Saint John " " The Name of the Doctor " Specials " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " Twelfth Doctor Series 8 " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " Listen " " Time Heist " " The Caretaker " " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " Series 9 Special " Last Christmas " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " The Girl Who Died " " The Zygon Inversion " " Heaven Sent " " Hell Bent " Special " The Husbands of River Song " Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Fifteenth Doctor " Boom " " Joy to the World " Mini episodes " Time Crash " " Space" / "Time " Night and the Doctor " The Night of the Doctor " See also The Curse of Fatal Death v t e Doctor Who : First Doctor stories Television Season 1 An Unearthly Child The Daleks The Edge of Destruction Marco Polo The Keys of Marinus The Aztecs The Sensorites The Reign of Terror Season 2 Planet of Giants The Dalek Invasion of Earth The Rescue The Romans The Web Planet The Crusade The Space Museum The Chase The Time Meddler Season 3 Galaxy 4 The Myth Makers The Daleks' Master Plan The Massacre The Ark The Celestial Toymaker The Gunfighters The Savages The War Machines Season 4 The Smugglers The Tenth Planet Other appearances Major The Three Doctors " The Five Doctors " " Twice Upon a Time " Minor " The Name of the Doctor " " The Day of the Doctor " " Listen " " The Witch's Familiar " " The Doctor Falls " " The Power of the Doctor " See also Dimensions in Time An Adventure in Space and Time Audio The Early Adventures Domain of the Voord The Doctor's Tale Other The Companion Chronicles The Lost Stories A Star is Born Hunters of Earth The First Doctor Adventures An Unearthly Woman Books Missing Adventures Venusian Lullaby The Sorcerer's Apprentice The Empire of Glass The Man in the Velvet Mask The Plotters Past Doctor Adventures The Witch Hunters The Infinity Doctors Salvation City at World's End Bunker Soldiers Byzantium!

Ten Little Aliens The Eleventh Tiger The Time Travellers Novellas Time and Relative Frayed Video games Destiny of the Doctors Legacy Lego Dimensions v t e Doctor Who : Twelfth Doctor stories Television Series 8 " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " Robot of Sherwood " " Listen " " Time Heist " " The Caretaker " " Kill the Moon " " Mummy on the Orient Express " " Flatline " " In the Forest of the Night " " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " Series 9 Special " Last Christmas " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " Under the Lake " / " Before the Flood " " The Girl Who Died " " The Woman Who Lived " " The Zygon Invasion " / " The Zygon Inversion " " Sleep No More " " Face the Raven " " Heaven Sent " " Hell Bent " Special " The Husbands of River Song " Series 10 Special " The Return of Doctor Mysterio " " The Pilot " " Smile " " Thin Ice " " Knock Knock " " Oxygen " " Extremis " " The Pyramid at the End of the World " " The Lie of the Land " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Special " Twice Upon a Time " Other appearances Major " For Tonight We Might Die " Minor " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " See also " The Fires of Pompeii " Books The Blood Cell Video games Legacy Lego Dimensions v t e Doctor Who : Cyberman stories Television First Doctor The Tenth Planet Second Doctor The Moonbase The Tomb of the Cybermen The Wheel in Space The Invasion Fourth Doctor Revenge of the Cybermen Fifth Doctor Earthshock " The Five Doctors " Sixth Doctor Attack of the Cybermen Seventh Doctor Silver Nemesis Tenth Doctor " Rise of the Cybermen " / " The Age of Steel " " Army of Ghosts " / " Doomsday " " The Next Doctor " Eleventh Doctor " Closing Time " " Nightmare in Silver " Twelfth Doctor " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Thirteenth Doctor " The Haunting of Villa Diodati " " Ascension of the Cybermen " / " The Timeless Children " " The Power of the Doctor " Other appearances Major " Cyberwoman " Minor The War Games The Mind of Evil Carnival of Monsters " Dalek " " The Pandorica Opens " / " The Big Bang " " A Good Man Goes to War " " The Day of the Doctor " " The Time of the Doctor " " Face the Raven " " Hell Bent " Flux " Once, Upon Time " / " The Vanquishers " See also Dimensions in Time Tardisode " Twice Upon a Time " Audio Spare Parts Legend of the Cybermen Books Iceberg Made of Steel Video games Destiny of the Doctors Top Trumps " Blood of the Cybermen " Return to Earth The Mazes of Time The Eternity Clock Legacy Lego Dimensions Stage Doctor Who Prom Doctor Who Live v t e Doctor Who : The Master stories Television Third Doctor Terror of the Autons The Mind of Evil The Claws of Axos Colony in Space The Dæmons The Sea Devils The Time Monster Frontier in Space Fourth Doctor The Deadly Assassin The Keeper of Traken Logopolis Fifth Doctor Castrovalva Time-Flight The King's Demons " The Five Doctors " Planet of Fire Sixth Doctor The Mark of the Rani The Ultimate Foe Seventh Doctor Survival Eighth Doctor Doctor Who Tenth Doctor " Utopia " / " The Sound of Drums " / " Last of the Time Lords " " The End of Time " Twelfth Doctor " Dark Water " / " Death in Heaven " " The Magician's Apprentice " / " The Witch's Familiar " " Extremis " " The Lie of the Land " " World Enough and Time " / " The Doctor Falls " Thirteenth Doctor " Spyfall " " Ascension of the Cybermen " / " The Timeless Children " " The Power of the Doctor " Minor appearances The Caves of Androzani " Deep Breath " " Into the Dalek " " The Caretaker " " Flatline " " In the Forest of the Night " " Empress of Mars " " The Eaters of Light " See also The War Games in Colour The Curse of Fatal Death Scream of the Shalka " The Giggle " Audio The Fourth Doctor Adventures Trail of the White Worm / The Oseidon Adventure Other The Monthly Adventures Unbound The Eighth Doctor Adventures Dominion Mastermind The End of the Line Jago & Litefoot The War Master Master of Worlds Books Missing Adventures The Dark Path Verdigris Eighth Doctor Adventures The Eight Doctors Legacy of the Daleks The Adventuress of Henrietta Street Sometime Never...

The Deadstone Memorial The Gallifrey Chronicles Past Doctor Adventures The Infinity Doctors Last of the Gaderene Prime Time The Quantum Archangel Deadly Reunion Other Who Killed Kennedy Happy Endings Harvest of Time The Story of Martha Video games Destiny of the Doctors Legacy v t e Doctor Who : Multi-Doctor stories Television Different incarnations The Three Doctors " The Five Doctors " The Two Doctors " The Day of the Doctor " " Twice Upon a Time " " Fugitive of the Judoon " " The Power of the Doctor " " The Giggle " " The Reality War " Minor instances " The Name of the Doctor " " Deep Breath " " Listen " " The Witch's Familiar " " The Doctor Falls " " The Timeless Children " " Once, Upon Time " " The Story & the Engine " Identical incarnations The Chase " Journey's End " " The Rebel Flesh " / " The Almost People " " The Vanquishers " Minor instances Day of the Daleks " Father's Day " " The Big Bang " " Journey to the Centre of the TARDIS " " Joy to the World " Audio The Sirens of Time Zagreus 100 The Four Doctors The Eleven Cold Fusion Books Timewyrm: Genesys Timewyrm: Revelation Who Killed Kennedy Cold Fusion The Eight Doctors Players Interference – Book One Interference – Book Two The Colony of Lies Wolfsbane Comics Emperor of the Daleks Assimilation 2 Video games Dalek Attack Destiny of the Doctors Legacy Lego Dimensions See also Regeneration The Brain of Morbius The Trial of a Time Lord Dimensions in Time The Curse of Fatal Death " Time Crash " "Space" / "Time" " Last Night " Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Doctor_Falls&oldid=1297002359 " Categories : 2017 British television episodes Fiction about time dilation Fiction about black holes Cybermen television stories Doctor Who multi-Doctor stories First Doctor serials The Master (Doctor Who) television stories Television episodes written by Steven Moffat Twelfth Doctor episodes Doctor Who multi-Master stories Television episodes set in hospitals Television episodes set in outer space Television episodes set in the 1980s Fiction set in 1986 Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 16:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Doctor Falls 6 languages Add topic

