Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Physics 1.2 Math 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 In mathematics 2.2 In physics 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Variational principle 14 languages Беларуская Čeština Français Հայերեն Italiano Қазақша 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific principles enabling the use of the calculus of variations This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series of articles about Calculus ∫ ∫ a b f ′ ( t ) d t = f ( b ) − − f ( a ) {\displaystyle \int _{a}^{b}f'(t)\,dt=f(b)-f(a)} Fundamental theorem Limits Continuity Rolle's theorem Mean value theorem Inverse function theorem Differential Definitions Derivative ( generalizations ) Differential infinitesimal of a function total Concepts Differentiation notation Second derivative Implicit differentiation Logarithmic differentiation Related rates Taylor's theorem Rules and identities Sum Product Chain Power Quotient L'Hôpital's rule Inverse General Leibniz Faà di Bruno's formula Reynolds Integral Lists of integrals Integral transform Leibniz integral rule Definitions Antiderivative Integral ( improper ) Riemann integral Lebesgue integration Contour integration Integral of inverse functions Integration by Parts Discs Cylindrical shells Substitution ( trigonometric , tangent half-angle , Euler ) Euler's formula Partial fractions ( Heaviside's method ) Changing order Reduction formulae Differentiating under the integral sign Risch algorithm Series Geometric ( arithmetico-geometric ) Harmonic Alternating Power Binomial Taylor Convergence tests Summand limit (term test) Ratio Root Integral Direct comparison Limit comparison Alternating series Cauchy condensation Dirichlet Abel Vector Gradient Divergence Curl Laplacian Directional derivative Identities Theorems Gradient Green's Stokes' Divergence Generalized Stokes Helmholtz decomposition Multivariable Formalisms Matrix Tensor Exterior Geometric Definitions Partial derivative Multiple integral Line integral Surface integral Volume integral Jacobian Hessian Advanced Calculus on Euclidean space Generalized functions Limit of distributions Specialized Fractional Malliavin Stochastic Variations Miscellanea Precalculus History Glossary List of topics Integration Bee Mathematical analysis Nonstandard analysis v t e A variational principle is a mathematical procedure that renders a physical problem solvable by the calculus of variations , which concerns finding functions that optimize the values of quantities that depend on those functions. For example, the problem of determining the shape of a hanging chain suspended at both ends—a catenary —can be solved using variational calculus , and in this case, the variational principle is the following: The solution is a function that minimizes the gravitational potential energy of the chain.

History [ edit ] Physics [ edit ] Main article: History of variational principles in physics The history of the variational principle in classical mechanics started with Maupertuis's principle in the 18th century.

Math [ edit ] Felix Klein 's 1872 Erlangen program attempted to identify invariants under a group of transformations.

Examples [ edit ] In mathematics [ edit ] Ekeland's variational principle in mathematical optimization The finite element method The variation principle relating topological entropy and Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy .

In physics [ edit ] Variational principles for classical mechanics was developed in parallel with Newtonian mechanics.

The Rayleigh–Ritz method for solving boundary-value problems in elasticity and wave propagation Fermat's principle in geometrical optics Hamilton's principle in classical mechanics Maupertuis' principle in classical mechanics The principle of least action in mechanics , electromagnetic theory , and quantum mechanics The variational method in quantum mechanics Hellmann–Feynman theorem Gauss's principle of least constraint and Hertz's principle of least curvature Hilbert's action principle in general relativity, leading to the Einstein field equations .

Palatini variation Hartree–Fock method Density functional theory Gibbons–Hawking–York boundary term Variational quantum eigensolver References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] The Feynman Lectures on Physics Vol. II Ch. 19: The Principle of Least Action Ekeland, Ivar (1979).

"Nonconvex minimization problems" .

Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society . New Series.

1 (3): 443– 474.

doi : 10.1090/S0273-0979-1979-14595-6 .

MR 0526967 .

S T Epstein  1974 "The Variation Method in Quantum Chemistry". (New York: Academic) C Lanczos, The Variational Principles of Mechanics (Dover Publications) R K Nesbet 2003 "Variational Principles and Methods In Theoretical Physics and Chemistry". (New York: Cambridge U.P.) S K Adhikari  1998 "Variational Principles for the Numerical Solution of Scattering Problems". (New York: Wiley) C G Gray, G Karl G and V A Novikov 1996, Ann. Phys.

251 1.

C.G. Gray, G. Karl, and V. A. Novikov, " Progress in Classical and Quantum Variational Principles ". 11 December 2003. physics/0312071 Classical Physics.

Griffiths, David J. (2004).

Introduction to Quantum Mechanics (2nd ed.) . Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-805326-X .

John Venables, " The Variational Principle and some applications Archived 2015-09-26 at the Wayback Machine ". Dept of Physics and Astronomy, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona (Graduate Course: Quantum Physics) Andrew James Williamson, " The Variational Principle -- Quantum monte carlo calculations of electronic excitations". Robinson College, Cambridge,  Theory of Condensed Matter Group, Cavendish Laboratory. September 1996. (dissertation of Doctor of Philosophy) Kiyohisa Tokunaga, " Variational Principle for Electromagnetic Field ". Total Integral for Electromagnetic Canonical Action, Part Two, Relativistic Canonical Theory of Electromagnetics, Chapter VI Komkov, Vadim (1986) Variational principles of continuum mechanics with engineering applications. Vol. 1. Critical points theory. Mathematics and its Applications, 24. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht.

Cassel, Kevin W.: Variational Methods with Applications in Science and Engineering, Cambridge University Press, 2013.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Variational_principle&oldid=1302454907 " Categories : Calculus of variations Theoretical physics Principles Variational principles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing proofs This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 14:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Variational principle 14 languages Add topic

