Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criticism 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Time–space compression 6 languages Deutsch Français Português Русский Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Time-space compression ) Idea in space–time Time–space compression (also known as space–time compression and time–space distanciation ) is an idea referring to the altering of the qualities of space–time and the relationship between space and time that is a consequence of the expansion of capital . It is rooted in Karl Marx 's notion of the "annihilation of space by time" originally elaborated in the Grundrisse , [ 1 ] and was later articulated by Marxist geographer David Harvey in his book The Condition of Postmodernity .

[ 2 ] A similar idea was proposed by Elmar Altvater in an article in PROKLA in 1987, [ 3 ] translated into English as "Ecological and Economic Modalities of Time and Space" and published in Capitalism Nature Socialism in 1990.

[ 4 ] Time–space compression occurs as a result of technological innovations driven by the global expansion of capital that condense or elide spatial and temporal distances, including technologies of communication ( telegraph , telephones , fax machines , Internet ) and travel (rail, cars, trains, jets), driven by the need to overcome spatial barriers, open up new markets, speed up production cycles, and reduce the turnover time of capital.

According to Paul Virilio , time-space compression is an essential facet of capitalist life, saying that "we are entering a space which is speed-space ... This new other time is that of electronic transmission, of high-tech machines, and therefore, man is present in this sort of time, not via his physical presence, but via programming" (qtd. in Decron 71 [ 5 ] ). In Speed and Politics , Virilio coined the term dromology to describe the study of "speed-space". Virilio describes velocity as the hidden factor in wealth and power, where historical eras and political events are effectively speed-ratios. In his view, acceleration destroys space and compresses time in ways of perceiving reality.

Theorists generally identify two historical periods in which time–space compression occurred; the period from the mid-19th century to the beginnings of the First World War , and the end of the 20th century. In both of these time periods, according to Jon May and Nigel Thrift, "there occurred a radical restructuring in the nature and experience of both time and space ... both periods saw a significant acceleration in the pace of life concomitant with a dissolution or collapse of traditional spatial co-ordinates".

[ 6 ] Criticism [ edit ] Doreen Massey critiqued the idea of time-space compression in her discussion of globalization and its effect on our society. She insisted that any ideas that our world is "speeding up" and "spreading out" should be placed within local social contexts. "Time-space compression", she argues, "needs differentiating socially": "how people are placed within 'time-space compression' are complicated and extremely varied". In effect, Massey is critical of the notion of "time-space compression" as it represents capital's attempts to erase the sense of the local and masks the dynamic social ways through which places remain "meeting places".

[ 7 ] For Moishe Postone , [ 8 ] Harvey's treatment of space-time compression and postmodern diversity are merely reactions to capitalism .  Hence Harvey's analysis remains "extrinsic to the social forms expressed" by the deep structure concepts of capital, value and the commodity . For Postone, the postmodern moment is not necessarily just a one-sided effect of the contemporary form of capitalism but can also be seen as having an emancipatory side if it happened to be part of post-capitalism.  And because postmodernism usually neglects its own context of embeddedness it can legitimate capitalism as postmodern, whereas at the level of deep structure it may in fact be more concentrated, with large capitals that accumulate rather than diverge, and with an expansion of commodification niches with fewer buyers.

Postone asserts that one cannot step outside capitalism and declare it a pure evil or as a one-dimensional badness, since the emancipatory content of such things as equal distribution or diversity are potentials of capitalism itself in its abundant and diverse productive powers. This initial perspective misfires however, when forms of society such as modernity and subsequently postmodernism take itself as the true whole of life for being oppositional to capitalism, when in fact they are grounded in the reproduction of the same capitalist relations that created them.

See also [ edit ] Global village Late capitalism Late modernism Social production of space Space of flows References [ edit ] ^ Marx, Karl.

Grundrisse . Penguin Classics, 1993. pp. 539.

^ Harvey, David.

The Condition of Postmodernity: An Enquiry into the Origins of Cultural Change . Cambridge, MA: Blackwell, 1990.

^ Altvater, Elmar (1987).

"Ökologische und ökonomische Modalitäten von Zeit und Raum" .

PROKLA. Zeitschrift für kritische Sozialwissenschaft (in German).

17 (67): 35– 54.

doi : 10.32387/prokla.v17i67.1338 .

^ Altvater, Elmar (1989). "Ecological and economic modalities of time and space".

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

1 (3): 59– 70.

doi : 10.1080/10455758909358384 .

^ Decron, Chris.

Speed-Space.

Virilio Live. Ed. John Armitage. London: Sage, 2001. 69–81.

^ May, Jon and Nigel Thrift . "Introduction." TimeSpace: Geographies of Temporality . NY: Routledge, 2001. pp. 1–46.

^ Massey, Doreen (1994). "A Global Sense of Place".

Space, Place, and Gender .

the University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 0816626162 .

^ Postone, Moishe . "Theorizing the Contemporary World: Robert Brenner, Giovanni Arrighi, David Harvey" in Political Economy of the Present and Possible Global Future(s) , Anthem Press, 2007.

Further reading [ edit ] Giddens, Anthony (1981).

"Time-Space Distanciation and the Generation of Power" .

A Contemporary Critique of Historical Materialism: Power, Property and the State . London: Macmillan. pp.

90 –108.

ISBN 978-0-520-04535-4 . Retrieved 23 May 2011 .

Jeff Lewis (2008), Cultural Studies ,  Sage, London.

ISBN 9781412922302 .

[Sophie Raine] (2022), What is Time-Space Compression?

v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Time–space_compression&oldid=1305107505 " Categories : Perception History of telecommunications Spacetime Postmodernism Postmodern theory Cultural geography Globalization Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 02:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Time–space compression 6 languages Add topic

