Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Politics 2 Religion 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Morphological freedom 8 languages فارسی Français Hausa Հայերեն Polski Русский Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed civil right Part of a series on Human enhancement Advocacy Rationale Adaptionist "Beneficient" Emancipatory Compensatory Democratic "Directive" Libertarian " Metahumanistic " Posthumanistic " Prometheist " Preventative Transhumanistic Paradigm Biohappiness Cyborgs Eugenics Intelligence amplification Moral enhancement Prostheses ( De facto ) germline interventions Selective Cloning Counseling Genetic Genomic Pre-conception Genetic enhancement Genetic engineering Epigenome editing PGD Embryo quality Oocyte selection Polygenic (risk) score (technical article) Prenatal testing Selective abortion Sex selection Sperm sorting "Nobelist sperm banks" Somatic interventions Body hacking Somatic gene therapy for color blindness in sports doping Stem-cell therapy Embryonic cells Fetal tissue implant Chemical Stimulants Amphetamine Methamphetamine Ritalin Nootropics Modafinil Piracetam Xanthine derivatives Caffeine Neurological Brain implant Brain–computer interface Deep brain stimulation " Man-Computer Symbiosis " (1960) Neuralink Neurohacking Opposition Appeal to nature Bioconservatism " Brave New World Argument " Chesterton Francis Fukuyama Our Posthuman Future (2002) Cloning prohibition Leon Kass Stem cell controversy " Designer baby " " Frankenstein's monster " He Jiankui affair Hwang affair Against life extension Undesirability of immortality Nikolas Kompridis Legal EU convention on Bioethics Stem Cell Research Enhancement Act (vetoed) United Nations Declaration on Human Cloning In the UK 1990 act 2003 act 2008 act 2001 act C. S. Lewis The Abolition of Man (1943) That Hideous Strength (1945) "Playing God" Religious response to ART s " Wisdom of repugnance " Related ART Exo wombs IVG Augmented learning Deep ecology Treating executive dysfunction Evolutionary humanism Longevity Anti-aging movement Life extension Rejuvenation Young blood transfusion Natalism Natura naturans Pontifical and Promethean man Collapse of the therapy-enhancement divide Promethean gap Technophobia Therapy-enhancement distinction v t e Morphological freedom refers to a proposed civil right of a person to either maintain or modify their own body , on their own terms, through informed, consensual recourse to, or refusal of, available therapeutic or enabling medical technology .

[ 1 ] The term may have been coined by transhumanist Max More in his 1993 article, “Technological Self-Transformation: Expanding Personal Extropy”, where he defined it as "the ability to alter bodily form at will through technologies such as surgery, genetic engineering, nanotechnology, uploading". The term was later used by science debater and futurist Anders Sandberg as "an extension of one’s right to one’s body, not just self-ownership but also the right to modify oneself according to one’s desires." [ 2 ] The Massachusetts -headquartered charity, the Freedom of Form Foundation , was founded in 2018 to advocate and fund scientific research furthering progress on morphological freedom, the tools required to achieve it and its general acceptance in society at large.

[ 3 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Politics [ edit ] According to technocritic Dale Carrico , the politics of morphological freedom imply a commitment to the value, standing, and social legibility of the widest possible variety of desired morphologies and lifestyles . More specifically, morphological freedom is an expression of liberal pluralism , secularism , progressive cosmopolitanism , and posthumanist multiculturalisms applied to the ongoing and upcoming transformation of the understanding of medical practice from one of conventional therapy to one of consensual self-determination , via genetic , prosthetic , and cognitive modification.

[ citation needed ] Religion [ edit ] According to authors Calvin Mercer and Tracy J. Trothen there is tension between religion and transhumanists , particularly the Abrahamic traditions, with regards to morphological freedom. While religion generally recognizes the need to heal people and improve their situation from a medical perspective they are generally hesitant to promote a wholesale modification of the body as they see it ultimately belonging to God .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Artistic freedom Autonomy Bodily integrity Cognitive liberty Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery My body, my choice Neuroenhancement Otherkin Postgenderism Reproductive rights Self-ownership References [ edit ] ^ Bostrom, N. (2005). "In Defense of Posthuman Dignity".

Bioethics .

19 (3): 202– 214.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8519.2005.00437.x .

PMID 16167401 .

^ Bradshaw, H. G.; Ter Meulen, R. (2010). "A Transhumanist Fault Line Around Disability: Morphological Freedom and the Obligation to Enhance".

Journal of Medicine and Philosophy .

35 (6): 670– 684.

doi : 10.1093/jmp/jhq048 .

PMID 21076073 .

^ "About us" . Retrieved 2020-06-14 .

^ Calvin Mercer; Tracy J. Trothen (17 November 2014).

Religion and Transhumanism: The Unknown Future of Human Enhancement: The Unknown Future of Human Enhancement . ABC-CLIO. pp.

303– 311.

ISBN 978-1-4408-3326-7 .

External links [ edit ] Carrico, Dale (2006).

"The Politics of Morphological Freedom" .

Amor Munro blog . Retrieved 2007-01-28 .

Sandberg, Anders (2001).

"Morphological Freedom -- Why We not just Want it, but Need it" . Retrieved 2024-03-07 .

v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Cyberpunk List of cyberpunk works Contributors Bruce Bethke Pat Cadigan Philip K. Dick William Gibson Sogo Ishii Tom Maddox Mamoru Oshii Katsuhiro Otomo Rudy Rucker Ridley Scott John Shirley Masamune Shirow Neal Stephenson Bruce Sterling Subcultures Japanese cyberpunk Cyberdelic Cybergoth Cypherpunk Electrohippies Themes Philosophy Transhumanism Cognitive liberty Morphological freedom Human enhancement Artificial intelligence AI in fiction Cyberspace Cybercrime Cyberculture Digital revolution Information technology Megacorporation Evil corporation Virtual reality Augmented reality Derivative genres Tech noir Steampunk works Dieselpunk Biopunk works Nanopunk Solarpunk Hopepunk Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morphological_freedom&oldid=1305899608 " Categories : Bioethics Human rights concepts Morphology Transhumanism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from September 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 19:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morphological freedom 8 languages Add topic

