Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Risks and precautions 3 Ethics and chaos 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Gray goo 24 languages العربية Asturianu Boarisch Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical end-of-the-world scenario This article is about the doomsday scenario. For the video game, see Grey Goo .

Part of a series of articles on Nanotechnology History Organizations Popular culture Outline Impact and applications Nanomedicine Nanotoxicology Green nanotechnology Hazards Regulation Nanomaterials Fullerenes Carbon nanotubes Nanoparticles Molecular self-assembly Self-assembled monolayer Supramolecular assembly DNA nanotechnology Nanoelectronics Molecular scale electronics Molecular logic gate Nanolithography Moore's law Semiconductor device fabrication Semiconductor scale examples Nanometrology Atomic force microscopy Scanning tunneling microscope Electron microscope Super-resolution microscopy Nanotribology Molecular nanotechnology Molecular assembler Nanorobotics Mechanosynthesis Molecular engineering Science portal Technology portal v t e Gray goo (also spelled as grey goo ) is a hypothetical global catastrophic scenario involving molecular nanotechnology in which out-of-control self-replicating machines consume all biomass (and perhaps also everything else) on Earth while building many more of themselves, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] a scenario that has been called ecophagy ( literally: "consumption of the environment" ) .

[ 3 ] The original idea assumed machines were designed to have this capability, while popularizations have assumed that machines might somehow gain this capability by accident.

Self-replicating machines of the macroscopic variety were originally described by mathematician John von Neumann , and are sometimes referred to as von Neumann machines or clanking replicators .
The term gray goo was coined by nanotechnology pioneer K. Eric Drexler in his 1986 book Engines of Creation .

[ 4 ] In 2004, he stated "I wish I had never used the term 'gray goo'." [ 5 ] Engines of Creation mentions "gray goo" as a thought experiment in two paragraphs and a note, while the popularized idea of gray goo was first publicized in a mass-circulation magazine, Omni , in November 1986.

[ 6 ] Definition [ edit ] The term was first used by molecular nanotechnology pioneer K. Eric Drexler in Engines of Creation (1986). In Chapter 4, Engines Of Abundance , Drexler illustrates both exponential growth and inherent limits (not gray goo) by describing " dry " nanomachines that can function only if given special raw materials : Imagine such a replicator floating in a bottle of chemicals, making copies of itself...the first replicator assembles a copy in one thousand seconds, the two replicators then build two more in the next thousand seconds, the four build another four, and the eight build another eight. At the end of ten hours, there are not thirty-six new replicators, but over 68 billion. In less than a day, they would weigh a ton; in less than two days, they would outweigh the Earth; in another four hours, they would exceed the mass of the Sun and all the planets combined — if the bottle of chemicals hadn't run dry long before.

According to Drexler, the term was popularized by an article in science fiction magazine Omni , which also popularized the term "nanotechnology" in the same issue. Drexler says arms control is a far greater issue than gray goo "nanobugs".

[ 7 ] Drexler describes gray goo in Chapter 11 of Engines of Creation : Early assembler-based replicators could beat the most advanced modern organisms. 'Plants' with 'leaves' no more efficient than today's solar cells could out-compete real plants, crowding the biosphere with an inedible foliage. Tough, omnivorous 'bacteria' could out-compete real bacteria: they could spread like blowing pollen, replicate swiftly, and reduce the biosphere to dust in a matter of days. Dangerous replicators could easily be too tough, small, and rapidly spreading to stop — at least if we made no preparation. We have trouble enough controlling viruses and fruit flies.

Drexler notes that the geometric growth made possible by self-replication is inherently limited by the availability of suitable raw materials. Drexler used the term "gray goo" not to indicate color or texture, but to emphasize the difference between "superiority" in terms of human values and "superiority" in terms of competitive success: Though masses of uncontrolled replicators need not be grey or gooey, the term "grey goo" emphasizes that replicators able to obliterate life might be less inspiring than a single species of crabgrass. They might be "superior" in an evolutionary sense, but this need not make them valuable.

Bill Joy , one of the founders of Sun Microsystems, discussed some of the problems with pursuing this technology in his now-famous 2000 article in Wired magazine, titled " Why The Future Doesn't Need Us ". In direct response to Joy's concerns, the first quantitative technical analysis of the ecophagy scenario was published in 2000 by nanomedicine pioneer Robert Freitas .

[ 3 ] Risks and precautions [ edit ] Drexler more recently conceded that there is no need to build anything that even resembles a potential runaway replicator. This would avoid the problem entirely. In a paper in the journal Nanotechnology , he argues that self-replicating machines are needlessly complex and inefficient. His 1992 technical book on advanced nanotechnologies Nanosystems: Molecular Machinery, Manufacturing, and Computation [ 8 ] describes manufacturing systems that are desktop-scale factories with specialized machines in fixed locations and conveyor belts to move parts from place to place. None of these measures would prevent a party from creating a weaponized gray goo, were such a thing possible.

King Charles III (then Prince of Wales ) called upon the British Royal Society to investigate the "enormous environmental and social risks" of nanotechnology in a planned report, leading to much media commentary on gray goo. The Royal Society's report on nanoscience was released on 29 July 2004, and declared the possibility of self-replicating machines to lie too far in the future to be of concern to regulators.

[ 9 ] More recent analysis in the paper titled Safe Exponential Manufacturing from the Institute of Physics (co-written by Chris Phoenix, Director of Research of the Center for Responsible Nanotechnology, and Eric Drexler), shows that the danger of gray goo is far less likely than originally thought.

[ 10 ] However, other long-term major risks to society and the environment from nanotechnology have been identified.

[ 11 ] Drexler has made a somewhat public effort to retract his gray goo hypothesis, in an effort to focus the debate on more realistic threats associated with knowledge-enabled nanoterrorism and other misuses.

[ 12 ] In Safe Exponential Manufacturing , which was published in a 2004 issue of Nanotechnology , it was suggested that creating manufacturing systems with the ability to self-replicate by the use of their own energy sources would not be needed.

[ 13 ] The Foresight Institute also recommended embedding controls in the molecular machines. These controls would be able to prevent anyone from purposely abusing nanotechnology, and therefore avoid the gray goo scenario.

[ 14 ] Ethics and chaos [ edit ] Gray goo is a useful construct for considering low-probability, high-impact outcomes from emerging technologies. Thus, it is a useful tool in the ethics of technology .

Daniel A. Vallero applied it as a worst-case scenario thought experiment for technologists contemplating possible risks from advancing a technology.

[ 15 ] This requires that a decision tree or event tree include even extremely low probability events if such events may have an extremely negative and irreversible consequence, i.e. application of the precautionary principle . Dianne Irving admonishes that "any error in science will have a rippling effect".

[ 16 ] Vallero adapted this reference to chaos theory to emerging technologies, wherein slight permutations of initial conditions can lead to unforeseen and profoundly negative downstream effects, for which the technologist and the new technology's proponents must be held accountable.

In popular culture [ edit ] Grey goo is the basis for " Benderama ", an episode of the animated science fiction sitcom Futurama . In this episode, Bender creates smaller copies of himself to accomplish mundane tasks, which quickly spirals out of control as those copies begin replicating themselves, eventually reaching a stage where the copies are small enough to manipulate matter at the subatomic level.

The Horizon video game series is set in the post-apocalyptic aftermath of a Gray goo scenario, where a self-replicating swarm of 'insectoid robots' end up devouring the Earth's biosphere [ 17 ] rendering all life on the planet extinct. Humanity is reduced to living in scattered, primitive tribes after the species was revived via an automated terraforming system over the course of centuries.

The plot of the novel Prey , by Michael Crichton , centers around the concept of nanobots. The protagonist attempts to stop them from evolving as they self-replicate and infect others.

The video game series Tasty Planet revolves around a bathroom cleaner nanotechnology beginning to self replicate and consume the planet.

The 1985 science fiction novel Blood Music features biological computers created from lymphocyte cells. Smuggled out of a lab, the cells multiply and evolve rapidly eventually aggregating most of the biosphere of North America.

See also [ edit ] Alkahest – Theorized universal solvent in alchemy Astrochicken – Astrophysical thought experiment by Freeman Dyson Claytronics – Matter which can change its physical properties in a programmable fashion Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Cat's Cradle – 1963 novel by Kurt Vonnegut Microswimmer – Microscopic object able to traverse fluid Molecular machine – Molecular-scale artificial or biological device Paperclip maximizer – Hypothesis about intelligent agents Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Programmable matter – Matter which can change its physical properties in a programmable fashion Self-replicating machine – Device able to make copies of itself Self-reconfiguring modular robot – Robot that can rearrange its own parts Smartdust – System of microelectromechanical devices Synthetic biology – Interdisciplinary branch of biology and engineering Utility fog – Concept of a swarm of tiny robots References [ edit ] ^ "Grey Goo is a Small Issue" . Center for Responsible Nanotechnology. 2003-12-14. Archived from the original on 2014-08-29 . Retrieved 2009-12-28 .

^ "Nanotechnology pioneer slays "grey goo" myths" .

Nanotechnology .

Institute of Physics . 2006-07-06 . Retrieved 2009-12-28 .

^ a b Freitas Jr., Robert A. (April 2000).

"Some Limits to Global Ecophagy by Biovorous Nanoreplicators, with Public Policy Recommendations" . Retrieved 28 December 2009 .

^ Joseph, Lawrence E. (2007).

Apocalypse 2012 . New York: Broadway. p.

6 .

ISBN 978-0-7679-2448-1 .

^ Giles, Jim (2004).

"Nanotech takes small step towards burying 'grey goo' " .

Nature .

429 (6992): 591.

Bibcode : 2004Natur.429..591G .

doi : 10.1038/429591b .

PMID 15190320 .

^ Nanotechnology: Molecular Machines that Mimic Life, OMNI, Vol. 9 No. 6, November 1986, p. 56ff.

^ Dr Eric Drexler - Nanotechnology: The Big Picture ^ Drexler, K. Eric (1992).

Nanosystems: molecular machinery, manufacturing, and computation . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-471-57518-4 . Archived from the original on 2019-10-08 . Retrieved 2010-04-16 .

^ "Nanoscience and nanotechnologies: opportunities and uncertainties" . The Royal Society. Archived from the original on 2018-07-03 . Retrieved 2011-08-23 .

^ "Leading nanotech experts put 'grey goo' in perspective" (Press release). Center for Responsible Nanotechnology. 9 June 2004 . Retrieved 2006-06-17 .

^ "Current Results of Our Research" . Center for Responsible Nanotechnology . Retrieved 2006-06-17 .

^ Rincon, Paul (2004-06-09).

"Nanotech guru turns back on 'goo' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 2012-03-30 .

^ Phoenix, Chris; Eric Drexler (August 2004).

"Safe Exponential Manufacturing" (PDF) .

Nanotechnology .

15 (8): 869– 72.

doi : 10.1088/0957-4484/15/8/001 .

S2CID 250895814 . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 13, 2016.

^ "Foresight Guidelines for Responsible Nanotechnology Development" . Foresight Institute and IMM . Retrieved 2012-05-07 .

^ Vallero, Daniel (2007).

Biomedical Ethics for Engineers: Ethics and Decision Making in Biomedical and Biosystem Engineering . Academic Press.

ISBN 9780080476100 .

^ Irving, Dianne (October 28, 1999). "Science, the formation of conscience and moral decision theory".

Proceedings of the Guadalupan Appeal: The Dignity and Status of the Human Embryo, Mexico City, Mexico .

^ Tassi, Paul.

"The Only 'Horizon Zero Dawn' Story Recap Video You Need To Watch Before 'Forbidden West' " .

Forbes . Retrieved 2025-01-04 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lynn Margulis and Dorion Sagan – What Is Life?

(1995). Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-684-81087-5 Bill Bryson A Short History of Nearly Everything (2003) Green Goo – Life in the Era of Humane Genocide by Nick Szabo Green Goo: Nanotechnology Comes Alive!

Green Goo: The New Nanothreat from Wired Hello From the Wired: An Introduction to Cyber-Nihilism by N1x from The Anarchist Library External links [ edit ] Some Limits to Global Ecophagy by Biovorous Nanoreplicators, with Public Policy Recommendations Safe exponential manufacturing Paper critical of "grey goo," summarized in article Nanotechnology pioneer slays "grey goo" myths Online edition of the Royal Society's report Nanoscience and nanotechnologies: opportunities and uncertainties UK Government & Royal Society commission on Nanotechnology and Nanoscience Nanotechnology: Drexler and Smalley make the case for and against 'molecular assemblers' ( Richard Smalley argues that laws of chemistry imply it will be impossible to ever create "self-replicating nanobots" whose abilities to assemble molecules are significantly different than those of biological self-replicators. Some pro-nanobot responses to Smalley's argument can be found at Debate About Assemblers — Smalley Rebuttal , The Drexler-Smalley debate on molecular assembly , Of Chemistry, Nanobots, and Policy , and Is the Revolution Real?

) Nanotechnology and the Grey Goo Problem , BBC v t e Molecular nanotechnology Concepts Molecular assembler Molecular machine Mechanosynthesis Mechanochemistry Nanorobotics Self-replicating machine Productive nanosystems Gray goo Exploratory engineering Carbon nanotube nanomotor Utility fog Ecophagy Starseed launcher Organizations Foresight Institute Future of Humanity Institute Zyvex Works Engines of Creation Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition " There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom " Other Feynman Prize in Nanotechnology Drexler–Smalley debate on molecular nanotechnology People James C. Bennett K. Eric Drexler Robert Freitas J. Storrs Hall Ralph Merkle Carlo Montemagno Christine Peterson Related topics Nanotechnology Nanomedicine Transhumanism Cryonics Technological singularity Impact of nanotechnology Societal v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wsbnp
Cached time: 20250818072813
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.597 seconds
Real time usage: 0.746 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3563/1000000
Revision size: 17040/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 93248/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2580/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84213/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.409/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16210469/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  648.866      1 -total
 30.41%  197.352     13 Template:Annotated_link
 26.69%  173.163      1 Template:Reflist
 17.27%  112.086      1 Template:Nanotechnology
 16.95%  109.998      1 Template:Sidebar
 14.62%   94.850      7 Template:Cite_web
  8.91%   57.790      1 Template:Short_description
  7.10%   46.049      4 Template:Navbox
  4.99%   32.355      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.55%   29.511      1 Template:Molecular_nanotechnology_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:175996:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818072813 and revision id 1293595580. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gray_goo&oldid=1293595580 " Categories : Artificial life Doomsday scenarios 1980s neologisms Nanotechnology Multi-robot systems Self-replicating machines Thought experiments in ethics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 16:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gray goo 24 languages Add topic

