Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Composition and influences 3 Structure 4 Wilkins's scheme 5 Related efforts, discussions, and literary references 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language 5 languages Esperanto Interlingua Nederlands 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by John Wilkins This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The first edition cover page An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (London, 1668) is the best-remembered of the numerous works of John Wilkins , in which he expounds a new universal language , meant primarily to facilitate international communication among scholars, but envisioned for use by diplomats, travelers, and merchants as well.  Unlike many universal language schemes of the period, it was meant merely as an auxiliary to—not a replacement of—existing natural languages.

[ citation needed ] Background One of the aims of the Essay was to provide a replacement for the Latin language , which had been the international language of scholars in Western Europe by then for 1000 years.

[ 1 ] Comenius and others interested in international languages had criticisms of the arbitrary features of Latin that made it harder to learn, and Wilkins also made such points.

[ 2 ] A scheme for a lingua franca based on numerical values had been published by John Pell (1630); and in his 1640 work Mercury or the Secret Messenger (1640) Wilkins had mentioned the possibility of developing a trade language .

[ 3 ] Seth Ward was author with Wilkins of Vindiciae academiarum (1654), a defence of the Commonwealth period of the Oxbridge university system against outsider reformers. In it Ward put forward a related language scheme, though differing from the Essay of Wilkins in some significant ways.

[ 4 ] Ward's ideas derived from a number of sources, such as Cyprian Kinner who was a follower of Comenius, Ramon Lull , and Georg Ritschel . They went on to influence George Dalgarno as well as Wilkins.

[ 5 ] There was immediate interest in the Essay ; Wilkins is said to have regarded his work only in terms of a proof of concept .

[ 6 ] But in the medium term enthusiasm for this kind of constructed language declined. The problem of a universal language remained as a topic of debate.

[ 4 ] Composition and influences [ edit ] The stimulus for Wilkins to write the Essay came from the Council of the Royal Society, in 1662. The work was delayed by the Great Fire of London of 1666, which destroyed some of it in draft.

[ 7 ] The book was written by Wilkins, assisted by John Ray , Francis Willughby , and others. An influence was the Ars Signorum of George Dalgarno.

[ 8 ] Also influential, as Wilkins acknowledged, was The Ground-Work or Foundation Laid ... for the Framing of a New Perfect Language (1652) by Francis Lodwick .

[ 9 ] Structure [ edit ] The work is in five parts, of which the fourth contains the discussion of the "real character" and " philosophical language ". The third deals with "philosophical grammar" ( universal grammar ).  The last part is the "alphabetical dictionary".

[ 10 ] It was compiled by William Lloyd .

[ 11 ] Wilkins's scheme [ edit ] Sample of the "real character" from the Essay .

Joseph Moxon created the symbols for the printing of the book.

[ 12 ] Wilkins's "Real Character" is a constructed family of symbols, corresponding to a classification scheme developed by Wilkins and his colleagues. It was intended as a pasigraphy , in other words, to provide elementary building blocks from which could be constructed the universe's every possible thing and notion. The Real Character is not an orthography : i.e. it is not a written representation of spoken language . Instead, each symbol represents a concept directly, without (at least in the early parts of the Essay's presentation) there being any way of vocalizing it.

[ 13 ] Inspiration for this approach came in part from contemporary European accounts of the Chinese writing system , which were somewhat mistaken.

Later in the Essay Wilkins introduces his "Philosophical Language", which assigns phonetic values to the Real Characters. For convenience, the following discussion blurs the distinction between Wilkins's Character and his Language.

Concepts are divided into forty main Genera , each of which gives the first two-letter syllable of the word; a Genus is divided into Differences , each of which adds another letter; and Differences are divided into Species , which add a fourth letter. For instance, Zi identifies the Genus of "beasts" (mammals); Zit gives the Difference of "rapacious beasts of the dog kind"; Zitα gives the Species of dogs. (Sometimes the first letter indicates a supercategory—e.g. Z always indicates an animal—but this does not always hold.) The resulting Character, and its vocalization, for a given concept thus captures, to some extent, the concept's semantics .

The Essay also proposed ideas on weights and measure similar to those later found in the metric system .

[ citation needed ] The botanical section of the essay was contributed by John Ray ; Robert Morison 's criticism of Ray's work began a prolonged dispute between the two men.

[ 14 ] Related efforts, discussions, and literary references [ edit ] The Essay has received a certain amount of academic and literary attention, [ citation needed ] usually casting it as brilliant but hopeless.

One criticism (among many) is that "words expressing closely related ideas have almost the same form, differing perhaps by their last letter only...[I]t would be exceedingly difficult to remember all these minute distinctions, and confusion would arise, in rapid reading and particularly in conversation." [ 15 ] ( Umberto Eco notes [ 16 ] that Wilkins himself made such a mistake in the Essay, using Gαde (barley) where apparently Gαpe (tulip) was meant.)  However, others claim that natural languages already have such minute differences, and that to assume that such differences would be indistinguishable would be to claim that natural languages fail at this.

George Edmonds sought to improve Wilkins's Philosophical Language by reorganizing its grammar and orthography while keeping its taxonomy.

[ 17 ] More recent a priori languages (among many others) are Solresol and Ro .

Jorge Luis Borges discusses Wilkins's philosophical language in his essay El idioma analítico de John Wilkins ( The Analytical Language of John Wilkins ) , comparing Wilkins's classification to the fictitious Chinese encyclopedia Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge and expressing doubts about any attempt at a universal classification.

In Neal Stephenson 's Quicksilver , character Daniel Waterhouse spends considerable time supporting the development of Wilkins's classification system.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language .

Oligosynthesis Philosophical language Semantic primitives Menace from the Moon (1925 novel) The Analytical Language of John Wilkins , a critique of this work by Jorge Luis Borges La Ricerca della Lingua Perfetta nella Cultura Europea (The Search for a Perfect Language) by Umberto Eco , about Wilkins, Leibniz , Ramon Lull 's and other's attempts to devise an ideal language Notes [ edit ] ^ Dons, Ute (2004).

Descriptive adequacy of early modern English grammars . Walter de Gruyter. p. 21.

ISBN 978-3-11-018193-7 . Retrieved 28 March 2012 .

^ Waquet, Françoise (2001).

Latin, or the Empire of a Sign . Translated by Howe, John. Verso. p. 258.

ISBN 1859846157 .

^ Murphy, Daniel (1995).

Comenius: a critical reassessment of his life and work . Irish Academic Press. pp.

209– 10.

ISBN 0716525372 .

^ a b Wilkins, John (1984).

Mercury, or, The secret and swift messenger: shewing how a man may with privacy and speed communicate his thoughts to a friend at any distance ; together with an abstract of Dr. Wilkins's Essays towards a real character and a philosophical language . John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 29.

ISBN 978-90-272-3276-2 . Retrieved 28 March 2012 .

^ Henry, John. "Ward, Seth".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/28706 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Van Leeuwen, Henry G. (1970).

The problem of certainty in English thought, 1630–1690 . Springer. p. 56.

ISBN 978-90-247-0179-7 . Retrieved 28 March 2012 .

^ Subbiondo, Joseph L. (1992).

John Wilkins and 17th-century British linguistics . John Benjamins Publishing Company. p. 144 note 34.

ISBN 978-90-272-4554-0 . Retrieved 28 March 2012 .

^ "Wilkins, John" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

^ Salmon, Vivian. "Lodwick, Francis".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/37684 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Considine, John P. (27 March 2008).

Dictionaries in Early Modern Europe: Lexicography and the Making of Heritage . Cambridge University Press. p. 298.

ISBN 978-0-521-88674-1 . Retrieved 28 March 2012 .

^ "Lloyd, William (1627–1717)" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

^ Bryden, D. J. "Moxon, Joseph".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/19466 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Poole, William (24 January 2018).

"Seventeenth-Century 'double writing' schemes, and a 1676 letter in the phonetic script and real character of John Wilkins" .

Notes and Records: the Royal Society Journal of the History of Science .

72 (1): 7– 23.

doi : 10.1098/rsnr.2017.0041 .

PMC 5906426 .

PMID 31390391 .

^ Vines, Sydney Howard (1913). "Robert Morison 1620–1683 and John Ray 1627–1705". In Oliver, Francis Wall (ed.).

Makers of British Botany . Cambridge University Press. p.

21 .

^ Guérard, Albert Léon (1921).

A Short History of the International Language Movement . pp.

90 –92.

^ Eco, Umberto (1995).

The Search for the Perfect Language [ Ricerca della lingua perfetta nella cultura europea ]. Oxford: Blackwell.

ISBN 0-631-17465-6 .

^ Edmonds, George (1856).

A Universal Alphabet, Grammar, and Language, Comprising a Scientific Classification of the Radical Elements of Discourse: and Illustrative Translations from the Holy Scriptures and the Principal British Classics: to which is Added, A Dictionary of the Language . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Andrade, Edward Neville da Costa (1936). "The real character of bishop Wilkins".

Annals of Science .

1 (1): 4– 12.

doi : 10.1080/00033793600200021 .

Lewis, Rhodri.

Language, Mind and Nature. Artificial Languages in England from Bacon to Locke , 2012 CUP, Cambridge ISBN 9780521294133 Pinker, Steven.

Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language , 2000 External links [ edit ] Wilkins, John (1668).

An Essay Towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language . London.

(page images) Wilkins, John (1668).

An essay towards a real character, and a philosophical language by John Wilkins . Early English Books Online: Text Creation Partnership. U of Michigan Library.

(transcription) John Wilkins's Artificial Language, Austrian National Library, research blog The Analytical Language of John Wilkins, by Jorge Luis Borges v t e Constructed languages Classification Artistic Fictional Language game International auxiliary Zonal Engineered Experimental Musical Philosophical Specific languages by group International auxiliary Babm Blissymbols Bolak Communicationssprache Esperanto Adjuvilo Arcaicam Esperanto II Ido Mundolinco Reformed Romániço Universal other esperantidos Glosa Interglossa Idiom Neutral Intal Interlingua Interlingue International Sign Kotava Langue nouvelle Latino sine flexione Lingua Franca Nova Lingwa de planeta Mondial Neo Nal Bino Novial Pasilingua Sambahsa Solresol Sona Unish Universalglot Uropi Volapük Zonal Afrihili Budinos Efatese Eurolengo Guosa Ortatürk Pan-Germanic language Tutonish Pan-Romance language Neolatino Romance Romanid Pan-Slavic language Interslavic Iazychie Runyakitara Wede Weltdeutsch Engineered aUI Basic English Dutton Speedwords Ithkuil Kalaba-X Astrolinguistics Lincos Lingua generalis Loglan Logopandecteision Lojban Real Character Ro Toki Pona Viossa Fictional and other artistic Atlantean Belter Creole Brithenig Chakobsa Dritok Dothraki Elvish languages Enchanta Kēlen Kiliki Klingon Kobaïan Láadan Lapine Loxian Lydnevi Mänti Middle-earth languages Adûnaic Quenya Sindarin Black Speech Khuzdul Valarin Westron Naʼvi Nadsat Newspeak Simlish Spocanian Star Wars languages Syldavian Talossan Teonaht Tsolyáni Utopian Valyrian Venedic Verdurian Wenja Ritual and other Balaibalan Damin Enochian Eskayan Kukurá Lingua ignota Medefaidrin Myska Palawa kani Yerkish Zaum Neography Constructed script Esperanto orthography Sitelen Pona Tolkien's scripts Cirth Sarati Tengwar Study Esperantology A Secret Vice Bridge of Words Conlanging: The Art of Crafting Tongues In the Land of Invented Languages La Ricerca della Lingua Perfetta nella Cultura Europea Comparisons Esperanto/Ido Esperanto/Interlingua Esperanto/Novial Ido/Interlingua Ido/Novial Interlingue/Interlingua Lojban/Loglan List of constructed languages List of language creators Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=An_Essay_Towards_a_Real_Character,_and_a_Philosophical_Language&oldid=1283147917 " Categories : Engineered languages 1668 works British essays Essays about language Philosophy of language literature Social science essays Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language 5 languages Add topic

