Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Occurrence 3 Effects 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Nor'west arch 5 languages भोजपुरी Deutsch فارسی Français Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Föhn cloud formation in New Zealand The nor'west arch, viewed from Christchurch , appears as a blue belt of clear sky to the west from which high white cloud streams.

The nor'west arch is a band of high white lenticular cloud that forms on the eastern side of New Zealand's South Island and which looks like an arch in an otherwise clear blue sky over the Southern Alps . It is accompanied by a strong hot northwesterly or northerly wind known as a "nor'wester". In Canterbury , where it is a well known feature, it is also called the Canterbury arch . It also occurs in Otago and Marlborough and east of mountain ranges along the east coast of the North Island .

[ 1 ] Closer to the Canterbury coast, some distance from the mountains of the Southern Alps, it appears as a clear area of blue above the mountains, with white cloud streaming to the east from it. The phenomenon is similar to the Chinook arch seen in the Pacific regions of the United States and Canada.

Formation [ edit ] The nor'wester is a föhn wind – moist air is driven over the Southern Alps , falling as condensation on the western side, leaving the eastern plains in the rain shadow .

A typical Canterbury nor'west arch at sunset The nor'west arch is a föhn cloud or a lenticular cloud .

[ 1 ] The northwesterly wind drives warm moist air from over the Tasman Sea , and it is pushed up by the presence of the Southern Alps, causing it to cool rapidly. The area to the east of the divide is in the rain shadow of the Alps; much of the moisture is dumped on the West Coast , and is responsible for the temperate rainforests found there. As the air passes over the alps, the water vapour remaining becomes visible in a band of cloud over the mountains at the top of each wave of air. From the perspective of a viewer on the eastern side, this appears as an 'arch' of cloud. The standing wave or arch is caused by the moisture condensing and becoming visible towards the top of the wave and then evaporating again as the air descends to the trough of the wave.

Nor'westers caused by cold fronts will often change within a day or two to a cool southerly wind accompanied by rain showers, as the front passes through. In mid-winter, a nor'wester is often followed by a brief but intense cold snap, frequently bringing thunder, hail, or rain and sometimes snow which may settle to sea level.

Occurrence [ edit ] The nor'west arch can be seen as far north as Amberley and as far south as Central Otago , but it is at its most prominent on the Canterbury Plains , due to the flat and low-lying nature of the land to the east of the mountains.

The nor'wester can blow at any time of year, but is less common in winter. Many of the strongest northerly and northwesterly winds blow ahead of cold fronts . A front lying across the South Island will often extend from northwest to southeast, reaching northern parts of the West Coast before it reaches corresponding areas on the east coast. The steep air pressure gradient ahead of the cyclonic system associated with a front gives these nor'westers their strength; they will commonly reach gale force and cause isolated damage to trees and buildings.

[ 2 ] Once every few years, a nor'wester will approach hurricane strength and cause widespread damage.

Effects [ edit ] The heat and lack of moisture characteristic of nor'westers play a major role in the intermittent droughts experienced by Canterbury and other regions on New Zealand's eastern coasts.

[ citation needed ] The nor'wester has a deep psychological effect on many people subjected to its hot, dry nature. It has been statistically linked to increases in suicide and domestic violence.

[ 3 ] About 10 percent of people affected by the nor’wester feel elated and wonderful. But the rest feel depressed, irritable, and lacking energy. People feel they can’t cope with everyday things. ... There is irrational anxiety and a sense of foreboding.

— Neil Cherry [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Lee waves Southeast Australian foehn Roaring forties Taieri Pet References [ edit ] ^ a b "Clouds" .

NIWA . Retrieved 22 September 2024 .

^ "Dunedin homes without water as wind topples trees" .

Radio New Zealand . 21 December 2010 . Retrieved 1 November 2011 .

^ Erick Brenstrum, Canterbury's damaging nor'wester , New Zealand Geographic. Reprinted from New Zealand Geographic No.1 (Jan–Mar 1989). Accessed 2007-06-17.

^ Chinooks , Plains Folk, Prairie Public Broadcasting. Accessed 2007-06-17.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nor'west arch .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nor%27west_arch&oldid=1250498491 " Categories : Winds Climate of New Zealand Föhn effect Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2024 Use New Zealand English from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 October 2024, at 19:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nor'west arch 5 languages Add topic

