Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Classical theorems Toggle Classical theorems subsection 2.1 General theorems 2.2 Geometry in large 2.2.1 Pinched sectional curvature 2.2.2 Sectional curvature bounded below 2.2.3 Sectional curvature bounded above 2.2.4 Ricci curvature bounded below 2.2.5 Negative Ricci curvature 2.2.6 Positive scalar curvature 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Riemannian geometry 39 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of differential geometry Geometry Projecting a sphere to a plane Branches Euclidean Non-Euclidean Elliptic Spherical Hyperbolic Non-Archimedean geometry Projective Affine Synthetic Analytic Algebraic Arithmetic Diophantine Differential Riemannian Symplectic Discrete differential Complex Finite Discrete/Combinatorial Digital Convex Computational Fractal Incidence Noncommutative geometry Noncommutative algebraic geometry Concepts Features Dimension Straightedge and compass constructions Angle Curve Diagonal Orthogonality ( Perpendicular ) Parallel Vertex Congruence Similarity Symmetry Zero-dimensional Point One-dimensional Line segment ray Length Two-dimensional Plane Area Polygon Triangle Altitude Hypotenuse Pythagorean theorem Parallelogram Square Rectangle Rhombus Rhomboid Quadrilateral Trapezoid Kite Circle Diameter Circumference Area Three-dimensional Volume Cube cuboid Cylinder Dodecahedron Icosahedron Octahedron Pyramid Platonic Solid Sphere Tetrahedron Four -/other-dimensional Tesseract Hypersphere Geometers by name Aida Aryabhata Ahmes Alhazen Apollonius Archimedes Atiyah Baudhayana Bolyai Brahmagupta Cartan Chern Coxeter Descartes Euclid Euler Gauss Gromov Hilbert Huygens Jyeṣṭhadeva Kātyāyana Khayyám Klein Lobachevsky Manava Minkowski Minggatu Pascal Pythagoras Parameshvara Poincaré Riemann Sakabe Sijzi al-Tusi Veblen Virasena Yang Hui al-Yasamin Zhang List of geometers by period BCE Ahmes Baudhayana Manava Pythagoras Euclid Archimedes Apollonius 1–1400s Zhang Kātyāyana Aryabhata Brahmagupta Virasena Alhazen Sijzi Khayyám al-Yasamin al-Tusi Yang Hui Parameshvara 1400s–1700s Jyeṣṭhadeva Descartes Pascal Huygens Minggatu Euler Sakabe Aida 1700s–1900s Gauss Lobachevsky Bolyai Riemann Klein Poincaré Hilbert Minkowski Cartan Veblen Coxeter Chern Present day Atiyah Gromov v t e Riemannian geometry is the branch of differential geometry that studies Riemannian manifolds , defined as smooth manifolds with a Riemannian metric (an inner product on the tangent space at each point that varies smoothly from point to point). This gives, in particular, local notions of angle , length of curves , surface area and volume . From those, some other global quantities can be derived by integrating local contributions.

Riemannian geometry originated with the vision of Bernhard Riemann expressed in his inaugural lecture " Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen " ("On the Hypotheses on which Geometry is Based").

[ 1 ] It is a very broad and abstract generalization of the differential geometry of surfaces in R 3 . Development of Riemannian geometry resulted in synthesis of diverse results concerning the geometry of surfaces and the behavior of geodesics on them, with techniques that can be applied to the study of differentiable manifolds of higher dimensions. It enabled the formulation of Einstein 's general theory of relativity , made profound impact on group theory and representation theory , as well as analysis , and spurred the development of algebraic and differential topology .

Introduction [ edit ] Bernhard Riemann Riemannian geometry was first put forward in generality by Bernhard Riemann in the 19th century. It deals with a broad range of geometries whose metric properties vary from point to point, including the standard types of non-Euclidean geometry .

Every smooth manifold admits a Riemannian metric , which often helps to solve problems of differential topology . It also serves as an entry level for the more complicated structure of pseudo-Riemannian manifolds , which (in four dimensions) are the main objects of the theory of general relativity . Other generalizations of Riemannian geometry include Finsler geometry .

There exists a close analogy of differential geometry with the mathematical structure of defects in regular crystals.

Dislocations and disclinations produce torsions and curvature.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The following articles provide some useful introductory material: Metric tensor Riemannian manifold Levi-Civita connection Curvature Riemann curvature tensor List of differential geometry topics Glossary of Riemannian and metric geometry Classical theorems [ edit ] What follows is an incomplete list of the most classical theorems in Riemannian geometry. The choice is made depending on its importance and elegance of formulation. Most of the results can be found in the classic monograph by Jeff Cheeger and D. Ebin (see below).

The formulations given are far from being very exact or the most general. This list is oriented to those who already know the basic definitions and want to know what these definitions are about.

General theorems [ edit ] Gauss–Bonnet theorem The integral of the Gauss curvature on a compact 2-dimensional Riemannian manifold is equal to 2 π χ ( M ) where χ ( M ) denotes the Euler characteristic of M . This theorem has a generalization to any compact even-dimensional Riemannian manifold, see generalized Gauss-Bonnet theorem .

Nash embedding theorems . They state that every Riemannian manifold can be isometrically embedded in a Euclidean space R n .

Geometry in large [ edit ] In all of the following theorems we assume some local behavior of the space (usually formulated using curvature assumption) to derive some information about the global structure of the space, including either some information on the topological type of the manifold or on the behavior of points at "sufficiently large" distances.

Pinched sectional curvature [ edit ] Sphere theorem .

If M is a simply connected compact n -dimensional Riemannian manifold with sectional curvature strictly pinched between 1/4 and 1 then M is diffeomorphic to a sphere.

Cheeger's finiteness theorem.

Given constants C , D and V , there are only finitely many (up to diffeomorphism) compact n -dimensional Riemannian manifolds with sectional curvature | K | ≤ C , diameter ≤ D and volume ≥ V .

Gromov's almost flat manifolds .

There is an ε n > 0 such that if an n -dimensional Riemannian manifold has a metric with sectional curvature | K | ≤ ε n and diameter ≤ 1 then its finite cover is diffeomorphic to a nil manifold .

Sectional curvature bounded below [ edit ] Cheeger–Gromoll's soul theorem .

If M is a non-compact complete non-negatively curved n -dimensional Riemannian manifold, then M contains a compact, totally geodesic submanifold S such that M is diffeomorphic to the normal bundle of S ( S is called the soul of M .) In particular, if M has strictly positive curvature everywhere, then it is diffeomorphic to R n .

G. Perelman in 1994 gave an astonishingly elegant/short proof of the Soul Conjecture: M is diffeomorphic to R n if it has positive curvature at only one point.

Gromov's Betti number theorem.

There is a constant C = C ( n ) such that if M is a compact connected n -dimensional Riemannian manifold with positive sectional curvature then the sum of its Betti numbers is at most C .

Grove–Petersen's finiteness theorem.

Given constants C , D and V , there are only finitely many homotopy types of compact n -dimensional Riemannian manifolds with sectional curvature K ≥ C , diameter ≤ D and volume ≥ V .

Sectional curvature bounded above [ edit ] The Cartan–Hadamard theorem states that a complete simply connected Riemannian manifold M with nonpositive sectional curvature is diffeomorphic to the Euclidean space R n with n = dim M via the exponential map at any point. It implies that any two points of a simply connected complete Riemannian manifold with nonpositive sectional curvature are joined by a unique geodesic.

The geodesic flow of any compact Riemannian manifold with negative sectional curvature is ergodic .

If M is a complete Riemannian manifold with sectional curvature bounded above by a strictly negative constant k then it is a CAT( k ) space . Consequently, its fundamental group Γ = π 1 ( M ) is Gromov hyperbolic . This has many implications for the structure of the fundamental group: it is finitely presented ; the word problem for Γ has a positive solution; the group Γ has finite virtual cohomological dimension ; it contains only finitely many conjugacy classes of elements of finite order ; the abelian subgroups of Γ are virtually cyclic , so that it does not contain a subgroup isomorphic to Z × Z .

Ricci curvature bounded below [ edit ] Myers theorem .

If a complete Riemannian manifold has positive Ricci curvature then its fundamental group is finite.

Bochner's formula .

If a compact Riemannian n -manifold has non-negative Ricci curvature, then its first Betti number is at most n , with equality if and only if the Riemannian manifold is a flat torus.

Splitting theorem .

If a complete n -dimensional Riemannian manifold has nonnegative Ricci curvature and a straight line (i.e. a geodesic that minimizes distance on each interval) then it is isometric to a direct product of the real line and a complete ( n -1)-dimensional Riemannian manifold that has nonnegative Ricci curvature.

Bishop–Gromov inequality .

The volume of a metric ball of radius r in a complete n -dimensional Riemannian manifold with positive Ricci curvature has volume at most that of the volume of a ball of the same radius r in Euclidean space.

Gromov's compactness theorem .

The set of all Riemannian manifolds with positive Ricci curvature and diameter at most D is pre-compact in the Gromov-Hausdorff metric .

Negative Ricci curvature [ edit ] The isometry group of a compact Riemannian manifold with negative Ricci curvature is discrete .

Any smooth manifold of dimension n ≥ 3 admits a Riemannian metric with negative Ricci curvature.

[ 4 ] ( This is not true for surfaces .) Positive scalar curvature [ edit ] The n -dimensional torus does not admit a metric with positive scalar curvature.

If the injectivity radius of a compact n -dimensional Riemannian manifold is ≥ π then the average scalar curvature is at most n ( n -1).

See also [ edit ] Shape of the universe Introduction to the mathematics of general relativity Normal coordinates Systolic geometry Riemann–Cartan geometry in Einstein–Cartan theory (motivation) Riemann's minimal surface Reilly formula Notes [ edit ] ^ maths.tcd.ie ^ Kleinert, Hagen (1989), Gauge Fields in Condensed Matter Vol II , World Scientific, pp.

743– 1440 ^ Kleinert, Hagen (2008), Multivalued Fields in Condensed Matter, Electromagnetism, and Gravitation (PDF) , World Scientific, pp.

1– 496, Bibcode : 2008mfcm.book.....K ^ Joachim Lohkamp has shown (Annals of Mathematics, 1994) that any manifold of dimension greater than two admits a metric of negative Ricci curvature.

References [ edit ] Books Berger, Marcel (2000), Riemannian Geometry During the Second Half of the Twentieth Century , University Lecture Series, vol. 17, Rhode Island: American Mathematical Society, ISBN 0-8218-2052-4 .

(Provides a historical review and survey, including hundreds of references.) Cheeger, Jeff ; Ebin, David G. (2008), Comparison theorems in Riemannian geometry , Providence, RI: AMS Chelsea Publishing ; Revised reprint of the 1975 original.

Gallot, Sylvestre; Hulin, Dominique ; Lafontaine, Jacques (2004), Riemannian geometry , Universitext (3rd ed.), Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

Jost, Jürgen (2002), Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis , Berlin: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 3-540-42627-2 .

Petersen, Peter (2006), Riemannian Geometry , Berlin: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-98212-4 From Riemann to Differential Geometry and Relativity (Lizhen Ji, Athanase Papadopoulos, and Sumio Yamada, Eds.) Springer, 2017, XXXIV, 647 p.

ISBN 978-3-319-60039-0 Papers Brendle, Simon ; Schoen, Richard M.

(2008), "Classification of manifolds with weakly 1/4-pinched curvatures", Acta Math , 200 : 1– 13, arXiv : 0705.3963 , Bibcode : 2007arXiv0705.3963B , doi : 10.1007/s11511-008-0022-7 , S2CID 15463483 External links [ edit ] Riemannian geometry by V. A. Toponogov at the Encyclopedia of Mathematics Weisstein, Eric W.

, "Riemannian Geometry" , MathWorld v t e Riemannian geometry ( Glossary ) Basic concepts Curvature tensor Scalar Ricci Sectional Exponential map Geodesic Inner product Metric tensor Levi-Civita connection Covariant derivative Signature Raising and lowering indices / Musical isomorphism Parallel transport Riemannian manifold Pseudo-Riemannian manifold Riemannian volume form Types of manifolds Hermitian Hyperbolic Kähler Kenmotsu Main results Fundamental theorem of Riemannian geometry Gauss's lemma Gauss–Bonnet theorem Hopf–Rinow theorem Nash embedding theorem Ricci flow Schur's lemma Generalizations Finsler Hilbert Sub-Riemannian Applications General relativity Geometrization conjecture Poincaré conjecture Uniformization theorem v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category v t e Bernhard Riemann Cauchy–Riemann equations Generalized Riemann hypothesis Grand Riemann hypothesis Grothendieck–Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem Hirzebruch–Riemann–Roch theorem Local zeta function Measurable Riemann mapping theorem Riemann (crater) Riemann Xi function Riemann curvature tensor Riemann hypothesis Riemann integral Riemann invariant Riemann mapping theorem Riemann form Riemann problem Riemann series theorem Riemann solver Riemann sphere Riemann sum Riemann surface Riemann zeta function Riemann's differential equation Riemann's minimal surface Riemannian circle Riemannian connection on a surface Riemannian geometry Riemann–Hilbert correspondence Riemann–Hilbert problems Riemann–Lebesgue lemma Riemann–Liouville integral Riemann–Roch theorem Riemann–Roch theorem for smooth manifolds Riemann–Siegel formula Riemann–Siegel theta function Riemann–Silberstein vector Riemann–Stieltjes integral Riemann–von Mangoldt formula Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Riemannian_geometry&oldid=1274913519 " Categories : Riemannian geometry Bernhard Riemann Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 23:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Riemannian geometry 39 languages Add topic

