Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Commercial 2.2 Military 2.3 Civilian 2.4 Safety 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Chemical 3.1.1 Decomposition 3.1.2 Deflagration 3.1.3 Detonation 3.2 Exotic 4 Properties Toggle Properties subsection 4.1 Sensitivity 4.2 Sensitivity to initiation 4.3 Velocity of detonation 4.4 Stability 4.5 Power, performance, and strength 4.6 Brisance 4.7 Density 4.8 Volatility 4.9 Hygroscopicity and water resistance 4.10 Toxicity 4.11 Explosive train 4.12 Volume of products of explosion 4.13 Oxygen balance (OB% or Ω ) 4.14 Chemical composition 4.14.1 Pure compounds 4.14.2 Oxidized fuel 4.15 Availability and cost 5 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 5.1 By sensitivity 5.1.1 Primary 5.1.2 Secondary 5.1.3 Tertiary 5.2 By velocity 5.2.1 Low 5.2.2 High 5.3 By physical form 5.4 Shipping label classifications 5.4.1 United Nations (UN) GHS Hazard Class and Division 5.4.2 Class 1 Compatibility Group 6 Regulation Toggle Regulation subsection 6.1 Netherlands 6.2 United Kingdom 6.3 United States 7 List of explosives Toggle List of explosives subsection 7.1 Compounds 7.1.1 Acetylides 7.1.2 Fulminates 7.1.3 Nitro 7.1.4 Nitrosos 7.1.5 Nitrates 7.1.6 Amines 7.1.7 Azides 7.1.8 Peroxides 7.1.9 Oxides 7.1.10 Unsorted 7.2 Mixtures 7.3 Elements and isotopes 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 U.S. government 10.2 Institute of Makers of Explosives 10.3 Other historical 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Explosive 102 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Chemical explosive ) Substance that can explode This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may contain confusing or ambiguous abbreviations .

Please review the Manual of Style , help improve this article , and discuss this issue on the talk page .

( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For the American band, see The Explosives . For the song by Dr. Dre, see Xxplosive . For other uses, see Explosive (disambiguation) .

Demonstration of the explosive properties of three different explosives; four explosions are demonstrated. Three are conducted on a solid marble base, and one is conducted on the demonstrator's hand; each is initiated by a match.

An explosive (or explosive material ) is a reactive substance that contains a great amount of potential energy that can produce an explosion if released suddenly, usually accompanied by the production of light , heat , sound , and pressure . An explosive charge is a measured quantity of explosive material, which may either be composed solely of one ingredient or be a mixture containing at least two substances.

The potential energy stored in an explosive material may, for example, be: chemical energy , such as nitroglycerin or grain dust pressurized gas , such as a gas cylinder , aerosol can , or boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion nuclear energy, such as in the fissile isotopes uranium-235 and plutonium-239 Explosive materials may be categorized by the speed at which they expand. Materials that detonate (the front of the chemical reaction moves faster through the material than the speed of sound ) are said to be "high explosives" and materials that deflagrate are said to be "low explosives". Explosives may also be categorized by their sensitivity . Sensitive materials that can be initiated by a relatively small amount of heat or pressure are primary explosives , and materials that are relatively insensitive are secondary or tertiary explosives .

A wide variety of chemicals can explode; a smaller number are manufactured specifically for the purpose of being used as explosives. The remainder are too dangerous, sensitive, toxic, expensive, unstable, or prone to decomposition or degradation over short time spans.

In contrast, some materials are merely combustible or flammable if they burn without exploding. The distinction, however, is not always clear. Certain materials—dusts, powders, gases, or volatile organic liquids—may be simply combustible or flammable under ordinary conditions, but become explosive in specific situations or forms, such as dispersed airborne clouds , or confinement or sudden release .

History [ edit ] See also: History of gunpowder and Timeline of explosives The Great Western Powder Company of Toledo, Ohio, a producer of explosives, seen in 1905 Early thermal weapons , such as Greek fire , have existed since ancient times. At its roots, the history of chemical explosives lies in the history of gunpowder .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] During the Tang dynasty in the 9th century, Taoist Chinese alchemists were eagerly trying to find the elixir of immortality.

[ 3 ] In the process, they stumbled upon the explosive invention of black powder made from coal, saltpeter, and sulfur in 1044. Gunpowder was the first form of chemical explosives, and by 1161, the Chinese were using explosives for the first time in warfare.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Chinese would incorporate explosives fired from bamboo or bronze tubes known as bamboo firecrackers. The Chinese also inserted live rats inside the bamboo firecrackers; when fired toward the enemy, the flaming rats created great psychological ramifications—scaring enemy soldiers away and causing cavalry units to go wild.

[ 7 ] The first useful explosive stronger than black powder was nitroglycerin , developed in 1847. Since nitroglycerin is a liquid and highly unstable, it was replaced by nitrocellulose , trinitrotoluene ( TNT ) in 1863, smokeless powder , dynamite in 1867 and gelignite (the latter two being sophisticated stabilized preparations of nitroglycerine rather than chemical alternatives, both invented by Alfred Nobel ). World War I saw the adoption of TNT in artillery shells. World War II saw extensive use of new explosives (see: List of explosives used during World War II ) .

In turn, these have largely been replaced by more powerful explosives such as C-4 and pentaerythritol tetranitrate (PETN) which are also waterproof and malleable though they may catch fire due to reactions with metals.

[ 8 ] Applications [ edit ] This section is transcluded from Explosive device .

( edit | history ) A stick of dynamite Diatomaceous earth (or any other type of absorbent material) soaked in nitroglycerin Protective coating surrounding the explosive material Blasting cap Wire connected to the blasting cap An explosive device is usually just a bomb that is not used by a regular military.

[ 9 ] It contains an explosive with a detonator connected to a triggering mechanism to form a device used for a specific purpose.

[ 10 ] Commercial [ edit ] The largest commercial application of explosives is mining . The detonation or deflagration of either a high or low explosive in a confined space can be used to liberate a fairly specific sub-volume of a brittle material (rock) in a much larger volume of the same or similar material. The mining industry tends to use nitrate-based explosives such as emulsions of fuel oil and ammonium nitrate solutions, [ 11 ] mixtures of ammonium nitrate prills (fertilizer pellets) and fuel oil ( ANFO ) and gelatinous suspensions or slurries [ 12 ] of ammonium nitrate and combustible fuels.

In materials science and engineering, explosives are used in cladding ( explosion welding ). This is a solid state (solid-phase) process where welding is accomplished by accelerating one of the components at extremely high velocity through the use of explosives. This process is often used to clad carbon steel or aluminium plate with a thin layer of a harder or more corrosion -resistant material.

[ 13 ] A video on safety precautions at blast sites A video describing how to safely handle explosives in mines Military [ edit ] Main article: Explosive weapon Civilian [ edit ] Main article: Explosives engineering Safety [ edit ] Main article: Explosives safety Types [ edit ] Chemical [ edit ] The international pictogram for explosive substances An explosion is a type of spontaneous chemical reaction that, once initiated, is driven by both a large exothermic change (great release of heat) and a large positive entropy change (great quantities of gases are released) in going from reactants to products, thereby constituting a thermodynamically favorable process in addition to one that propagates very rapidly. Thus, explosives are substances that contain a large amount of energy stored in chemical bonds . The energetic stability of the gaseous products and hence their generation comes from the formation of strongly bonded species like carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen gas, which contain strong double and triple bonds having bond strengths of nearly 1 MJ/mole. Consequently, most commercial explosives are organic compounds containing –NO 2 , –ONO 2 and –NHNO 2 groups that, when detonated, release gases like the aforementioned (e.g., nitroglycerin , TNT , HMX , PETN , nitrocellulose ).

[ 14 ] An explosive is classified as a low or high explosive according to its rate of combustion : low explosives burn rapidly (or deflagrate ), while high explosives detonate . While these definitions are distinct, the problem of precisely measuring rapid decomposition makes practical classification of explosives difficult. For a reaction to be classified as a detonation as opposed to just a deflagration, the propagation of the reaction shockwave through the material being tested must be faster than the speed of sound through that material. The speed of sound through a liquid or solid material is usually orders of magnitude faster than the speed of sound through air or other gases.

Traditional explosives mechanics is based on the shock-sensitive rapid oxidation of carbon and hydrogen to carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, and water in the form of steam.

Nitrates typically provide the required oxygen to burn the carbon and hydrogen fuel. High explosives tend to have the oxygen, carbon, and hydrogen contained in one organic molecule, and less sensitive explosives like ANFO are combinations of fuel (carbon and hydrogen fuel oil) and ammonium nitrate . A sensitizer such as powdered aluminum may be added to an explosive to increase the energy of the detonation. Once detonated, the nitrogen portion of the explosive formulation emerges as nitrogen gas and toxic nitric oxides .

Decomposition [ edit ] The chemical decomposition of an explosive may take years, days, hours, or a fraction of a second. The slower processes of decomposition take place in storage and are of interest only from a stability standpoint. Of more interest are the other two rapid forms besides decomposition: deflagration and detonation.

Deflagration [ edit ] Main article: Deflagration In deflagration, decomposition of the explosive material is propagated by a flame front which moves relatively slowly through the explosive material, i.e.

at speeds less than the speed of sound within the substance (which is usually still higher than 340 m/s or 1,220 km/h in most liquid or solid materials) [ 15 ] in contrast to detonation, which occurs at speeds greater than the speed of sound. Deflagration is a characteristic of low explosive material.

Detonation [ edit ] Main article: Detonation This term is used to describe an explosive phenomenon whereby the decomposition is propagated by a shock wave traversing the explosive material at speeds greater than the speed of sound within the substance.

[ 16 ] The shock front is capable of passing through the high explosive material at supersonic speeds — typically thousands of metres per second.

Exotic [ edit ] In addition to chemical explosives, there are a number of more exotic explosive materials and exotic methods of causing explosions. Examples include nuclear explosives , and abruptly heating a substance to a plasma state with a high-intensity laser or electric arc .

Laser- and arc-heating are used in laser detonators, exploding-bridgewire detonators , and exploding foil initiators , where a shock wave and then detonation in conventional chemical explosive material is created by laser- or electric-arc heating. Laser and electric energy are not currently used in practice to generate most of the required energy, but only to initiate reactions.

Properties [ edit ] To determine the suitability of an explosive substance for a particular use, its physical properties must first be known. The usefulness of an explosive can only be appreciated when the properties and the factors affecting them are fully understood. Some of the more important characteristics are listed below: Sensitivity [ edit ] Main article: Sensitivity (explosives) Sensitivity refers to the ease with which an explosive can be ignited or detonated, i.e., the amount and intensity of shock , friction , or heat that is required. When the term sensitivity is used, care must be taken to clarify what kind of sensitivity is under discussion. The relative sensitivity of a given explosive to impact may vary greatly from its sensitivity to friction or heat. Some of the test methods used to determine sensitivity relate to: Impact – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the distance through which a standard weight must be dropped onto the material to cause it to explode.

Friction – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the amount of pressure applied to the material in order to create enough friction to cause a reaction.

Heat – Sensitivity is expressed in terms of the temperature at which decomposition of the material occurs.

Specific explosives (usually but not always highly sensitive on one or more of the three above axes) may be idiosyncratically sensitive to such factors as pressure drop, acceleration, the presence of sharp edges or rough surfaces, incompatible materials, or even — in rare cases — nuclear or electromagnetic radiation. These factors present special hazards that may rule out any practical utility.

Sensitivity is an important consideration in selecting an explosive for a particular purpose. The explosive in an armor-piercing projectile must be relatively insensitive, or the shock of impact would cause it to detonate before it penetrated to the point desired. The explosive lenses around nuclear charges are also designed to be highly insensitive, to minimize the risk of accidental detonation.

Sensitivity to initiation [ edit ] The index of the capacity of an explosive to be initiated into detonation in a sustained manner. It is defined by the power of the detonator, which is certain to prime the explosive to a sustained and continuous detonation. Reference is made to the Sellier-Bellot scale that consists of a series of 10 detonators, from n. 1 to n. 10 , each of which corresponds to an increasing charge weight. In practice, most of the explosives on the market today are sensitive to an n. 8 detonator, where the charge corresponds to 2 grams of mercury fulminate .

Velocity of detonation [ edit ] Main article: Detonation velocity The velocity with which the reaction process propagates in the mass of the explosive. Most commercial mining explosives have detonation velocities ranging from 1,800 m/s to 8,000 m/s. Today, the velocity of detonation can be measured with accuracy. Together with density , it is an important element influencing the yield of the energy transmitted through both atmospheric over-pressure and ground acceleration. By definition, a "low explosive", such as black powder, or smokeless gunpowder has a burn rate of 171–631 m/s.

[ 17 ] In contrast, a "high explosive", whether a primary, such as detonating cord , or a secondary, such as TNT or C-4, has a significantly higher burn rate about 6900–8092 m/s.

[ 18 ] Stability [ edit ] Main article: Chemical stability Stability is the ability of an explosive to be stored without deterioration .

The following factors affect the stability of an explosive: Chemical constitution .

In the strictest technical sense, the word "stability" is a thermodynamic term referring to the energy of a substance relative to a reference state or to some other substance. However, in the context of explosives, stability commonly refers to ease of detonation, which is concerned with chemical kinetics (i.e., rate of decomposition). It is perhaps best, then, to differentiate between the terms thermodynamically stable and kinetically stable by referring to the former as "inert." Contrarily, a kinetically unstable substance is said to be "labile." It is generally recognized that certain groups like nitro (–NO 2 ), nitrate (–ONO 2 ), and azide (–N 3 ), are intrinsically labile. Kinetically, there exists a low activation barrier to the decomposition reaction. Consequently, these compounds exhibit high sensitivity to flame or mechanical shock. The chemical bonding in these compounds is characterized as predominantly covalent and thus they are not thermodynamically stabilized by a high ionic-lattice energy. Furthermore, they generally have positive enthalpies of formation and there is little mechanistic hindrance to internal molecular rearrangement to yield the more thermodynamically stable (more strongly bonded) decomposition products. For example, in lead azide , Pb(N 3 ) 2 , the nitrogen atoms are already bonded to one another, so decomposition into Pb and N 2 [1] is relatively easy.

Temperature of storage.

The rate of decomposition of explosives increases at higher temperatures. All standard military explosives may be considered to have a high degree of stability at temperatures from –10 to +35 °C, but each has a high temperature at which its rate of thermal decomposition rapidly accelerates and stability is reduced. As a rule of thumb, most explosives become dangerously unstable at temperatures above 70 °C.

Exposure to sunlight .

When exposed to the ultraviolet rays of sunlight, many explosive compounds containing nitrogen groups rapidly decompose, affecting their stability.

Electrical discharge .

Electrostatic or spark sensitivity to initiation is common in a number of explosives. Static or other electrical discharge may be sufficient to cause a reaction, even detonation, under some circumstances. As a result, safe handling of explosives and pyrotechnics usually requires proper electrical grounding of the operator.

Power, performance, and strength [ edit ] Main articles: Power (physics) and Strength (explosive) The term power or performance as applied to an explosive refers to its ability to do work. In practice it is defined as the explosive's ability to accomplish what is intended in the way of energy delivery (i.e., fragment projection, air blast, high-velocity jet, underwater shock and bubble energy, etc.). Explosive power or performance is evaluated by a tailored series of tests to assess the material for its intended use. Of the tests listed below, cylinder expansion and air-blast tests are common to most testing programs, and the others support specific applications.

Cylinder expansion test.

A standard amount of explosive is loaded into a long hollow cylinder , usually of copper, and detonated at one end. Data is collected concerning the rate of radial expansion of the cylinder and the maximum cylinder wall velocity. This also establishes the Gurney energy or 2 E .

Cylinder fragmentation.

A standard steel cylinder is loaded with explosive and detonated in a sawdust pit. The fragments are collected and the size distribution analyzed.

Detonation pressure ( Chapman–Jouguet condition ).

Detonation pressure data derived from measurements of shock waves transmitted into water by the detonation of cylindrical explosive charges of a standard size.

Determination of critical diameter.

This test establishes the minimum physical size a charge of a specific explosive must be to sustain its own detonation wave. The procedure involves the detonation of a series of charges of different diameters until difficulty in detonation wave propagation is observed.

Massive-diameter detonation velocity.

Detonation velocity is dependent on loading density (c), charge diameter, and grain size. The hydrodynamic theory of detonation used in predicting explosive phenomena does not include the diameter of the charge, and therefore a detonation velocity, for a massive diameter. This procedure requires the firing of a series of charges of the same density and physical structure, but different diameters, and the extrapolation of the resulting detonation velocities to predict the detonation velocity of a charge of a massive diameter.

Pressure versus scaled distance.

A charge of a specific size is detonated and its pressure effects measured at a standard distance. The values obtained are compared with those for TNT.

Impulse versus scaled distance.

A charge of a specific size is detonated and its impulse (the area under the pressure-time curve) measured as a function of distance. The results are tabulated and expressed as TNT equivalents .

Relative bubble energy (RBE).

A 5 to 50 kg charge is detonated in water and piezoelectric gauges measure peak pressure, time constant, impulse, and energy.

The RBE may be defined as K x 3 RBE = K s where K = the bubble expansion period for an experimental ( x ) or a standard ( s ) charge.

Brisance [ edit ] Main article: Brisance In addition to strength, explosives display a second characteristic, which is their shattering effect or brisance (from the French meaning to "break"). Brisance is important in determining the effectiveness of an explosion in fragmenting shells, bomb casings, and grenades . The rapidity with which an explosive reaches its peak pressure ( power ) is a measure of its brisance. Brisance values are primarily employed in France and Russia.

The sand crush test is commonly employed to determine the relative brisance in comparison to TNT. No test is capable of directly comparing the explosive properties of two or more compounds; it is important to examine the data from several such tests (sand crush, trauzl , and so forth) in order to gauge relative brisance. True values for comparison require field experiments.

Density [ edit ] Density of loading refers to the mass of an explosive per unit volume. Several methods of loading are available, including pellet loading, cast loading, and press loading, the choice being determined by the characteristics of the explosive. Dependent upon the method employed, an average density of the loaded charge can be obtained that is within 80–99% of the theoretical maximum density of the explosive. High load density can reduce sensitivity by making the mass more resistant to internal friction . However, if density is increased to the extent that individual crystals are crushed, the explosive may become more sensitive. Increased load density also permits the use of more explosive, thereby increasing the power of the warhead . It is possible to compress an explosive beyond a point of sensitivity, known also as dead-pressing , in which the material is no longer capable of being reliably initiated, if at all.

[ citation needed ] Volatility [ edit ] Volatility is the readiness with which a substance vaporizes . Excessive volatility often results in the development of pressure within rounds of ammunition and separation of mixtures into their constituents. Volatility affects the chemical composition of the explosive such that a marked reduction in stability may occur, which results in an increase in the danger of handling.

Hygroscopicity and water resistance [ edit ] The introduction of water into an explosive is highly undesirable since it reduces the sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation of the explosive.

Hygroscopicity is a measure of a material's moisture-absorbing tendencies. Moisture affects explosives adversely by acting as an inert material that absorbs heat when vaporized, and by acting as a solvent medium that can cause undesired chemical reactions. Sensitivity, strength, and velocity of detonation are reduced by inert materials that reduce the continuity of the explosive mass. When the moisture content evaporates during detonation, cooling occurs, which reduces the temperature of reaction. Stability is also affected by the presence of moisture since moisture promotes decomposition of the explosive and, in addition, causes corrosion of the explosive's metal container.

Explosives considerably differ from one another as to their behavior in the presence of water. Gelatin dynamites containing nitroglycerine have a degree of water resistance. Explosives based on ammonium nitrate have little or no water resistance as ammonium nitrate is highly soluble in water and is hygroscopic.

Toxicity [ edit ] Many explosives are toxic to some extent. Manufacturing inputs can also be organic compounds or hazardous materials that require special handling due to risks (such as carcinogens ). The decomposition products, residual solids, or gases of some explosives can be toxic, whereas others are harmless, such as carbon dioxide and water.

Examples of harmful by-products are: Heavy metals, such as lead, mercury, and barium from primers (observed in high-volume firing ranges) Nitric oxides from TNT Perchlorates when used in large quantities "Green explosives" seek to reduce environment and health impacts. An example of such is the lead-free primary explosive copper(I) 5-nitrotetrazolate, an alternative to lead azide .

[ 19 ] Explosive train [ edit ] Main article: Explosive train Explosive material may be incorporated in the explosive train of a device or system. An example is a pyrotechnic lead igniting a booster, which causes the main charge to detonate.

Volume of products of explosion [ edit ] The most widely used explosives are condensed liquids or solids converted to gaseous products by explosive chemical reactions and the energy released by those reactions. The gaseous products of complete reaction are typically carbon dioxide , steam , and nitrogen .

[ 20 ] Gaseous volumes computed by the ideal gas law tend to be too large at high pressures characteristic of explosions.

[ 21 ] Ultimate volume expansion may be estimated at three orders of magnitude, or one liter per gram of explosive. Explosives with an oxygen deficit will generate soot or gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen , which may react with surrounding materials such as atmospheric oxygen .

[ 20 ] Attempts to obtain more precise volume estimates must consider the possibility of such side reactions, condensation of steam, and aqueous solubility of gases like carbon dioxide.

[ 22 ] Oxygen balance (OB% or Ω ) [ edit ] Main article: Oxygen balance Oxygen balance is an expression that is used to indicate the degree to which an explosive can be oxidized. If an explosive molecule contains just enough oxygen to convert all of its carbon to carbon dioxide, all of its hydrogen to water, and all of its metal to metal oxide with no excess, the molecule is said to have a zero oxygen balance. The molecule is said to have a positive oxygen balance if it contains more oxygen than is needed, and a negative oxygen balance if it contains less oxygen than is needed.

[ 23 ] The sensitivity, strength , and brisance of an explosive are all somewhat dependent upon oxygen balance and tend to approach their maxima as oxygen balance approaches zero.

Chemical composition [ edit ] A chemical explosive may consist of either a chemically pure compound, such as nitroglycerin , or a mixture of a fuel and an oxidizer , such as black powder or grain dust and air.

Pure compounds [ edit ] Some chemical compounds are unstable in that, when shocked, they react, possibly to the point of detonation. Each molecule of the compound dissociates into two or more new molecules (generally gases) with the release of energy.

Nitroglycerin : A highly sensitive colorless liquid Acetone peroxide : A very unstable white organic peroxide TNT : Yellow insensitive crystals that can be melted and cast without detonation Cellulose nitrate : A nitrated polymer which can be a high or low explosive depending on nitration level and conditions RDX , PETN , HMX : Very powerful explosives which can be used pure or in plastic explosives C-4 (or Composition C-4): An RDX plastic explosive plasticized to be adhesive and malleable The above compositions may describe most of the explosive material, but a practical explosive will often include small percentages of other substances. For example, dynamite is a mixture of highly sensitive nitroglycerin with sawdust , powdered silica , or most commonly diatomaceous earth , which act as stabilizers. Plastics and polymers may be added to bind powders of explosive compounds; waxes may be incorporated to make them safer to handle; aluminium powder may be introduced to increase total energy and blast effects. Explosive compounds are also often "alloyed": HMX or RDX powders may be mixed (typically by melt-casting) with TNT to form Octol or Cyclotol .

Oxidized fuel [ edit ] An oxidizer is a pure substance ( molecule ) that in a chemical reaction can contribute some atoms of one or more oxidizing elements, in which the fuel component of the explosive burns. On the simplest level, the oxidizer may itself be an oxidizing element , such as gaseous or liquid oxygen .

Black powder : Potassium nitrate , charcoal and sulfur Flash powder : Fine metal powder (usually aluminium or magnesium ) and a strong oxidizer (e.g.

potassium chlorate or perchlorate ) Ammonal : Ammonium nitrate and aluminium powder Armstrong's mixture : Potassium chlorate and red phosphorus . This is a very sensitive mixture. It is a primary high explosive in which sulfur is substituted for some or all of the phosphorus to slightly decrease sensitivity.

Sprengel explosives : A very general class incorporating any strong oxidizer and highly reactive fuel, although in practice the name was most commonly applied to mixtures of chlorates and nitroaromatics .

ANFO : Ammonium nitrate and fuel oil Cheddites : Chlorates or perchlorates and oil Oxyliquits : Mixtures of organic materials and liquid oxygen Panclastites : Mixtures of organic materials and dinitrogen tetroxide Availability and cost [ edit ] The availability and cost of explosives are determined by the availability of the raw materials and the cost, complexity, and safety of the manufacturing operations.

Classification [ edit ] By sensitivity [ edit ] Primary [ edit ] A primary explosive is an explosive that is extremely sensitive to stimuli such as impact , friction , heat , static electricity , or electromagnetic radiation . Some primary explosives are also known as contact explosives . A relatively small amount of energy is required for initiation . As a very general rule, primary explosives are considered to be those compounds that are more sensitive than PETN . As a practical measure, primary explosives are sufficiently sensitive that they can be reliably initiated with a blow from a hammer; however, PETN can also usually be initiated in this manner, so this is only a very broad guideline. Additionally, several compounds, such as nitrogen triiodide , are so sensitive that they cannot even be handled without detonating. Nitrogen triiodide is so sensitive that it can be reliably detonated by exposure to alpha radiation .

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Primary explosives are often used in detonators or to trigger larger charges of less sensitive secondary explosives . Primary explosives are commonly used in blasting caps and percussion caps to translate a physical shock signal. In other situations, different signals such as electrical or physical shock, or, in the case of laser detonation systems, light, are used to initiate an action, i.e., an explosion. A small quantity, usually milligrams, is sufficient to initiate a larger charge of explosive that is usually safer to handle.

Examples of primary high explosives are: Acetone peroxide Alkali metal ozonides Ammonium permanganate Ammonium chlorate Azidotetrazolates Azoclathrates Benzoyl peroxide Benzvalene 3,5-Bis(trinitromethyl)tetrazole [ 26 ] Chlorine oxides Copper(I) acetylide Copper(II) azide Cumene hydroperoxide Cycloprop(-2-)enyl nitrate (CXP or CPN) Cyanogen azide Cyanuric triazide Diacetyl peroxide 1-Diazidocarbamoyl-5-azidotetrazole Diazodinitrophenol Diazomethane Diethyl ether peroxide 4-Dimethylaminophenylpentazole Disulfur dinitride Ethyl azide Explosive antimony Fluorine perchlorate Fulminic acid Halogen azides: Fluorine azide Chlorine azide Bromine azide Iodine azide Hexamethylene triperoxide diamine Hydrazoic acid Hypofluorous acid Lead azide Lead styphnate Lead picrate [ 27 ] Manganese heptoxide Mercury(II) fulminate Mercury nitride Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide Nickel hydrazine nitrate [ 28 ] Nickel hydrazine perchlorate Nitrogen trihalides: Nitrogen trichloride Nitrogen tribromide Nitrogen triiodide Nitroglycerin Nitronium perchlorate Nitrosyl perchlorate Nitrotetrazolate- N -oxides Pentazenium hexafluoroarsenate Peroxy acids Peroxymonosulfuric acid Selenium tetraazide Silicon tetraazide Silver azide Silver acetylide Silver fulminate Silver nitride Tellurium tetraazide tert -Butyl hydroperoxide Tetraamine copper complexes Tetraazidomethane Tetrazene explosive Tetrazoles Titanium tetraazide Triazidomethane Oxides of xenon: Xenon dioxide Xenon oxytetrafluoride Xenon tetroxide Xenon trioxide Secondary [ edit ] A secondary explosive is less sensitive than a primary explosive and requires substantially more energy to be initiated. Because they are less sensitive, they are usable in a wider variety of applications and are safer to handle and store. Secondary explosives are used in larger quantities in an explosive train and are usually initiated by a smaller quantity of a primary explosive.

Examples of secondary explosives include TNT and RDX .

Tertiary [ edit ] Tertiary explosives , also called blasting agents , are so insensitive to shock that they cannot be reliably detonated by practical quantities of primary explosive , and instead require an intermediate explosive booster of secondary explosive . These are often used for safety and the typically lower costs of material and handling. The largest consumers are large-scale mining and construction operations.

Most tertiaries include a fuel and an oxidizer.

ANFO can be a tertiary explosive if its reaction rate is slow.

By velocity [ edit ] Low [ edit ] Low explosives (or low-order explosives) are compounds wherein the rate of decomposition proceeds through the material at less than the speed of sound . The decomposition is propagated by a flame front ( deflagration ) that travels much more slowly through the explosive material than the shock wave of a high explosive.

Under normal conditions , low explosives undergo deflagration at rates that vary from a few centimetres per second to approximately 0.4 kilometres per second (1,300 ft/s). It is possible for them to deflagrate very quickly, producing an effect similar to a detonation . This can happen under higher pressure (such as when gunpowder deflagrates inside the confined space of a bullet casing, accelerating the bullet to well beyond the speed of sound) or temperature .

A low explosive is usually a mixture of a combustible substance and an oxidant that decomposes rapidly (deflagration); however, they burn more slowly than a high explosive, which has an extremely fast burn rate.

[ 29 ] Low explosives are normally employed as propellants . Included in this group are petroleum products such as propane and gasoline , gunpowder (including smokeless powder ), and light pyrotechnics such as flares and fireworks , but they can replace high explosives in certain applications, including gas pressure blasting.

[ 30 ] High [ edit ] High explosives (HE, or high-order explosives) are explosive materials that detonate , meaning that the explosive shock front passes through the material at a supersonic speed. High explosives detonate with explosive velocity of about 3–9 kilometres per second (9,800–29,500 ft/s). For instance, TNT has a detonation (burn) rate of approximately 6.9 km/s (22,600 feet per second), detonating cord of 6.7 km/s (22,000 feet per second), and C-4 about 8.0 km/s (26,000 feet per second). They are normally employed in mining, demolition, and military applications. The term high explosive is in contrast with the term low explosive , which explodes ( deflagrates ) at a lower rate.

High explosives can be divided into two explosives classes differentiated by sensitivity : primary explosive and secondary explosive . Although tertiary explosives (such as ANFO at 3,200 m/s) can technically meet the explosive velocity definition, they are not considered high explosives in regulatory contexts.

Countless high-explosive compounds are chemically possible, but commercially and militarily important ones have included NG , TNT , TNP , TNX, RDX , HMX , PETN , TATP , TATB , and HNS .

By physical form [ edit ] Main article: Use forms of explosives Explosives are often characterized by the physical form that the explosives are produced or used in. These use forms are commonly categorized as: [ 31 ] Pressings Castings Plastic or polymer bonded Plastic explosives , a.k.a. putties Rubberized Extrudable Binary Blasting agents Slurries and gels Dynamites Shipping label classifications [ edit ] Shipping labels and tags may include both United Nations and national markings.

United Nations markings include numbered Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) codes and alphabetic Compatibility Group codes. Though the two are related, they are separate and distinct. Any Compatibility Group designator can be assigned to any Hazard Class and Division. An example of this hybrid marking would be a consumer firework , which is labeled as 1.4G or 1.4S.

Examples of national markings would include United States Department of Transportation (U.S. DOT) codes.

United Nations (UN) GHS Hazard Class and Division [ edit ] GHS Explosives transport pictogram See also: HAZMAT Class 1 Explosives The UN GHS Hazard Class and Division (HC/D) is a numeric designator within a hazard class indicating the character, predominance of associated hazards, and potential for causing personnel casualties and property damage. It is an internationally accepted system that communicates using the minimum amount of markings the primary hazard associated with a substance.

[ 32 ] Listed below are the Divisions for Class 1 (Explosives): 1.1 Mass Detonation Hazard. With HC/D 1.1, it is expected that if one item in a container or pallet inadvertently detonates, the explosion will sympathetically detonate the surrounding items. The explosion could propagate to all or the majority of the items stored together, causing a mass detonation. There will also be fragments from the item's casing and/or structures in the blast area.

1.2 Non-mass explosion, fragment-producing. HC/D 1.2 is further divided into three subdivisions, HC/D 1.2.1, 1.2.2 and 1.2.3, to account for the magnitude of the effects of an explosion.

1.3 Mass fire, minor blast or fragment hazard. Propellants and many pyrotechnic items fall into this category. If one item in a package or stack initiates, it will usually propagate to the other items, creating a mass fire.

1.4 Moderate fire, no blast or fragment. HC/D 1.4 items are listed in the table as explosives with no significant hazard. Most small arms ammunition (including loaded weapons) and some pyrotechnic items fall into this category. If the energetic material in these items inadvertently initiates, most of the energy and fragments will be contained within the storage structure or the item containers themselves.

1.5 mass detonation hazard, very insensitive.

1.6 detonation hazard without mass detonation hazard, extremely insensitive.

To see an entire UNO Table, browse Paragraphs 3–8 and 3–9 of NAVSEA OP 5, Vol. 1, Chapter 3.

Class 1 Compatibility Group [ edit ] Compatibility Group codes are used to indicate storage compatibility for HC/D Class 1 (explosive) materials. Letters are used to designate 13 compatibility groups as follows.

A : Primary explosive substance (1.1A).

B : An article containing a primary explosive substance and not containing two or more effective protective features. Some articles, such as detonator assemblies for blasting and primers, cap-type, are included. (1.1B, 1.2B, 1.4B).

C : Propellant explosive substance or other deflagrating explosive substance or article containing such explosive substance (1.1C, 1.2C, 1.3C, 1.4C). These are bulk propellants , propelling charges, and devices containing propellants with or without means of ignition. Examples include single-based propellant, double-based propellant, triple-based propellant, and composite propellants , solid propellant rocket motors and ammunition with inert projectiles.

D : Secondary detonating explosive substance or black powder or article containing a secondary detonating explosive substance, in each case without means of initiation and without a propelling charge, or article containing a primary explosive substance and containing two or more effective protective features. (1.1D, 1.2D, 1.4D, 1.5D).

E : Article containing a secondary detonating explosive substance without means of initiation, with a propelling charge (other than one containing flammable liquid, gel or hypergolic liquid) (1.1E, 1.2E, 1.4E).

F containing a secondary detonating explosive substance with its means of initiation, with a propelling charge (other than one containing flammable liquid, gel or hypergolic liquid) or without a propelling charge (1.1F, 1.2F, 1.3F, 1.4F).

G : Pyrotechnic substance or article containing a pyrotechnic substance, or article containing both an explosive substance and an illuminating, incendiary, tear-producing or smoke-producing substance (other than a water-activated article or one containing white phosphorus, phosphide or flammable liquid or gel or hypergolic liquid) (1.1G, 1.2G, 1.3G, 1.4G). Examples include Flares, signals, incendiary or illuminating ammunition and other smoke and tear producing devices.

H : Article containing both an explosive substance and white phosphorus (1.2H, 1.3H). These articles will spontaneously combust when exposed to the atmosphere.

J : Article containing both an explosive substance and flammable liquid or gel (1.1J, 1.2J, 1.3J). This excludes liquids or gels which are spontaneously flammable when exposed to water or the atmosphere, which belong in group H. Examples include liquid or gel filled incendiary ammunition, fuel-air explosive (FAE) devices, and flammable liquid fueled missiles.

K : Article containing both an explosive substance and a toxic chemical agent (1.2K, 1.3K) L Explosive substance or article containing an explosive substance and presenting a special risk (e.g., due to water-activation or presence of hypergolic liquids, phosphides, or pyrophoric substances) needing isolation of each type (1.1L, 1.2L, 1.3L). Damaged or suspect ammunition of any group belongs in this group.

N : Articles containing only extremely insensitive detonating substances (1.6N).

S : Substance or article so packed or designed that any hazardous effects arising from accidental functioning are limited to the extent that they do not significantly hinder or prohibit fire fighting or other emergency response efforts in the immediate vicinity of the package (1.4S).

Regulation [ edit ] The legality of possessing or using explosives varies by jurisdiction. Various countries around the world have enacted explosives law and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, possess explosives or ingredients.

Netherlands [ edit ] In the Netherlands , the civil and commercial use of explosives is covered under the Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik (explosives for civil use Act), in accordance with EU directive nr. 93/15/EEG [ 33 ] (Dutch). The illegal use of explosives is covered under the Wet Wapens en Munitie (Weapons and Munition Act) [ 34 ] (Dutch).

United Kingdom [ edit ] Further information: Explosive Substances Act 1883 The new Explosives Regulations 2014 (ER 2014) [ 35 ] came into force on 1 October 2014 and defines "explosive" as: "a) any explosive article or explosive substance which would — (i) if packaged for transport, be classified in accordance with the United Nations Recommendations as falling within Class 1; or (ii) be classified in accordance with the United Nations Recommendations as — (aa) being unduly sensitive or so reactive as to be subject to spontaneous reaction and accordingly too dangerous to transport, and (bb) falling within Class 1; or (b) a desensitised explosive, but it does not include an explosive substance produced as part of a manufacturing process which thereafter reprocesses it in order to produce a substance or preparation which is not an explosive substance" [ 35 ] "Anyone who wishes to acquire and or keep relevant explosives needs to contact their local police explosives liaison officer. All explosives are relevant explosives apart from those listed under Schedule 2 of Explosives Regulations 2014." [ 36 ] United States [ edit ] During World War I , numerous laws were created to regulate war related industries and increase security within the United States. In 1917, the 65th United States Congress created many laws , including the Espionage Act of 1917 and Explosives Act of 1917 .

The Explosives Act of 1917 (session 1, chapter 83, 40 Stat.

385 ) was signed on 6 October 1917 and went into effect on 16 November 1917. The legal summary is "An Act to prohibit the manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession in time of war of explosives, providing regulations for the safe manufacture, distribution, storage, use, and possession of the same, and for other purposes". This was the first federal regulation of licensing explosives purchases. The act was deactivated after World War I ended.

[ 37 ] After the United States entered World War II , the Explosives Act of 1917 was reactivated. In 1947, the act was deactivated by President Truman .

[ 38 ] The Organized Crime Control Act of 1970 ( Pub. L.

91–452 ) transferred many explosives regulations to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF) of the Department of Treasury . The bill became effective in 1971.

[ 39 ] Currently, regulations are governed by Title 18 of the United States Code and Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations : "Importation, Manufacture, Distribution and Storage of Explosive Materials" (18 U.S.C. Chapter 40).

[ 40 ] "Commerce in Explosives" (27 C.F.R. Chapter II, Part 555).

[ 41 ] List of explosives [ edit ] Compounds [ edit ] Acetylides [ edit ] Copper(I) acetylide , Dichloroacetylene , Silver acetylide Fulminates [ edit ] Fulminic Acid , Fulminating Gold , Mercury(II) fulminate , Platinum fulminate , Potassium fulminate , Silver fulminate Nitro [ edit ] MonoNitro: Nitroguanidine , Nitroethane , Nitromethane , Nitropropane , Nitrourea DiNitro : Diazo dinitro phenol , Dinitrobenzene , Dinitroethylene urea , DNN , Dinitrophenol , Dinitrophenolate , DNPH , Dinitroresorcinol , Dinitropentano nitrile , Polydinitropropyl acrylate , Dinitro cerine , Dipicryl sulfone , Dipicrylamine , EDNP , KDNBF , BEAF , DADNE TriNitro: RDX , Diaminotrinitrobenzene , Triaminotrinitrobenzene , Lead styphnate , Lead picrate , Trinitroaniline , Trinitroanisole , TNAS , TNB , TNBA , Styphnic acid , MC , Trinitroethyl formal , TNOC , TNOF , TNP , TNT , TNN , TNPG , TNR , BTNEN , BTNEC , Ammonium picrate , TNS TetraNitro : Tetryl , HMX HexaNitro : HNS , HNIW , HHTDD HeptaNitro : Heptanitrocubane OctaNitro: Octanitrocubane Nitrosos [ edit ] Trinitrosos: R-salt Nitrates [ edit ] Mononitrates: Ammonium nitrate , Methyl ammonium nitrate , Urea Nitrate Dinitrates: Diethyleneglycol dinitrate , Ethylenediamine dinitrate , Ethylene dinitramine , Ethylene glycol dinitrate , Hexamethylenetetramine dinitrate , Triethylene glycol dinitrate Trinitrates: 1,2,4-Butanetriol trinitrate , Trimethylolethane trinitrate , Nitroglycerin Tetranitrates: Erythritol tetranitrate , Pentaerythritol tetranitrate , Tetranitratoxycarbon Pentanitrates: Xylitol pentanitrate Polynitrates: Nitrocellulose , Nitrostarch , Mannitol hexanitrate Amines [ edit ] Tertiary Amines: Nitrogen tribromide , Nitrogen trichloride , Nitrogen triiodide , Nitrogen trisulfide , Selenium nitride , Silver nitride Diamines: Disulfur dinitride Tetramines: Tetrazene , Tetrazole , Azidoazide azide Pentamines: Pentazenium Octamines: Octaazacubane , 1,1'-Azobis-1,2,3-triazole Azides [ edit ] Inorganic: Chlorine azide , Copper(II) azide , Fluorine azide , Hydrazoic acid , Lead(II) azide , Silver azide , Sodium azide , Rubidium azide , Selenium tetraazide , Silicon tetraazide , Tellurium tetraazide , Titanium tetraazide Organic: Cyanuric triazide , Cyanogen azide , Ethyl azide , Tetraazidomethane Peroxides [ edit ] Acetone peroxide (TATP) , Cumene hydroperoxide , Diacetyl peroxide , Dibenzoyl peroxide , Diethyl ether peroxide , Hexamethylene triperoxide diamine , Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide , Tert-butyl hydroperoxide , Tetramethylene diperoxide dicarbamide Oxides [ edit ] Xenon oxytetrafluoride , Xenon dioxide , Xenon trioxide , Xenon tetroxide Unsorted [ edit ] Alkali metal Ozonides Ammonium chlorate Ammonium perchlorate Ammonium permanganate Azidotetrazolates Azoclathrates Benzvalene Chlorine oxides DMAPP Fluorine perchlorate Fulminating gold Fulminating silver (several substances) Hexafluoroantimonate Hexafluoroarsenate Hypofluorous acid Manganese heptoxide Mercury nitride Nitronium perchlorate Nitrotetrazolate-N-Oxides Peroxy acids Peroxymonosulfuric acid Tetramine copper complexes Tetrasulfur tetranitride Mixtures [ edit ] Aluminum Orphorite , Amatex , Amatol , Ammonal , Armstrong's mixture , ANFO , ANNMAL , Astrolite Baranol , Baratol , Ballistite , Butyl tetryl Carbonite , Composition A , Composition B , Composition C , Composition 1 , Composition 2 , Composition 3 , Composition 4 , Composition 5 , Composition H6 , Cordtex , Cyclotol Danubit , Detasheet , Detonating cord , Dualin , Dunnite , Dynamite Ecrasite , Ednatol Flash powder Gelignite , Gunpowder Hexanite , Hydromite 600 Kinetite Minol Octol , Oxyliquit Panclastite , Pentolite , Picratol , PNNM , Pyrotol Schneiderite , Semtex , Shellite Tannerit simply , Tannerite , Titadine , Tovex , Torpex , Tritonal Elements and isotopes [ edit ] Alkali metals Explosive antimony Plutonium-239 Uranium-235 See also [ edit ] Blast injury Detection dog Flame speed Improvised explosive device Insensitive munition Largest artificial non-nuclear explosions Nuclear weapon Orica ; largest supplier of commercial explosives TM 31-210 Improvised Munitions Handbook Total body disruption References [ edit ] ^ Sastri, M.N. (2004).

Weapons of Mass Destruction . APH Publishing Corporation. p. 1.

ISBN 978-81-7648-742-9 .

^ Singh, Kirpal (2010).

Chemistry in Daily Life . Prentice-Hall. p. 68.

ISBN 978-81-203-4617-8 .

^ Sigurðsson, Albert (17 January 2017).

"China's explosive history of gunpowder and fireworks" .

GBTimes .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017.

^ Pomeranz, Ken; Wong, Bin.

"China and Europe, 1500–2000 and Beyond: What is Modern?" (PDF) . Columbia University Press.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 December 2016.

^ Kerr, Gordon (2013).

A Short History of China . No Exit Press.

ISBN 978-1-84243-968-5 .

^ Takacs, Sarolta Anna; Cline, Eric H. (2008).

The Ancient World . Routledge. p. 544.

^ Back, Fiona (2011).

Australian History Series: The ancient world . Ready-Ed Publications. p. 55.

ISBN 978-1-86397-826-2 .

^ Ankony, Robert C., Lurps: A Ranger's Diary of Tet, Khe Sanh, A Shau, and Quang Tri, revised ed., Rowman & Littlefield Publishing Group, Lanham, MD (2009), p.73.

^ "explosive device" .

Cambridge Dictionaries (Online). Cambridge University Press. n.d . Retrieved 9 July 2025 .

^ Hussein, E. M. A. (1 January 2003), Buschow, K. H. Jürgen; Cahn, Robert W.; Flemings, Merton C.; Ilschner, Bernhard (eds.), "Nondestructive Detection of Explosives" , Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology , Oxford: Elsevier, pp.

1– 5, ISBN 978-0-08-043152-9 , retrieved 9 July 2025 ^ "Emulsion Explosives - Ideal Industrial Explosives Ltd" .

www.idealexplosives.com . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ "Slurry Explosives -Manufacturer & Suppliers-IDEAL INDUSTRIAL EXPLOSIVES" .

www.idealexplosives.com . Retrieved 6 June 2024 .

^ Lancaster, J.F. (1999).

Metallurgy of welding (6th ed.). Abington, Cambridge: Abington Pub.

ISBN 1-85573-428-1 .

^ Porterfield, W.W. (1993).

Inorganic Chemistry: A Unified Approach (2nd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press, Inc. pp.

479– 480.

^ "2.1 Deflagration" .

chem-page.de (in German). Archived from the original on 6 February 2017 . Retrieved 5 February 2017 .

^ "2.2 Detonation" .

chem-page.de (in German). Archived from the original on 6 February 2017 . Retrieved 5 February 2017 .

^ Krehl, Peter O.K. (24 September 2008).

History of Shock Waves, Explosions and Impact: A Chronological and Biographical Reference . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 106.

ISBN 978-3-540-30421-0 .

^ Krehl, Peter O.K. (2008).

History of Shock Waves, Explosions and Impact: A Chronological and Biographical Reference . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 1970.

ISBN 978-3-540-30421-0 .

^ "Green explosive is a friend of the Earth" .

New Scientist . 27 March 2006.

Archived from the original on 12 November 2014 . Retrieved 12 November 2014 .

^ a b Zel'dovich, Yakov ; Kompaneets, Alexander Solomonovich (1960).

Theory of Detonation . Academic Press. pp.

208– 210.

^ Hougen, Olaf A.; Watson, Kenneth; Ragatz, Roland (1954).

Chemical Process Principles . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

66– 67.

^ Anderson, H.V. (1955).

Chemical Calculations . McGraw-Hill. p. 206.

^ Meyer, Rudolf; Köhler, Josef; Homburg, Axel (2007).

Explosives (6th ed.). Wiley VCH.

ISBN 978-3-527-31656-4 .

^ "Nitrogen triiodide" , Wikipedia , 8 June 2024 , retrieved 2 September 2024 ^ UCL (23 June 2020).

"Nitrogen Triiodide (NI3)" .

Safety Services . Retrieved 2 September 2024 .

^ Lowe, Derek (15 August 2019).

"Can't Stop the Nitro Groups" .

Science.org . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ Barros, Sam.

"PowerLabs Lead Picrate Synthesis" .

powerlabs.org .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2016.

^ Matyáš, Robert; Pachman, Jiří (2013).

Primary Explosives . Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. p. 331.

^ Read "Containing the Threat from Illegal Bombings: An Integrated National Strategy for Marking, Tagging, Rendering Inert, and Licensing Explosives and Their Precursors" at NAP.edu . 1998.

doi : 10.17226/5966 .

ISBN 978-0-309-06126-1 .

^ Bowden, F. P. (29 July 1958).

"The initiation of explosion by neutrons, α -particles and fission products" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences .

246 (1245): 216– 219.

Bibcode : 1958RSPSA.246..216B .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1958.0123 .

ISSN 0080-4630 .

S2CID 137728239 .

^ Cooper, Paul W. (1996). "Chapter 4: Use forms of explosives".

Explosives Engineering . Wiley-VCH. pp.

51– 66.

ISBN 978-0-471-18636-6 .

^ Table 12-4. – United Nations Organization Hazard Classes Archived 5 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Tpub.com. Retrieved on 2010-02-11.

^ "wetten.nl – Wet- en regelgeving – Wet explosieven voor civiel gebruik – BWBR0006803" .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2013.

^ "wetten.nl – Wet- en regelgeving – Wet wapens en munitie – BWBR0008804" .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2013.

^ a b This article incorporates text published under the British Open Government Licence v3.0: "The Explosives Regulations 2014" .

www.legislation.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 12 February 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2019 .

^ "HSE Explosives – Licensing" .

www.hse.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on 21 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 February 2019 .

^ "1913–1919" .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2016.

^ "1940–1949" .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ "1970–1979" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015.

^ "Federal Explosives Laws" (PDF) . U.S. Department of Justice, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 February 2016 .

^ "Regulations for Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives | Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives" .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2014 . Retrieved 13 December 2014 .

ATF Regulations Further reading [ edit ] U.S. government [ edit ] Explosives and Demolitions FM 5–250; U.S. Department of the Army; 274 pp.; 1992.

Military Explosives TM 9–1300–214; U.S. Department of the Army; 355 pp.; 1984.

Explosives and Blasting Procedures Manual ; U.S. Department of Interior; 128 pp.; 1982.

Safety and Performance Tests for Qualification of Explosives ; Commander, Naval Ordnance Systems Command; NAVORD OD 44811. Washington, DC: GPO, 1972.

Weapons Systems Fundamentals ; Commander, Naval Ordnance Systems Command. NAVORD OP 3000, vol. 2, 1st rev. Washington, DC: GPO, 1971.

Elements of Armament Engineering – Part One ; Army Research Office. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Army Materiel Command , 1964.

Hazardous Materials Transportation Plaecards; USDOT.

Institute of Makers of Explosives [ edit ] Safety in the Handling and Use of Explosives SLP 17; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 66 pp.; 1932 / 1935 / 1940.

History of the Explosives Industry in America ; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 37 pp.; 1927.

Clearing Land of Stumps ; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 92 pp.; 1917.

The Use of Explosives for Agricultural and Other Purposes ; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 190 pp.; 1917.

The Use of Explosives in making Ditches ; Institute of Makers of Explosives; 80 pp.; 1917.

Other historical [ edit ] Farmers' Hand Book of Explosives ; duPont; 113 pp.; 1920.

A Short Account of Explosives ; Arthur Marshall; 119 pp.; 1917.

Historical Papers on Modern Explosives ; George MacDonald; 216 pp.; 1912.

The Rise and Progress of the British Explosives Industry ; International Congress of Pure and Applied Chemistry; 450 pp.; 1909.

Explosives and their Power ; M. Berthelot; 592 pp.; 1892.

External links [ edit ] Listed in alphabetical order: Blaster Exchange – Explosives Industry Portal Class 1 Hazmat Placards Explosives Academy The Explosives and Weapons Forum Explosives info Journal of Energetic Materials Military Explosives at the Federation of American Scientists Why high nitrogen density in explosives?

( Archived 26 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine ) YouTube video demonstrating blast wave in slow motion v t e Hazardous materials List of accidents Accidents involving transport or storage of ammunition Accidents involving ammonium nitrate Accidents involving fireworks Accidents involving pipelines List of accidents involving natural gas and oil production Dangerous cargo classes HAZMAT Class 1 Explosives HAZMAT Class 2 Gases HAZMAT Class 3 Flammable liquids HAZMAT Class 4 Flammable solids HAZMAT Class 5 Oxidizing agents and organic peroxides HAZMAT Class 6 Toxic and infectious substances HAZMAT Class 7 Radioactive substances HAZMAT Class 8 Corrosive substances HAZMAT Class 9 Miscellaneous Hazardous materials laws and regulations AIR Shipper Australian Dangerous Goods Code European Agreement concerning the International Carriage of Dangerous Goods by Road (ADR) Hazardous Materials Transportation Act Hazardous Substances and New Organisms Act 1996 HAZWOPER Hong Kong ship laws Midwest hazardous work training NA/UN exceptions Safe handling of carcinogens UN Recommendations on the Transport of Dangerous Goods US Committee on Hazardous Materials Regulatory agencies and organizations United Nations Economic Commission for Europe United Nations - International Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration USA National Transport Commission Australia Hazardous material labelling systems Globally Harmonized System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals (GHS) International UN ADR International Hazchem United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand NFPA 704 'Fire diamond' USA Hazardous Materials Identification System (HMIS) USA Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System Canada European hazard symbols from Dangerous Substances Directive (67/548/EEC) European Union Hazardous goods Consumption of Tide Pods Crotonaldehyde Dangerous goods Explosive High production volume chemicals Nickel hydrazine nitrate Nuclear flask Nuclear fuel cycle Sedaxane Substance of very high concern Category v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Poland Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐dk4mj
Cached time: 20250818135415
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.905 seconds
Real time usage: 1.123 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5047/1000000
Revision size: 66799/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 150683/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13942/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 177754/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.517/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9153564/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  890.680      1 -total
 41.32%  368.053      1 Template:Reflist
 20.11%  179.123     16 Template:Cite_book
 10.76%   95.801     18 Template:Cite_web
  9.73%   86.663      1 Template:Mi
  9.00%   80.132      1 Template:Hazardous_materials
  8.75%   77.924      1 Template:Navbox
  8.36%   74.494      1 Template:Short_description
  6.22%   55.429      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.88%   43.468      1 Explosive_device Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10192:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818135415 and revision id 1305298445. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explosive&oldid=1305298445#Chemical " Categories : Explosives Chinese inventions Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Open Government Licence attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2023 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles lacking reliable references from April 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from March 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 06:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explosive 102 languages Add topic

