Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Demography 2 Language 3 History of Macedonians in Australia Toggle History of Macedonians in Australia subsection 3.1 Macedonians in Victoria 3.2 Macedonians in New South Wales 3.3 Western Australia 3.4 South Australia 3.5 Queensland 3.6 Aegean Macedonians 4 Sports 5 Religion 6 List of notable Macedonian Australians Toggle List of notable Macedonian Australians subsection 6.1 Artists and media 6.2 Sports 6.3 Music 6.4 Media 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Macedonian Australians 2 languages Македонски Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( July 2020 ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ethnic group Macedonian Australians Македонски Австралијанци Makedonski Avstralijanci Total population 111,352 (Macedonian ancestry in 2021) 41,786 (Macedonian-born in 2021) Regions with significant populations Melbourne , Sydney , Wollongong , Perth , Newcastle , Geelong Languages Australian English · Macedonian Religion Predominantly Macedonian Orthodox Church Minority Islam , Methodism Related ethnic groups Macedonians , Macedonian Americans , Macedonian Canadians Macedonian Australians ( Macedonian : Македонски Австралијанци) are Australian citizens of Macedonian descent. Many arrived in the 1920s and 1930s, although larger numbers came to Australia after World War II and the Greek Civil War . By far the largest wave of immigration was during the 1960s and 1970s. As of the 2021 Australian census , Macedonian is the most-spoken Eastern European language in Australia.

[ 1 ] Demography [ edit ] Part of a series on Macedonians Македонци Culture Literature Music Art Cinema Cuisine Dances Costume Sport Public holidays in North Macedonia By country Albania Australia Austria Argentina Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Canada Croatia Czech Republic France Germany Greece Hungary Poland Romania Serbia Slovenia Switzerland United Kingdom United States Subgroups Gorani Torbeši Mijaks Brsjaks Shopi Religion Macedonian Orthodox Church Catholic Church Greek Catholic Protestantism Islam Protestants Language Macedonian Dialects Other List of Macedonians People of Macedonian descent v t e In 2001, 81,898 people claimed Macedonian Ancestry, in 2006 this rose to 83,978 in 2006. Macedonian was the 21st most common ancestry group. Of the total number who claimed Macedonian ancestry in 2001, 39,244 or 47.9% were born in Macedonia, 35,805 or 43.7% were born in Australia, 2,919 or 3.6% were born in Greece and roughly 5% were born elsewhere.

[ 2 ] In the 2021 Census, 41,786 Australian residents are listed as having been born in North Macedonia , and a total of 111,352 residents declared their ancestry as Macedonian, either alone or in combination with another ancestry.

[ 3 ] In 2011 Macedonian was spoken at home by 68,843 residents, reducing slightly to 66,173 over the ten years to the 2021 census.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] In 2021, North Macedonia was the 47th most common birthplace in Australia.

[ 3 ] People with Macedonian ancestry as a percentage of the population in Australia divided geographically by statistical local area, as of the 2011 census Australian cities with the largest Macedonian -born communities are Melbourne (17,286, in particular the outer suburbs), Sydney (11,630, in particular in the Southern ) and Wollongong (4,279 - about 1.6% of the Wollongong population).

Most Macedonian Australians are of the Orthodox Christian faith, although there is a small number of Methodists and Muslims . 36,749 Macedonian-born Australian residents declared they were Christian, and 2,161 stated they were Muslim. In 2001 there were a total of 53,249 adherents to the Macedonian Orthodox Church. 28,474 or 53.5% of these were born in Macedonia, 21,324 or 40% were born in Australia, 1,340 or 2.5% were born in Greece and roughly 4% were born elsewhere.

[ 2 ] Language [ edit ] According to ABS data from 2021, 66,173 people were using Macedonian at home, making it the most-spoken Eastern European language, with more speakers than Russian, Polish, Serbian or Croatian. This makes Macedonian, on the night of the 2021 census, the 27th-most-spoken language at home in Australia (including English).

[ 3 ] In 2001, one-third of Macedonian speakers were aged over 65, 25.9% were aged from 55 to 64, 31.8% were aged from 25 to 54, 1.2% were aged from 13 to 24 and 7.7% were aged from 0–12. 53.2% or 38,826 speakers were born in Macedonia, 37.6% or 27,051 speakers were born in Australia , 4.4% or 3,152 speakers were born in Greece and a further 1.3% or 908 speakers were born in Yugoslavia .

Most Australians born in territory of Macedonia use Macedonian at home (35,070 or 86% out of 40,656 in 2006).

[ 5 ] Proficiency in English for Australians born in Macedonia was self-described by census respondents as very well by 33%, well by 33%, 26% not well (8% didn't state or said not applicable).

[ 5 ] The most significant populations of Macedonian speakers as of 2001 were Melbourne - 30,083, [ 6 ] Sydney - 19,980, Wollongong - 7,420, [ 7 ] Perth - 5,772, Newcastle - 1,993, [ 8 ] Geelong - 1,300, Queanbeyan - 1,105.

Many suburbs have large Macedonian speaking communities, the largest are Port Kembla (20.9%), Thomastown (16.7%), Banksia (16.1%), Coniston (15.9%) and Lalor (14.8%). In 2001, Cringila was titled the "most Macedonian" suburb in all of Australia with 32.8% of its population speaking Macedonian at home.

[ 9 ] History of Macedonians in Australia [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Further information: Macedonian nationalism and Macedonian-Australian People's League Macedonians have been arriving in Australia since the late 1880s as Pečalba . These Pečalbari (the man in the family) would go and work overseas to earn money then return home with the spoils. This restricted major settlement. The two major waves of early Macedonian immigration, according to Peter Hill, were when in 1924 America implemented tougher immigration policies and in 1936 when the Ioannis Metaxas regime came into power.

[ 10 ] By 1921 there were 50 Macedonians in Australia, by 1940 this number had reached over 6,000, the majority of whom were from Florina , Kastoria and Bitola . However, before the Second World War, when the Macedonian identity gained popularity, [ 11 ] many Macedonians did not have a strong sense of national identity, but of regional one. The general population pre-WWII commonly considered themselves ethnically as Macedonian Bulgarians or simply as Bulgarians .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Until then the number of Macedonian immigrants in Australia was negligible.

[ 18 ] After World War II and the Greek Civil War many Macedonians from Greece came to Australia ; these people are known as Aegean Macedonians , settling in areas including Richmond and Footscray .

[ 19 ] When the Yugoslav policies that encouraged its citizens to work overseas were introduced, many ethnic Macedonians within Yugoslavia left for Australia. The peak of this emigration was in the early 1970s. They settled in mainly industrial districts, particularly in Wollongong and Newcastle , in the Melbourne suburb of Thomastown and the Sydney suburb of Rockdale . Many Macedonians from Yugoslavia would also settle in isolated parts of Australia such as Port Hedland . Most of these immigrants were from an agricultural background. Macedonian migration had slowed by the 1980s only to restart in the early 1990s after the breakup of Yugoslavia .

As at the 2006 census 64% of Australian residents born in Macedonia had arrived before 1980.

[ 5 ] Macedonians in Victoria [ edit ] Macedonians are concentrated in North and North-West Melbourne and in Geelong Macedonians have been migrating to Victoria since the late 1880s. Many "pečalbari" decided to settle and they travelled the countryside looking for work as itinerant labourers. Others established market gardens or small businesses in both rural and city areas. Many thousands of Aegean Macedonians came to Victoria in the post war period, today the largest group of Aegean Macedonians can be found in Victoria. During the 1960s and 1970s they were joined by thousands of Macedonians from the Socialist Republic of Macedonia . In 1982, KUD Jane Sandanski was established in St Albans and is still in operation to this day. In 1991, Macedonia declared its independence from the Yugoslav federation. Business migrants from Macedonia soon began to arrive in Australia. By 1986 there were 24,090 Macedonian speakers in Victoria, this reached a peak in 1996 with 32,949 people using Macedonian at home. As of 2006 37,434 people in Victoria had either full or partial Macedonian ancestry.

[ 20 ] Currently, there are over 40,000 people in Greater Melbourne of Macedonian descent, making up around one percent of the population - the 17th largest ethnicity in the city behind Lebanese but ahead of Croatian.

[ 21 ] In Victoria, Macedonians established St. George in Fitzroy , Melbourne during the late 1950s as the first independent Macedonian Orthodox church inside Australia and outside of Macedonia.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] In Melburnian suburbs with Macedonian communities, other churches were established such as St. Ilija , St. Dimitrija , St. Nikola , St. George & St. Mary , St. Mary , St. Petka , and in Geelong St. John the Baptist .

[ 25 ] Macedonian Melburnians also built the first Macedonian Orthodox monastery St. Kliment Ohridski - Chudotvorec in the vicinity of King Lake .

[ 26 ] The Macedonian community of Australia views the Macedonian Orthodox Church as a "Guardian" of Macedonian identity, its people and cultural traditions.

[ 27 ] St. George Church bell tower, Fitzroy St. Ilija Church, Footscray St. Dimitrija Solunski Church, Springvale St. Nikola Church, Preston St. George & St. Mary Church, Epping St. Mary Church, Sydenham St. Petka Church, Mill Park After North Macedonia gained independence in 1991 as the Republic of Macedonia, Greek Australians opposed the move through local protests and tense relations developed with Macedonian Australians.

[ 28 ] There were some businesses, community buildings and Orthodox churches belonging to both groups which were either destroyed and attacked.

[ 29 ] Australia recognised Macedonia under its temporary name as "FYROM".

[ 28 ] Responding to the Greek government stance, the Australian Federal Government issued a directive that its agencies and departments call Macedonians as "Slav-Macedonians" and some people from the north of Greece as "persons associated with Slav-Macedonians".

[ 28 ] [ 30 ] Government owned media, the ABC and SBS dismissed the federal government decision.

[ 30 ] In the mid 1990s, Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett backed the Greek position over the Macedonian question in his attempts to shore up local electoral support.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] At Kennett's insistence, his state government in 1994 issued its own directive that all its departments refer to the language as "Macedonian (Slavonic)" and to Macedonians as "Slav Macedonians".

[ 28 ] [ 33 ] Reasons given for the decision were "to avoid confusion", be consistent with federal naming protocols toward Macedonian Australians and repair relations between Macedonian and Greek communities.

[ 28 ] [ 34 ] It was accepted that it would not impact the way Macedonians self identified themselves.

[ 28 ] The decision upset Macedonians, as they had to use the terms in deliberations with the government or its institutions related to education and public broadcasting.

[ 35 ] In mid 1995, the Macedonian Community through its organisation, the Australian Macedonian Human Rights Commission challenged the decision on the basis of the Race Discrimination Act at the Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC).

[ 36 ] The plaintiffs described that the government directive treated Macedonian differently and with an unequal status from other officially recognised languages.

[ 33 ] The commissioner acknowledged the distress the directive caused, but upheld it due to its intent of decreasing community tensions and not causing discrimination based on ethnic background.

[ 36 ] [ 33 ] After the case was dismissed, the Macedonian community went to the Federal Court .

[ 36 ] The judge stated that HREOC had made errors in its interpretation of various terms and ruled that discrimination had occurred based on ethnic background.

[ 36 ] The Federal Court repealed the decision in 1998 and since then the prefix "slavo-" has been dropped, on the basis of racial discrimination.

[ 37 ] The new state government lost an appeal challenging the decision and then went to the High Court of Australia where it was defeated in 2000 after a ruling was made favouring Macedonians in Australia.

[ 36 ] As a result of local Greek community pressure, the language name matter was still not addressed in Victoria, causing further distress among parts of the Macedonian community.

[ 36 ] The issue returned to HREOC and in late December 2000, the commissioner ruled that the directive was not in accordance with the law and that it was discrimination based on ethnic background.

[ 36 ] The commissioner stated that people from the Macedonian community had experienced distress and humiliation as the Victorian Government had not conducted itself lawfully.

[ 36 ] The state government said it would remove the language directive and Premier Steve Bracks urged acceptance of the ruling among local communities.

[ 36 ] Macedonian Radio in Melbourne A Macedonian Social Club, Thomastown Goce Delčev statue, Epping Macedonian Evangelical United Church, Preston Macedonian burek (meat and onion, cheese and spinach slices) from a Macedonian pastry shop, Lalor In early 2018, amid efforts by the Republic of Macedonia and Greece to resolve the Macedonia naming dispute , some Macedonian Orthodox churches and sporting centres in Melbourne were vandalised with racist and violent graffiti causing distress among the Macedonian community.

[ 38 ] The Macedonian community organised rallies in Sydney, Melbourne and Perth in support of the Macedonian state retaining its name.

[ 39 ] Macedonian Australians viewed the name change Macedonian referendum (2018) as a flawed process and a majority of community members expressed that they would boycott the vote.

[ 40 ] Thomastown (10%) South Morang (7%) Mill Park (7%) Lalor (10%) Epping (6%) St. John the Baptist Church, Geelong Geelong A prominent group of Macedonians has existed in the Geelong area since the 1950s. The first Macedonians, primarily from Aegean Macedonia, arrived in the late 1930s to work in the Industries which surrounded the city. This community, composed mainly of single males, did not establish any form of community or cultural amenities. By the Second World War much of this community had left to seek employment in Melbourne. AftSome suburbs with significant Macedonian populations (percentage with Macedonian ancestry) incer the Second World War the Geelong branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League had been founded. By 1955 a large group of Aegean Macedonian refugees had arrived in the city. in 1956 the first Macedonian soccer club had been founded in the area. This group was active in the establishment of the Macedonian Communist in Geelong. Throughout the 1960s and 1970s this group of Macedonians was joined by immigrants from the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. A KUD Biser/Pearl was founded in the area and plans to consecrate a Macedonian Orthodox Church were drawn up. In 1965 the Macedonian-based soccer club "West Geelong" was founded.

[ 41 ] Eventually as more and more Macedonians immigrated to the area another KUD was founded and the plans for the Macedonian Orthodox Church were realised. The church "St Jovan the Baptist" was built in the suburb of Batesford. The community was soon involved with the Macedonian Cultural Week program throughout the 1980s. During the 1990s the community was able to establish itself in the area while the "Macedonian Orthodox Centre" and organisations such as the "Macedonian Senior Citizens Club" were founded. In the following years the community helped to support the Federation of Macedonian Cultural Artistic Associations of Victoria . In 1996 there were 1,341 speakers of Macedonian in the Geelong area this fell to 1,167 in 2006.

[ 42 ] The number of people born in the Republic of Macedonia also fell from 839 in 1996 to 752 in 2006. The number of people claiming Macedonian ancestry in 2006 was 1,415. The largest groups of Macedonians in the Geelong area could be found in Bell Post Hill (6.1%), [ 43 ] Norlane (3.5%), North Geelong (1.3%), Hamlyn Heights (2.5%) and Lovely Banks (5.3%).

Shepparton A community of Macedonians has existed in Shepparton since the 1930s. It is considered to be one of the original Macedonian settlements in Australia. Early pioneers from Greek Macedonia (also known as Aegean Macedonia ) began to come to Shepparton in the 1920s and 1930s. Many of them established Market Gardens. After the Second World War and the Greek Civil War a large number of Aegean Macedonians emigrated to Shepparton. The Macedonians of Shepparton soon became an active force in the Macedonian-Australian People's League and a branch was et up in Shepparton in 1946. Picnics, dances and functions were organised by the local branch. Although some Macedonians came to Shepparton in the 1960s and 1970s from Yugoslavia , the majority of the community were Aegean Macedonians. In the 1970s the St George, Orthodox Church was built although the local congregation was primarily Macedonian.

[ 44 ] The "Florina Saturday School and Community Centre" was built in 1978 next to the church. The school is still open today and teaches both Greek and Macedonian. Shepparton formed sister city arrangements with the two Macedonian cities of Resen and Salonica.

[ 45 ] In 1986 the first annual "Macedonian Cultural Day" was held. A 1966 figures puts the number of Macedonians in Shepparton at 600. In 1996, 322 people were speaking Macedonian at home, by 2006 this number had fallen to 213. In 2006, 254 people claimed Macedonian ancestry, of which 78 were born in the Republic of Macedonia.

Werribee The city of Werribee between Melbourne and Geelong was one of the original Macedonian settlements in Australia. The first Macedonians arrived in Werribee in 1924, and had great success growing peas, cauliflowers and tomatoes. Many also took to dairy farming and market-gardening. In 1934 the "Greek Macedonian Community of Weribee South" was founded among the Grecophile Macedonians. By 1940 many more had come to the Weribee area, a Macedonian cafe and restaurant had also been set up. In 1947 a branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League opened in Weribee. It took an instrumental role in the Hospital Appeals. The branch went on to establish a local KUD and social group. After the Greek Civil War a large influx of Aegean Macedonians came to the Weribee area. They would form the backbone of the Macedonian community in Werribee. In the 1960s many Macedonians from Yugoslavia also came to Australia. By the 1970s a Macedonian hall had been set up and two more KUD's had been founded in the area. The Macedonians are well established in the Weribee area and have made a lasting contribution to the region. By 1991 there were 565 Macedonians speakers in Weribee, this rose to 964 in 2006. The number of people claiming Macedonian ancestry are 1,154.

Macedonians in New South Wales [ edit ] Many of the first Macedonians came to New South Wales. During the 1920s, 1930s and 1940s many Aegean Macedonians settled in Crabbes Creek, Queanbeyan, Newcastle and Richmond. By the time of the Macedonian-Australian People's League Macedonians could be found all over the state. Branches were opened in Sydney ( Vesela Makedonija ), Queanbeyan ( Alexander the Great ), Richmond ( Kotori ), Crabbes Creek ( Sloboda ), Katoomba, Port Kembla, Forbes, Braidwood, Beechwood (Wauchope), Lithgow, Captains Flat, Newcastle, Bonnyrigg and Griffith.

[ 46 ] The first Macedonian hall built in Australia was the Macedonian Cultural Hall in Crabbes Creek.

[ 47 ] From the 1960s thousands of Macedonians from the Bitola, Prespa, Struga and Ohrid regions of Macedonia would come to New South Wales. Many of these immigrants settled in Wollongong, Sydney and Newcastle. Today the Macedonian Community in New South Wales is the second largest in Australia. By 2001, 30,658 people were speaking Macedonian at home with 19,057 of these born in the North Macedonia . In 2006, 34,316 people claimed Macedonian ancestry but community spokesperson claim that in New South Wales there are over 70,000 Macedonians.

Sydney Macedonians are concentrated in three major areas of Sydney Sydney is home to one of the largest concentrations of Macedonians in Australia and in the diaspora . The first Macedonians came to Sydney in the early 1920s before making their way to the coal fields of the Illawarra or Hunter Valley, the heavy industrial centres of Port Kembla and Newcastle, or heading inland to places like Broken Hill and Richmond. The first Macedonian to settle in Rockdale was Risto Belcheff from the village Capari in 1945. By 1946 a branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League was opened in Sydney, it was known as Vesela Makedonija . The Vesela Makedonija branch founded the Ilinden Soccer Club in the same year.

[ 46 ] In 1948 the group established a KUD also known as "Vesela Makedonija". From 1948 - 1953 the Macedonian Newspaper "Makedonska Iskra" was published in Sydney. From 1946 to 1960 Macedonian dances were often held in the Zora Hall. In 1957 the first Easter dance took place in the Trades Hall, the Russian Club was also a common hall for dances and celebrations. From 1960 onwards thousands of Macedonians from the Bitola and Prespa regions of Macedonia settled in Sydney, most notably: Rockdale , Arncliffe, Bexley, Bankstown, Yagoona and Banksia . The Macedonians started to meet every Christmas Day in the Royal National Park , this tradition continues today.

[ 19 ] A second, KUD Ilinden was set up. In 1969 and the only Macedonian Orthodox Cathedral in NSW and the first Macedonian Church in Sydney, Свети Кирил и Методиј/ Saints Cyril and Methodius of Rosebery was built.

In 1975 the Macedonian Orthodox Church, Света Петка/ Saint Petka of Rockdale was established by Macedonians from the village of Capari . In 1976 the Macedonian Ethnic School, 11 October was founded in Yagoona followed by a second in Canley Vale, St Nikola, in the following year. In 1977 the foundation stone was laid for Свети Никола/ Saint Nikola of Cabramatta was laid. Soccer clubs such as Bankstown City Lions (Sydney Macedonia), Rockdale City Suns (Rockdale Ilinden), Yagoona Lions Soccer Club and Arncliffe Macedonia Soccer Club were all founded by Macedonians. The Macedonian Literary society of " Gligor Prličev " was founded in Sydney in 1978. The Society releases a quarterly journal called Povod . The society maintains a Macedonian-language library. The society organises competitions for literature. And in 1985 the society published a volume of poems called Vidici (Vistas) with poems from 31 Australian Macedonian poets, this was done with the help of the Australia Council. Members of the Society have been invited to the prestigious Struga Poetry Evenings .

[ 48 ] In 1983 ties with SR Macedonia were strengthened as Bitola and Rockdale became sister cities.

St Petka Macedonian Orthodox Church in Rockdale In 1985 the Macedonian-language newspaper " Makedonski Vesnik was first printed in Rockdale, New South Wales, while The Australian Macedonian Weekly was another Macedonian-language newspaper that was printed in Victoria. The First Macedonian Cultural Day was held in Rockdale in 1986. By 1987 two more ethnic schools had opened in Arncliffe and Rockdale . By 1989 nearly 20 additional KUD's were operating in Sydney they were; KUD Tanec, KUD Orce Nikolov, KUD Mirče Acev , KUD Dame Gruev , KUD Sv Naum, KUD Kiril I Metodij, KUD Kitka, KUD Karpoš , KUD Makedonka, KUD Makedonski Orel, KUD Egejska Makedonija, and KUD Gerdan.

[ 49 ] The "Australian-Macedonian Mountaineering Association" was established by Dimitar Illievski. After the Breakup of Yugoslavia in the early 1990s many more Macedonians began to immigrate to Sydney. Much of the second generation began to migrate westwards to Fairfield and Liverpool as they gained affluence. It soon emerged that there were three major concentrations of Macedonians in Sydney, the Rockdale-Hurstville Area, Bankstown-Yagoona and Bonnyrigg-Fairfield. Today around 12 Radio programs service the Macedonian community in Sydney. Another church Света Богородица Пречиста/ Holy Mother of God in Liverpool has also opened and Macedonian is now taught at Macquarie University .

[ 50 ] Resurrection of Christ, Macedonian Orthodox Church, Note:From pre-2016 until the church was destroyed by fire [1] By the 1990s the Macedonian Community had constructed numerous halls the largest is the "Ilinden Centre" in Rockdale. Burek Shops, Kafani and Macedonian Associations have been the most prominent impact that Macedonian immigrants have had on the local community. The "Australian-Macedonian Mountaineering Association" operates from Holsworthy. Many pensioner groups and youth associations have been set up to cater for a diverse demographic. The most notable Macedonian soccer team in Sydney are the Rockdale City Suns otherwise known as Rockdale Ilinden . The total number of Macedonian speakers reached a peak in 2001 with 19,980 speakers, this fell to 19,033 speakers in 2006. The number of Macedonian born has fallen to 11,630 while the total number of people claiming Macedonian ancestry is 22,068. Community spokespersons claim that over 30,000 Macedonians reside in Sydney.

Richmond Richmond was one of the original Macedonian Settlements in Australia. The first Macedonian to come to Richmond was Steve Pandu, from the village Kotori in Lerin, Macedonia ( Florina , Greece) in 1927. He was joined by many other Macedonians and by 1938 they had established many farms and market-gardens. Soon more Macedonians came to establish orchard's in the Agnes Banks area. Many family members were brought out from Yugoslavia and Greece.

[ 51 ] in 1946 a chapter of the Macedonian-Australian People's League opened in Richmond. The Macedonians in Richmond were an integral part in Macedonian-Australian society. By 1950 a large concentration of Aegean Macedonians from the village Kotori was present. After the Macedonian-Australian People's League decentralized the Richmond Macedonian Association was founded in 1961. Later still in 1980, this organisation split half, forming the Aegean Macedonian Social and Cultural Society and the Macedonian Cultural and Art Society, Pelister . The Aegean Macedonian Social and Cultural Society went on to raise over $100,000 to build their own cultural centre which was opened on 26 December 1983, the Macedonian Hall, Kotori.

[ 52 ] Today both groups still operate independently although talks of re-unification have been fruitless. In Richmond two KUDs were set up, KUD Pelister and KUD Kotori. Community spokespersons claim that there are over 700 Macedonians in the Richmond Area.

The 1996 census recorded 267 Macedonian speakers; this fell to 218 in 2006. The total number of people claiming Macedonian ancestry in the Richmond area in 2001 was 291.

[ 53 ] The community frequent the local Catholic church or the other Macedonian Churches in Sydney. Many Macedonians have large amounts of real-estate in the Richmond area. Macedonians have played an important part in shaping the history of Richmond.

Illawarra The first Macedonian to arrive in the Illawarra was Riste Sazdanov in 1924. He initially arrived to work in the Port Kembla Steelworks . It is estimated only a few hundred Macedonians immigrated to the Illawarra region in the pre-World War Two period. Despite this the first Macedonian cafe was founded in 1943 by Trajan Rakovitis from the Lerin village of Rakovo. in 1946 a branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League opened in Port Kembla. Most of the Macedonians in Wollongong are post-war migrants from the Socialist Republic of Macedonia . From 1960 onwards thousands of Macedonians were employed in the Port Kembla Steelworks , they primarily settled in the nearby suburbs of Cringila , Warrawong and Coniston .

In 1971 the first Sredselo was introduced to Lake Heights by Lambe Nestoroski, Trajan Ristanovski and Sergija Sekuloski, it soon spread to Cringila. The first Macedonian Orthodox Church , Свети Димитрија Солунски/ Saint Dimitrija of Solun of Wollongong was built in 1972. The Macedonians founded many soccer clubs such as, Wollongong United or Wollongong Makedonija , Warrawong United, Lake Heights Junior Soccer Club, Cringila Lions Soccer Club, Coniston Macedonia Soccer Club, Shellharbour Barbarians and Pelister Illawarra Soccer Club. A friendly rivalry exists between Wollongong United whose fans base is primarily from Bitola, Cringila Lions Soccer Club whose fan base is primarily from Struga and Warrawong United whose supporters are primarily from the Mariovo area. A Macedonian Theatre was established in Cringila in the late 1970s, The "Macedonian theatre of the Illawarra" produced many notable performances and was later renamed after its patron, Bill Neskovski .

[ 54 ] By the 1970s an estimated 85% of Cringila and 55% of Port Kembla, 35% of Coniston and Warrawong were Macedonians.

Macedonian-Australians are concentrated in the Cringila and Port Kembla areas in the Illawarra The second church built was, Свети Климент Охридски/ Saint Kliment of Ohrid of Port Kembla, was consecrated in 1989. By 1986 an estimate 4% of the total Illawarra region was Macedonian. During the 1980s many Macedonians migrated to more affluent suburbs in the Illwarra and to Canberra. A branch of the VMRO political party was also founded in Wollongong. Many Macedonian "Cultural and Folkloric Groups" ( Macedonian : Културно Уметички друштва , romanized : Kulturno Umetički Društva ) such as; KUD Makedonija, KUD 11ti Oktomvri, KUD Biljana, KUD Nikola Karev, KUD Mlada Makedonka and KUD Makedonski Biseri were founded. By 2001 only 32% of Cringila and 21% of Port Kembla were Macedonians, while 11% of Blackbutt and 7% of Barrack Height were Macedonian. In 2006 there were 8,111 Macedonians in the Illawarra [ 55 ] and 7,420 speakers of Macedonian. The custom of Sredselo still continues in Cringila today and is the highlight of the Macedonian Social Year. The first Macedonian Orthodox monastery in NSW, Света Петка/ Saint Petka , was built in Kembla Grange in 2006. Two Macedonian-language radio stations service the community along with a range of support services, the community has a quarterly journal called "KOMPAS".

[ 56 ] Newcastle Many of the first Macedonians would often go to work at the Newcastle Steelworks . By the early 1930s various "Kafani" had been established. As whole families began to immigrate many social and cultural amenities were established. In 1946 the Newcastle branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League From the 1960s many Macedonians from the Socialist Republic of Macedonia came to Newcastle. A KUD was established and the Macedonian-Australian People's League helped to engage the Macedonian Novacastrians with the rest of the Macedonian Australian community. Many would attend dances in the Trades Hall, Sydney. The first time Macedonian was broadcast in Australia occurred in Newcastle in 1949 as the local branch of the MAPL held a commemorative Ilinden broadcast.

[ 57 ] After the decentralization of the Macedonian-Australian People's League the Greek orientated, " Pavlos Melas " society was founded. This in turn was replaced by the "Macedonian Community of Newcastle". In 1970 the community built the Света Богородица/ Holy Mother of God Macedonian Orthodox Church in Adamstown. The soccer clubs of Red Star, Newcastle-Macedonia, The Macedonian junior soccer club and Broadmeadow Magic were all founded by Macedonians. Another 3 KUD's, KUD Ilinden, KUD Bitola and KUD "Stiv Naumov" were all founded, the latter which still operates today. A sredselo was established as another church was constructed. In 1986 the first Macedonian Cultural Day was held and the " Goce Delcev " ethnic school was founded. The first non-English language Newspaper in Newcastle was the Macedonian paper "Kopnež" which was launched in 1984 by the "Macedonian Community of Newcastle". After the Breakup of Yugoslavia a number of Macedonians came to the Newcastle region. In the early 1990s a branch of the VMRO party was set up. A Macedonian welfare centre was built on the site of the Macedonian Orthodox Church. Peter Hill estimates that there are 3,600 Macedonians in the Newcastle region. In 1996, 2,095 people spoke Macedonian at home compared with the 1,863 in 2006.

[ 58 ] In 2006 the number of people with Macedonian ancestry in the Newcastle area was 2,424 of whom Aegean Macedonians comprise 20%.

[ 59 ] Saint Prophet Ilija Macedonian Orthodox Church in Queanbeyan Canberra/Queanbeyan The first Macedonians to arrive in the Queanbeyan area were Aegean Macedonians from the Florina and Kastoria regions. They established market-gardens or became Eucalypt cutters near Braidwood . By 1920 an estimated 250 Macedonian had come to the Queanbeyan area. After the Second World War and the Greek Civil War many Aegean Macedonians came to the Queanbeyan region. In 1946 a chapter of the Macedonian-Australian People's League was founded, it was called Mladi Goce after the name of the commander of the First Aegean Partisan Brigade which operated in Macedonia in 1944/1945. After the collapse of the Macedonian-Australian People's League a split occurred in the community between pro-Greek and pro-Macedonian factions. The Greek-orientated "Society of Kastorians and Florinians" was set up in Queanbeyan. The Greek Orthodox Community in Queanbeyan is dominated by Macedonians. In 1969 the Macedonian Orthodox Church, Свети Илија/ Saint Ilija of Queanbeyan was consecrated.

In 1983 the foundation stone for the Macedonian Orthodox Cathedral, Свети Климент Охридски/ Saint Kliment of Ohrid in Red Hill was laid. The cathedral was designed by Macedonian Australian, Vlase Nikoleski . As part of Macedonian Cultural Week a performance is traditionally held in Canberra. The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs estimated [ when?

] that there are 3,000 Macedonians in the Canberra/Queanbeyan region, of whom two-thirds are Aegean Macedonians. Two Cultural and Folkloric Groups, KUD Egejska Makedonija and KUD Razigrana Makedonka were founded in Queanbeyan, along with the Soccer Club, The Wolverines . The Bitola social club or "Tumbe Kafe" was founded in Canberra. A third church was built in Canberra, Свети Климент Охридски/ Saint Kliment of Ohrid in Narrabundah along with a Macedonian Ethnic School. Another Macedonian ethnic school, "Goce Delčev", operates in Queanbeyan. The number of Macedonian speakers in the Queanbeyan/Canberra region fell from 1,761 in 1996 to 1,550 in 2006. The total number of Macedonians in the Queanbeyan/Canberra region was 1,991 in 2006 of these only 927 were born in the Republic of Macedonia .

Western Australia [ edit ] Western Australia has traditionally had one of the largest Macedonian Australian communities in Australia. Thousands of pre-war immigrants came to the state in search of riches. Here they set up the Macedonian "villages" of Wanneroo and Upper Wanneroo. The Western Australian branches of the Macedonian-Australian People's League were the driving force behind the movement's inception. By this time the migrants had scattered to Manjimup, Geraldton and Kalgoorlie. The immigrants were joined by post war Aegean Macedonians and Yugoslav migrants. Many then headed north to Port Hedland and Broome. After the breakup of Yugoslavia another wave of Macedonians came to Western Australia. By 2001 there 6,184 Macedonian speakers in Western Australia with 8,043 people claiming Macedonian Ancestry. The Macedonians of Western Australia have helped drive the state into the 21st century.

Perth One of Australia's oldest Macedonian communities can be found in Perth. It is said Boris Šmagranov arrived in Perth in 1908, the first Macedonian to do so. A steady wave of Macedonians began to arrive in Perth after the First World War . Many of these were Aegean Macedonians from the Florina , Kastoria and Edessa regions. Many Macedonians left Perth for other areas where Macedonians had settled such as Manjimup , Balcatta , Geraldton and Kalgoorlie . In the early 1920s the "Makedonski Dom" (Macedonian Home) was founded in Perth. This soon became the heart of the Macedonian community in Perth. Attempts to found a branch of the Macedonian Patriotic Organization were unsuccessful. A concentration of Macedonians had been set up in the Wanneroo area and soon it was declared a Macedonian village. The mainstay of the village was Market Gardening and small-scale farming. Through chain migration Perth soon became the largest centre of Macedonian immigration to Australia. The first genuine Macedonian settlement with wives and families in Australia was Wanneroo. By the 1930s there were over 150 Macedonians in the Wanneroo area. Another Macedonian village was soon founded at Upper Wanneroo or 27 Mile. Although the area was a swamp it was soon made suitable for farming.

Macedonians are concentrated in the Wanneroo and Sitrling areas of Perth In 1939 the "Edinstvo" group was founded which would dominated Macedonian social life for the next two decades. The "Edinstvo" group soon began to organise socials, functions and gatherings. The group's motto soon became "Слободна, Независна, Еднокупна Македонија" (Free, Independent and United Macedonia) , referring to the irredentist concept of a United Macedonia . The group founded the "Edinstvo Perth Soccer Club" in the early 1940s. Community and youth groups were also founded. The first president of Edinstvo was George Dženev. On 18 September 1941, Naume Sharin was elected president with Mick Veloskey and Pavle Bozhinov as secretaries. During World War II many members of the Edinstvo group were called up to fight for their new mother country. After World War Two attempts by Edinstvo were made to create a unified Macedonian Australian Organisation. The Edinstvo group started radio sessions and eventually the group founded the "Makedonska Iskra" newspaper which went on to national distribution. On 24 and 25 August 1946 the Edinstvo group held an inaugural conference for all the Macedonian organisations in Australian. It was decided that the Macedonian-Australian People's League should be founded. The Edinstvo group was soon incorporated as a branch of the new organisation. The returned members would go on to found the Macedonian Australian Ex-Servicemen's League in 1947. After the creation of the People's Republic of Macedonia many Macedonians left to help rebuild the devastated country, while thousands of Aegean Macedonian refugees came to Australia, of which a large proportion settled in Perth.

During the years of the Macedonian-Australian People's League the Perth group was by far the most influential branch of the organisation. The group helped organise the "Miss Macedonia" competition and other events to raise money for the Macedonian Hospital Appeals . During the first appeal the West Australian branches managed to raise over £5,500 for the Macedonian hospitals. In 1948 the Makedonska Iskra newspaper was moved to Sydney. The "Macedonian Soccer Club" which was disbanded during World War Two was eventually replaced by "Makedonija" in 1947, "Alexander" in 1954 and finally "Olympic" in 1956.

In 1948 the organisation took the initiative to build a Macedonian Hall in Perth. The contributed drive was to come from the "Macedonian Ladies Section" of the group. On 23 May 1948 Mrs Diana Pappas was elected as President of the group. At this meeting it was agreed that a hall was needed for the "Edinstvo" group, "Macedonian Soccer Club" and the "Macedonian Ladies Section" . In 1949 the group purchased a hall in Leederville with a deposit of £80. However, there was friction within the group and the Hall was sold. The profits were put into buying a block of land in Church Street, Perth.

At the General Meeting of "Edinstvo" on 17 October 1954 in the Trades Hall the group passed the following resolutions: 1.

that a Macedonian centre be erected in Perth for the Macedonian Migrants 2.

that an amount of £10 be donated by each migrant from the age of 16 years without difference of men or women and be paid within a period of one year 3.

that the Hall and property be registered under the name of the Macedonian-Australian People's League, Branch "Edinstvo", Perth, W.A and that the hall be called the "Macedonian Hall" 4.

that every Macedonian migrant settled in Western Australia who has paid his or her nominated £10 had rights in the hall [ 48 ] By 1957 the group was financially secure and began to erect a hall on Church Street. The Perth community was seriously affected when the Macedonian-Australian People's League resolved to decentralize in 1957.

[ 54 ] In 1958 the " Stirling Soccer Club " was founded it was renamed to "West Perth Macedonia" in the 1960s. During this period "Edinstvo" was going through a period of structural changes and in 1960 it changed its name to the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia" and plans were made for the future. In 1963 after the collapse of the Tobacco industry in Manjimup many Macedonians migrated to Perth. By this time many Macedonians from the People's Republic of Macedonia began to immigrate to Perth. In 1966 the foundation stone to the "Macedonian Community Centre" was laid and the building was completed in 1968.  It include a chapel dedicated to Saint Nicholas. In 1969 a second level was added to the Community Centre.

In 1968 the "Vardar Club" (East Perth) soccer club was founded.

[ 60 ] In 1969 the "Olympic" soccer team broke with the Macedonian community and established its club-rooms and grounds in Kingsway. Another Macedonian soccer club "Macedonia United" (West Perth) was founded in 1970 under the auspices of the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia", which was the first United Macedonian club in Western Australia.

[ 61 ] The Community also went on to found a Basketball club and cricket club. In 1969 the first Macedonian Church in Western Australia was founded. The Macedonian Orthodox Church Свети Никола/ Saint Nicholas was consecrated on 6 April 1969. In 1969 the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia" founded the "Goce Delčev Macedonian Choir" and the KUD-Goce Delčev. The Vestnik/ Newspaper was founded in 1971. It began as Mesečni Novini/ Monthly News and then became "Newsletter of the Macedonian Communities in Australia". It printed mainly news from Western Australia in English and Macedonian.

In 1976 "The Macedonian Club" was founded on the site of the Macedonian Community Centre. Ever since its foundation it has been the centre of the Macedonian community in Perth. During 1977 a split within the Saint Nicholas church community led some parishioners to leave the original church and purchase another church just 500 metres from the original "Saint Nicholas" church. This new church was also named the Macedonian Orthodox Church of Свети Никола/ Saint Nicholas . This church founded the KUD-Ilinden and other social groups. By 1983 the Vardar Club had acquired premises in North Perth. From here they are able organise socials, dances and picnics. They also founded the KUD-Vardar group along with other social events such as "Miss Macedonia (W.A)". In 1985 the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia" acquired 10 hectares of land in Balcatta . The development known as "Macedonia Park" was to include a nursing home, C grade hospital, a chapel, rectory, halls, bars and a wide range of sporting amenities. On 22 May 1986 the sporting complex was officially opened by West Australian premier, Brian Burke. In 1985 the community had over 2,000 full or social members. Perth now has over 5 Macedonian clubs.

[ 51 ] Another social club the "Ilinden Club" was also founded the group went on to build a hall in North Perth.

[ 60 ] During the early 1990s many Macedonians immigrated to Perth from the newly independent Republic of Macedonia. The "Macedonian United Organisation of Perth and WA Inc." was founded as a uniting organisation within Western Australia, the group has members from the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia", "Vardar Club", both Churches, the Romany Community and the Ilinden Club. The Church street was renamed "Macedonia Place" in recognition of the great contribution that Macedonians had given to Perth. The "Macedonia Park" in Balcatta was expanded and a number of ethnic schools founded throughout Perth. Radio programs and KUD's were all expanded. By 1976 there were 3471 Macedonian speakers in Perth by 2001 this had risen to 5,772. 7,435 people claimed Macedonian ancestry in the 2006 census although community spokespersons put the number of Macedonians at over 12,000.

Macedonians in Perth Today Today the Macedonian community in Perth is one of the most influential in Australia and the Diaspora. The Macedonian community in Perth is represented by a number of organisations and Churches including: The Macedonian Australian Community Organisation "Vardar" [in Macedonian: Македонска Народна Општина - Вардар] which has a community centre in Malaga, Perth, The Macedonian Community of Western Australia [in Macedonian: Македонска Општина на Западна Австралија] which has a community centre in North Perth, Perth and also a sports stadium (Macedonia Park) in Balcatta, The Macedonian Cultural Center "Ilinden" [in Macedonian: Македонски Културен Центар - Илинден] located in Balcatta, Perth, which also has a community centre located there, and finally, The Macedonian Orthodox Church of "Saint Nikola" (Angove Street, North Perth) and the Macedonian Orthodox Church of "Saint Nikola" (Macedonia Place, North Perth).

There are also a number of smaller unofficial and official Macedonian groups and organisations in Perth including the Bitolsko Drustvo, Komitetot na VMRO-DPMNE Pert, Prilepski Odbor, Mislesevsko Drustvo, Penzionerskoto Drustvo, a number of women's annexes and organisations, youth groups such as the Mladinsko Drustvo pri Makedonskata Narodna Opstina and so forth. For major Macedonian events such as the Commemoration of the Ilinden Uprising of 1913, most of the above-mentioned organisations opt to unite under the banner of the United Macedonian Communities of Western Australia [in Macedonian: Обединети Македонски Организации на Западна Австралија] at events held at the Kings Park War Memorial in conjunction with the RSL of Western Australia.

The Macedonians of Perth also have their very own ethnic Macedonian radio station which runs 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The radio station is called MAK FM and is aired on 103.3fm from their station in Malaga, Perth. The above-mentioned organisations also have their own respective radio programs on another multi-ethnic radio station (6eba World Radio, 95.3fm) of which the largest and longest program is held by the Macedonian Australian Community Organisation (every Sunday from 19:30-22:30).

The Macedonians of Perth also hosted Australia's first "Macedonian Food Festival" in April 2011. This festival was organised at Edith Cowan University (ECU), Joondalup campus. The festival was organised by Robert Pasquale, Dame Krcoski and others members off the UMD. The festival was attended by approximately 1,000 guests. As of 2022, the food festival still continues at ECU and has grown to include other a variety ethnic groups. It is now known as the International Food Festival.

Further to this, Pasquale established the first Macedonian Student Association, at Edith Cowan University with approximately 50 members. ECU Vice Chancellor Prof. Cox named a street at the university Prilep Drive in honour of the university's Macedonian links.

Wanneroo Wanneroo is one of the original Macedonian settlements in Australia. It was also the first "Macedonian village" in Australia. Approximately 25 kilometres from Perth it was an attractive location for many early Macedonian migrants. Many of these were Aegean Macedonians from the Florina and Kastoria regions. The first Macedonian to come to Wanneroo was Stojan Angelcoff who immigrated to Australia in 1923. He later brought out his wife and many other relatives. Many of the early migrants made a living through Market Gardening and scrub clearing. Soon families and wives were brought out to the settlement and it was referred to as the "Macedonian Village". It would be these wives and families who would later go on to found the social and cultural organisations found in the area. By 1930 there were some 150 Macedonians in Waneroo which was steadily increasing. Another settlement was founded at Upper Waneroo. The area was well suited to growing vegetables in the summer.

[ 48 ] By World War Two the Macedonian community of Perth was primarily centred on Wanneroo. It was here that the "Edinstvo" group conducted many of its early functions and picnics. As the Perth metropolitan area was expanded Waneroo was gradually absorbed as a suburb of Perth. The lack of immigrants in the 1960s and 1970s led to the ageing of the community. Although many others came to the Waneroo area in the 1980s and 1990s. Some of the early areas of Macedonian settlement are still dominated by Market-gardening and second and third generation Macedonians. Today it is estimated that the original Macedonian community of Wanneroo numbers over 400 persons.

Manjimup Manjimup is considered as one of the original Macedonian settlements in Australia. One of the first Macedonians to arrive in Manjimup was Risto Marin in 1924. It was here he established a market garden before returning to the region of Macedonia. Many of the original Macedonian immigrants ended up cutting railway sleepers or scrub-clearing. Eventually permanent immigrants arrived and many market gardens were set up. Many of these immigrants were Aegean Macedonians from Greece, especially after the village of Babčor was destroyed by American Bombers in 1948. Many people from Babčor came to Australia and settled in Manjimup. Macedonians played an instrumental role in the foundation of the Tobacco industry in Manjimup. Other notable Macedonians who had arrived by 1930 included Risto Numev, Lazo Miče, The Milentises and Kole Palasin who would go on to have great influence in the regions local tobacco industry. A Greek entrepreneur, Peter Michelidis would turn the tobacco venture into a major industry of the 1930s, 40s and 1950s. At the height of the tobacco industry there were 1,600 Macedonians in Manjimup and the industry was worth £500,000 per annum to the district. Although in 1963 the industry collapsed when government regulations and competition seriously damaged the growers. It was said that many Anglo-Australians gloated at the ruin of the Macedonians, but in fact many Australians were also affected and a local department store closed within months of the tobacco collapse. Many Macedonians left the area to other tobacco growing areas or to Perth.

[ 48 ] After the collapse of the Tobacco industry Market-gardening had become the mainstay of Macedonian life in Manjimup. In 1942 the Macedonians in Manjimup created the Sloboda organisation. In 1947 it evolved to become a branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League . It soon became the centre of the Community. The Sloboda organisation remained even after the dentralisation of the Macedonian-Australian People's League . A film based on the experiences of Stase Manov, a Macedonian in Manjimup, called Stari Kraj (Old Country) was shown on Yugoslavian television. It was a great success. The community which had originally held dances and functions in tobacco sheds began to use the Town Hall. They have always been staunch supporters of the "Macedonian Community of Western Australia" , whereas many Macedonians in Perth were against its inception. From 1970 the population of Macedonians had stabilised at 350 from a peak of 1,600. In 1982, 1 hectare ( 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 acres) of land was donated to the community in Ipsen Street. It was here that the community built the Macedonian Community Centre which was blessed by Father Petre Nanevski from Perth on 3 August 1983. The hall was officially opened on 3 May 1987 by the then premier of Western Australia, Brian Burke. Many Macedonians from Manjimup would go on to play for the Macedonian soccer teams in Perth or Geraldton.

[ 48 ] A KUD was organised in the hall and functions and weddings were also held in the Macedonian Community Centre. The KUD often performs in statewide multicultural events. The community is still present in Manjimup as the second and third generation Macedonians take control of the community. Many people still speak Macedonian and follow Macedonian customs. Many have gone on to manage and own business' where their fathers were not accepted even as labourers. In 1991, 185 people claimed to speak Macedonian in the Manjimup area by 2006 this had fallen to 98. Although in 2006 there were 175 people of Macedonian ancestry down from the 200 in 2001.

[ 62 ] The number of Macedonian born has traditionally been low denoting the presence of Aegean Macedonians in Manjimup. The community was recently visited by the Macedonian Ambassador to Australia, which shows that Macedonians are still present in the Manjimup area [ 63 ] The Macedonians have left a lasting imprint on the Manjimup community.

South Australia [ edit ] South Australia is home to a small but compact Macedonian community. The first Macedonians immigrants were scrub clearers in Ceduna and grape harvesters in the Riverland region. Permanent immigrants established market gardens in Fulham Gardens , Flinders Park and later in Virginia . Soon a community of Aegean Macedonians had established themselves in South Australia, most notably in Fulham Gardens . Coffee Shops, were established by Macedonians and they soon became the original meeting place for the Macedonian community. In 1947 a chapter of the Macedonian-Australian People's League known as " Alexander the Great " opened in South Australia. In 1947, the group raised over £350 for the Macedonian Hospital Appeal.

[ 64 ] After the decantralization of the Macedonian-Australian People's League the "Macedonian Orthodox Community of South Australia" was founded in 1957. In 1967, the Macedonian Orthodox Community of South Australia constructed the Macedonian Hall which became the centre of Macedonian social activities in Adelaide.

[ 48 ] On 28 April 1968, a statue memorial to Macedonian National Hero Goce Delčev, Cyrillic: Гоце Делчев was unveiled. In 1969 the first Macedonian Orthodox Church in South Australia was built on the site of the Macedonian Community property. In 1982 the first Macedonian Orthodox Church in South Australia, Saint Naum of Ohrid, Cyrillic: Свети Наум Охридски was consecrated. The Macedonian Community collected donations from groups such as Yugoslavian Airlines and Stopanska Banka in building the church. The cultural dancing groups Sloboda/ Freedom and KUD Makedonka were also established. The Macedonia United Soccer team was also founded by Macedonians in Adelaide. Another church, Света Богородица Пречиста/ Holy Mother of God of Woodville South was also acquired more recently. A range of Macedonian radio programs also exist in Adelaide. A 1970 estimate put the number of Macedonians in South Australia at 1,200.

[ 65 ] While the 1976 census recorded 676 Macedonian speakers in 1976. By 1996 this number had risen to 923 falling to 705 in 2006.

[ 66 ] In 2006 there were only 400 Macedonian born people living in South Australia while 1,424 people claimed Macedonian Ancestry.

[ 67 ] In the census of 2011, across South Australia, 727 respondents reported speaking Macedonian at home, the highest concentration of this group (14%) was in the 5024 postal area (Fulham Gardens, Fulham and West Beach).

[ 68 ] Queensland [ edit ] There has traditionally been a small Macedonian community in Queensland. Relatively few immigrants arrived before the Second World War. In the late 1940s the Brisbane Branch of the Macedonian-Australian People's League was founded. After Crabbes Creek was devastated by a cyclone in the 1960s more Macedonians came to Brisbane.

[ 47 ] There were relatively few immigrants in Queensland until many Macedonians already in Australia decided to immigrate north. Despite this by 1986 there were still only 376 Macedonians in Queensland, although the community was still growing. Plans for a church in the Gold Coast were founded and planning soon began. A soccer club, "Brothers United" was founded by the community in the late 1980s. It was decided that the first ever Macedonian hall built in Crabbes Creek should be sold and the proceeds go towards founding Sveta Bogorodica church. In the 1990s a Macedonian Orthodox church was founded.

[ 47 ] Света Богородица/Sveta Bogorodica soon became the centre of the Macedonian community in Queensland. Soon afterwards a KUD and an Ethnic School were also set up. In late 2002 an appeal to build a second church began. Construction of the Света Недела/’'Sveta Nedela'’ church soon began. An Australia wide cultural day was held on the Gold Coast during the Christmas of 2006 to help raise funds for the Church. It was a success with Macedonians from all parts of Australia travelling to the event. As of mid-2008 the church is nearing completion. Today Queensland has the fastest growing Macedonian community in Australia. Community spokespersons claim that there are over 4000 Macedonians in Queensland. Although only 927 Macedonians speakers were recorded in the 1996 census and 1,144 in 2006. In 2006 1,829 persons claimed Macedonian Ancestry.

[ 69 ] Aegean Macedonians [ edit ] Main article: Aegean Macedonians The Aegean Macedonian people have had a long history in Australia. In 19th Century pečalba, working away from home, was a widespread Macedonian custom.

[ 70 ] The first Aegean Macedonian was Stojan Kenkov who came to Australian in 1914. Pre-World War Two migration occurred in two waves: the first, in 1924, when the USA imposed heavy immigration restrictions and the second, after 1936, when the 4 August Regime of General Ioannis Metaxas took power in Greece.

[ 19 ] The third wave occurred after the Greek Civil War when many ethnic Macedonians fled Greece. Charles Price estimates that by 1940 there were 670 Ethnic Macedonians from Florina and 370 from Kastoria resident in Australia.

[ 64 ] Peter Hill also estimates a figure of 50,000 Aegean Macedonians (including those born in Australia and excluding Slavophone speakers of Greek Macedonia who identify as Greeks ).

[ 71 ] 2.5% of adherents to the Macedonian Orthodox Church in Australia were born in Greece [ 2 ] while 3,152 speakers of Macedonian were born in Greece and 2,919 people born in Greece claimed ethnic Macedonian ancestry or roughly 3.6% of the total population group.

[ 2 ] Aegean Macedonians were essential in the establishment of the Macedonian Australia People league ( Macedonian : Makedono-Avstraliski Naroden Sojuz ) which dominated ethnic Macedonian life throughout the 1940s and 1950s. They then went on to establish organisations and events such as Macedonian Cultural Week, Preston Makedonija , Makedonska Iskra, Macedonian Community of S.A, Nova Makedonija and many others.

[ 48 ] There are Aegean Macedonian minorities in Richmond , Melbourne , Manjimup , [ 72 ] Shepparton , Wanneroo and Queanbeyan .

[ 73 ] The Church of St George and the Florina Community Centre and Day Care centre was built in Shepparton the Aegean Macedonian hall - Kotori was built by 32 families from the village Kotori in Richmond. Another Church was established by Aegean Macedonians in Queanbeyan and a hall erected in Manjimup. Other Aegean Macedonians organisations include the "Macedonian Aegean Association of Australia" and the "Richmond Aegean Macedonian Cultural and Sporting Association.

Sports [ edit ] Many Macedonians in Australia are involved with Soccer and other sports. Some of the various clubs they have helped to establish are: New South Wales Sydney Bankstown City Lions or Sydney Macedonia Rockdale City Suns or Rockdale Ilinden Yagoona Lions or Yagoona Macedonia Arncliffe Scots or Arncliffe Macedonia Wollongong Wollongong United or Wollongong Macedonia Lake Heights JFC Cringila Lions Coniston Lions or Coniston Macedonia Shell Cove Barbarians or Illawarra Pelister Newcastle Broadmeadow Magic or Newcastle Macedonia Newcastle Suns Macedonia Junior SC Queanbeyan Queanbeyan City or Queanbeyan Makedonia Preston Lions as Victorian Premier League champions, 2007 Victoria Melbourne Preston Lions or Preston Makedonia ( originally "the Makedonia Soccer Club" ) Altona Magic or Altona Vardar Pascoe Vale or Pelister Sydenham Park SC or Sydenham Park Macedonia Plenty Valley Lions or Lerin Lalor United or Lalor Sloga Plenty Valley Lions or Lerin FC Keilor Wolves or Keilor Pelagonija Noble Park SC or Vesela Makedonia Altona Lions or Altona Ilinden Footscray United Vardar Geelong Geelong SC or Geelong Macedonia Shepparton Shepparton SC or Shepparton Makedonia Western Australia Stirling Macedonia South Australia Macedonia United Lions SC Queensland Sunshine Lions FC Defunct teams Balcatta Ilinden North Perth Vardar Point Cook Lions Slivica Mogila Beranci Ohrid SC Warrawong United Mladost Macedonian Eagles Manjimup Macedonia Religion [ edit ] Most Macedonians in Australia are followers of the Macedonian Orthodox Church . Although there are many Macedonian Muslims and people who follow other branches of Christianity. In 1996 there were 53,152 followers of the Macedonian Orthodox Church , in 2001 there were 53,244 adherents.

[ 2 ] in 2006 this number had fallen to 48,084 people. There is a diocese of the Macedonian Orthodox Church for Australia and New Zealand. The Macedonian Orthodox Church is often shortened to MPC.

There are over 40 Macedonian Orthodox Churches in Operation throughout Australia, 3 monasteries and two Cathedrals. Most of them fall under the jurisdiction of the Macedonian Orthodox Church - Diocese for Australia and New Zealand. The monasteries are MPM- Свети Прохор Пчински/ Saint Prohor Pcinski of Donnybrook, MPM- Свети Наум Охридски/ Saint Naum of Ohrid of Kinglake and MPCO- Света Петка/ Saint Petka of Kembla Grange. The Cathedrals are Macedonian Orthodox Cathedral- Свети Климент Охридски/ Saint Kliment of Ohrid of Red Hill and Macedonian Orthodox Cathedral- Свети Кирил и Методиј/ Saints Cyril and Methodius of Rosebery (autocephalous).

[ 74 ] The Macedonian Orthodox Church "St George" was founded in 1959 before full Autocephaly had been declared. The Greek Orthodox Community of Shepparton is primarily Macedonian. In 1975 the "Macedonian Church of St Cyril and Methodius" was founded in Sydney.

Although most Macedonians are adherents of the Macedonian Orthodox Church many follow a different faith. In Melbourne there are two Macedonian Protestant Churches; the Macedonian Church in East Preston ( Uniting Church ) and Macedonian Baptist Community of Regent. There is another Macedonian Baptist Church in Sydney. Another Macedonian Methodist Community was established in Melbourne.

[ 48 ] Furthermore, Melbourne is home to a Macedonian-speaking Seventh-Day Adventist church in Footscray .

List of notable Macedonian Australians [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Artists and media [ edit ] name Born – Died Notable for Connection with Australia Connection with North Macedonia Goran Stolevski 1985 Filmmaker Migrated to Australia Born in SR Macedonia Toni Matičevski 1977– Fashion designer born Australia Matičevski's parents migrated from SR Macedonia [ 75 ] Bill Neskovski 1964–1989 Playwright [ 76 ] migrated to Australia in 1974 born in Macedonia; wrote in both English and Macedonian Steve Nasteski TBC Art Dealer TBC.

Sports [ edit ] name Born – Died Notable for Connection with Australia Connection with North Macedonia Jake Najdovski 2005– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Zach Lisolajski 2005– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Rhys Bozinovski 2004– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Nick Daicos 2003– Australian rules football Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry James Nikolovski 2002– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Matthew Bozinovski 2001– Macedonian International youth soccer player & A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Stefan Colakovski 2000– Macedonian International youth soccer player & A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Dylan Pierias 2000– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Jonas Markovski 1999– A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Josh Daicos 1998– Australian rules football Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Steve Kuzmanovski 1997– Football Player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Nicola Kuleski 1996– Macedonian International youth soccer player & Rockdale Ilinden Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia [ citation needed ] Paul Momirovski 1996– Rugby league player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Ellen Perez 1995– Tennis Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Michael Kantarovski 1995– Broadmeadow Magic, Lambton Jaffas & A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Alec Urosevski 1994– Football Player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Ben Kantarovski 1992– Olyroos & A-League player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Robert Stambolziev 1990– Bristol City, Panathinaikos, Sydney FC, Altona Magic, Preston Lions Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Lupce Acevski 1977– Preston Lions player & coach Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Mile Sterjovski 1979– Former Socceroo (member of 2006 World Cup squad) Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia [ citation needed ] Kris Terzievski 1991– Boxing Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Alexander Volkanovski 1988– UFC Fighter Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Michael Grbevski 1967– Former Socceroo Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry [ citation needed ] John Markovski 1970– Former Socceroo Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia [ citation needed ] Sasho Petrovski 1975– Former Socceroo Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry [ citation needed ] Spase Dilevski 1985– Olyroo Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia Daniel Georgievski 1988– Former Macedonian International Player Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Billy Celeski 1985– Olyroo Migrated to Australia Born in Ohrid , SR Macedonia David Micevski 1986– Olyroo Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia Ivan Necevski 1980– Sydney FC Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Sasa Ognenovski 1979– Former Socceroo Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Naum Sekulovski 1982– A-League player Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Mark Nicoski 1983– Australian rules footballer Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry Vlado Bozinovski 1964– Football Player Migrated to Australia Born in Ohrid , Macedonia Blagoja Kuleski 1962– Football Player Migrated to Australia Born in Prilep , Macedonia Peter Daicos 1961– Australian rules footballer [ 76 ] Born in Australia Macedonian ancestry [ 77 ] Zlatko Nastevski 1957– 1989 NSL Player of the year Migrated to Australia Born in Macedonia Žarko Odžakov 1955– Former Socceroo [ 76 ] Migrated to Australia Born in Skopje , Macedonia Nick Malceski 1984– Australian rules footballer Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Dayne Žorko 1989– Australian rules footballer Born in Australia Ethnically Macedonian parent from Slovenia Goran Lozanovski 1984– Football Player Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Aleks Vrteski 1988– Football Player Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Steven Božinovski 1981– Bonnyrigg White Eagles Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Len Pascoe 1950– Cricketer Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia [ 78 ] Music [ edit ] name Born – Died Notable for Connection with Australia Connection with Macedonia Chris Joannou 1979– Bass guitarist from the band Silverchair Born in Australia Parents from Macedonia Volk Makedonski MC from the act, Curse Ov Dialect Media [ edit ] name Born - Died Notable for Connection with Australia Connection with Macedonia Zoran Vidinovski 1984- Big Brother 2007 Housemate Born in Australia Parents from SR Macedonia See also [ edit ] Australia portal North Macedonia portal Altona Magic SC Australia–North Macedonia relations Bankstown City Lions Broadmeadow Magic FC European Australians Europeans in Oceania Geelong SC Immigration to Australia Macedonian diaspora Macedonian-Australian People's League Macedonians North Macedonia Preston Lions FC Rockdale Ilinden Stirling Macedonia FC Wollongong United FC References [ edit ] The Australian Bureau of Statistics : www.abs.gov.au Hill, Peter (1989).

The Macedonians in Australia . Hesperian Press.

^ "Cultural diversity: Census" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2022.

^ a b c d e "The People of Australia: Statistics from the 2001 Census" (PDF) .

Australian Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs . 2003. Archived from the original (pdf of 84 pages) on 25 June 2008 . Retrieved 16 July 2008 .

^ a b c d "Cultural diversity: Census, 2021 | Australian Bureau of Statistics" .

www.abs.gov.au . 12 January 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

^ "Languages spoken at home" .

2011 Census Tables . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2011. Archived from the original on 26 December 2018.

^ a b c "2914.0.55.002 2006 Census Ethnic Media Package" (Excel download) .

Census Dictionary, 2006 (cat.no 2901.0) .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . 27 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 July 2008 .

^ ABS CENSUS; Melbourne, 2001 [ permanent dead link ] ^ ABS CENSUS; Wollongong, 2001 [ permanent dead link ] ^ ABS CENSUS; Newcastle, 2001 [ permanent dead link ] ^ ABS census, Cringila; 2001 [ permanent dead link ] ^ Hill (1989) p. 10 ^ Dimitar Bechev (2009). Historical dictionary of the Republic of Macedonia. Scarecrow Press. pp. 139–140.

ISBN 0-8108-5565-8 .

^ The most prominent non-Balkan scholars, who deal with the Macedonian diasporas, seem to be unanimous that until 1945, the majority of the Macedonian immigrants of Slavic origin identified themselves as Bulgarians and, more rarely, as Greeks. Victor Roudometoff acknowledges the ethnic identity of the early immigrants, pointing out that: 'In the case of the Macedonian diasporas, there are three distinct groups holding out different images of Macedonia. These are the Greek Macedonians, the Bulgarian Macedonians, and the post-1945 ethnic Macedonians. The last group is by far the most recent addition to the list. The American anthropologist Loring Danforth, who became famous for his work on the identity conflict between the Greek and Macedonian diasporas in Australia, also confirms the observations of Roudometof.

Chris Kostov, Contested Ethnic Identity: The Case of Macedonian Immigrants in Toronto, 1900-1996, Peter Lang, 2010, ISBN 3034301960 , p. 117.

^ Hugh Poulton, Who are the Macedonians? C. Hurst & Co. Publishers, 2000, ISBN 1850655340 , p. 120.

^ The Australian people: an encyclopedia of the nation, its people, and their origins, James Jupp, Cambridge University Press, 2001 , ISBN 0-521-80789-1 , p. 573.

^ " Until the late 19th century both outside observers and those Bulgaro-Macedonians who had an ethnic consciousness believed that their group, which is now two separate nationalities, comprised a single people, the Bulgarians. Thus the reader should ignore references to ethnic Macedonians in the Middle ages which appear in some modern works. In the Middle ages and into the 19th century, the term 'Macedonian' was used entirely in reference to a geographical region. Anyone who lived within its confines, regardless of nationality could be called a Macedonian...Nevertheless, the absence of a national consciousness in the past is no grounds to reject the Macedonians as a nationality today." "The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century," John Van Antwerp Fine, University of Michigan Press, 1991, ISBN 0472081497 , pp. 36–37.

^ " At the end of the World War I there were very few historians or ethnographers, who claimed that a separate Macedonian nation existed... Of those Macedonian Slavs who had developed then some sense of national identity, the majority probably considered themselves to be Bulgarians, although they were aware of differences between themselves and the inhabitants of Bulgaria... The question as of whether a Macedonian nation actually existed in the 1940s when a Communist Yugoslavia decided to recognize one is difficult to answer. Some observers argue that even at this time it was doubtful whether the Slavs from Macedonia considered themselves to be a nationality separate from the Bulgarians ." The Macedonian conflict: ethnic nationalism in a transnational world , Loring M. Danforth, Princeton University Press, 1997, ISBN 0-691-04356-6 , pp. 65-66.

^ "Yugoslav Communists recognized the existence of a Macedonian nationality during WWII to quiet fears of the Macedonian population that a communist Yugoslavia would continue to follow the former Yugoslav policy of forced Serbianization . Hence, for them to recognize the inhabitants of Macedonia as Bulgarians would be tantamount to admitting that they should be part of the Bulgarian state. For that the Yugoslav Communists were most anxious to mold Macedonian history to fit their conception of Macedonian consciousness. The treatment of Macedonian history in Communist Yugoslavia had the same primary goal as the creation of the Macedonian language: to de-Bulgarize the Macedonian Slavs and to create a separate national consciousness that would inspire identification with Yugoslavia." For more see: Stephen E. Palmer, Robert R. King, Yugoslav communism and the Macedonian question, Archon Books, 1971, ISBN 0208008217 , Chapter 9: The encouragement of Macedonian culture.

^ Loring M. Danforth, The Macedonian Conflict: Ethnic Nationalism in a Transnational World, Princeton University Press, 1997, ISBN 0691043566 , p. 86.

^ a b c Thomas, Martin (2005).

"Migration Heritage Centre: A Multicultural Landscape: National Parks and the Macedonian Experience: 4. Macedonian migration to Australia" .

A Multicultural Landscape: National Parks and the Macedonian Experience .

National Parks and Wildlife Service (New South Wales) . Archived from the original on 4 February 2006 . Retrieved 16 July 2008 .

^ "2006 Census Community Profile Series : Victoria" . Archived from the original on 8 June 2011 . Retrieved 6 April 2009 .

^ "Ancestry | Australia | Community profile" .

profile.id.com.au . Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 4 November 2021 .

^ Najdovski 1997 , pp. 78, 83–84.

^ Collins, Jock; Krivokapic-Skoko, Branka; Jordan, Kirrily; Babacan, Hurriyet; Gopalkrishnan, Narayan (2020).

Cosmopolitan Place Making in Australia: Immigrant Minorities and the Built Environment in Cities, Regional and Rural Areas . Palgrave MacMillan. p. 102.

ISBN 9789811580413 .

^ Danforth, Loring (2000). "Ecclesiastical Nationalism and the Macedonian Question in the Australian Diaspora". In Roudometof, Victor (ed.).

The Macedonian Question: Culture, Historiography, Politics . East European Monographs. p. 36.

ISBN 9780880334518 .

"when another group of local Macedonian immigrants from the Florina region decided to establish the Macedonian Autocephalous Church of St. George." ^ Najdovski 1997 , pp. 86–89.

^ Cepreganov, Todor; Angelovska-Panova, Maja; Zajkovski, Dragan (2014).

"The Macedonian Orthodox Church" . In Leustean, Lucian N. (ed.).

Eastern Christianity and politics in the twenty-first century . Routledge. pp.

434– 435.

ISBN 9781317818656 .

^ Najdovski, Chris Ico (October 1997).

Contested Identity: Macedonians in Contemporary Australia (PDF) (Masters).

Victoria University . p. 90 . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Clyne & Kipp 2006 , p. 27.

^ Clyne & Kipp 2006 , pp. 27–28.

^ a b Jakubowicz 1995 , p. 2.

^ Jakubowicz, Andrew (26 June 1995).

The State, Multiculturalism and Ethnic Leadership in Australia (PDF) . Joint Seminar - Institute of Commonwealth Studies, Australian Studies Centre, and the Centre for Multicultural Education. University of London. p. 3.

^ THE "RESIGN, JEFF!" REVIEW 1994 Archived 21 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c Mulheron, Rachael (2020).

Class Actions and Government . Cambridge University Press. p. 294.

ISBN 9781107043978 .

^ Mulheron 2020 , pp. 293–294.

^ Clyne & Kipp 2006 , p. 28.

^ a b c d e f g h i Clyne, Michael G.; Kipp, Sandra (2006).

Tiles in a Multilingual Mosaic: Macedonian, Filipino and Somali in Melbourne (PDF) . Pacific Linguistics. p. 29.

ISBN 9780858835696 .

^ Molitto, Sylvia (21 April 1998). "Australian Macedonians a Unifying Title".

The Sydney Morning Herald .

^ Dunstan, Joseph (5 March 2018).

"Melbourne's Macedonian community 'shocked' by racist graffiti on community buildings" . ABC . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ "Sydney, Melbourne protests over Macedonia name dispute" . SBS. 6 March 2018 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

^ Dabbagh, Omar.

"Majority of Macedonian Australians boycotting name-change referendum" .

www.sbs.com.au . SBS . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

^ "Post war soccer in Geelong" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 August 2006 . Retrieved 2 December 2008 .

^ 2006 Census QuickStats : Geelong (Urban Centre/Locality) ^ 2006 Census QuickStats : Bell Post Hill (State Suburb) ^ Hill (1989) p.40 ^ Hill (1989) p. 108 ^ a b Hill (1989) p. 59 ^ a b c Aliens of the Tweed and Brunswick ^ a b c d e f g h Hill (1989) ^ Hill (1989) p. 102 ^ Macedonian Studies at Macquarie University ^ a b Jupp, James (2001).

The Australian People: An Encyclopedia of the Nation, Its People and Their Origins .

Cambridge University Press . p. 572.

ISBN 0-521-80789-1 .

^ Hill (1989) p. 76 ^ "2001 Census Tables : Hawkesbury (C) (Statistical Local Area)" (requires Excel download) . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 4 August 2006 . Retrieved 16 July 2008 .

^ a b Jupp, James (2001).

The Australian People: An Encyclopedia of the Nation, Its People and Their Origins .

Cambridge University Press . p. 574.

ISBN 0-521-80789-1 .

^ Macedonians in the Illawarra, www.abs.gov.au ^ "Macedonian Welfare Association Inc" . Archived from the original on 18 July 2008 . Retrieved 21 June 2008 .

^ Hill (1989) p. 58 ^ 2006 Census QuickStats : Newcastle (Urban Centre/Locality) ^ Hill (1989) p. 120 ^ a b Hill(1989) p. 105 ^ Kolar-Panov, Dona (1997).

Video, War and the Diasporic Imagination . Routledge. p.

67 .

ISBN 0-415-14880-4 .

^ ABS CENSUS; Community Profile, Manjimup 2006 ^ Lucky eight a great celebration : southwest.thewest.com.au Archived 13 July 2012 at archive.today ^ a b Price, Charles (1963).

Southern Europeans in Australia . Melbourne.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Kris, Betty. A study of the Macedonian community in Adelaide, South Australia. MS University of Adelaide (1970) ^ 2006 Census Data : View by Topic ^ ABS CENSUS; Community profile, South Australia 2006 ^ "2011 Census QuickStats: 5024, SA" .

^ Community Profile: Queensland ^ Hill(1989) p. 18 ^ Hill (1989) p. 123 ^ 2001 Census QuickStats : Manjimup ^ Hill (1989) pp. 91,86,48 ^ Pollitecon Publications ^ Wells, Rachel (19 March 2002).

"Dark horse wins in fashion stakes" .

Fashion .

The Age . Retrieved 6 June 2008 .

^ a b c Hill (1989) p. 132 ^ "Nick's Collingwood Page - Collingwood Football Club" .

^ Hill (1989) p. 131 External links [ edit ] Australia Wide United Macedonian Diaspora Australia Macedonian Human Rights Committee - Australia Macedonian Embassy in Australia Macedonian Orthodox Church - Australia and New Zealand Australian Macedonian Business Directory SBS- Macedonian language program Ties With Tradition - Macedonian apron designs Local Archive Groups A Multicultural Landscape: National Parks and the Macedonian Experience Macedonian Community Council of Victoria Macedonian Australian Welfare Association of Sydney Inc.

Australian Macedonian Weekly, the Macedonian Newspaper for Macedonian Australians Macedonian Dance Group in Queanbeyan, KUD Razigrana Makedonka Federation of Macedonian Cultural Artistic Associations of Victoria Port Kembla Macedonian Welfare Association Inc.

Macedonian Community of Adelaide and South Australia The Macedonians of Crabbes Creek Macedonian - West Australian Business and Economic Forum Makedonska Iskra Newspaper Stirling Lions Soccer Club Wollongong United Soccer Club Preston Lions Soccer Club Rockdale City Suns Soccer Club Broadmeadow Magic Soccer Club v t e Macedonian diaspora Europe Southeast Europe Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Greece Montenegro Romania Serbia Slovenia Austria Czech Republic France Hungary Germany Poland Switzerland Sweden United Kingdom Asia Turkey Americas Argentina Brazil Canada United States Oceania Australia v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e Macedonian diaspora organisations Australia Macedonian-Australian People's League Australian & New Zealander Diocese Diocese of Australia – Sydney Canada Canadian Diocese St. Clement, Toronto St. Ilija, Ontario St. Dimitrija Solunski, Ontario St. Marys, Ontario St. Nedela, Ontario St. Naum of Ohrid, Ontario St. Nicholas, Ontario Europe Albania Macedonian Alliance for European Integration Bulgaria United Macedonian Organization Ilinden–Pirin Greece Rainbow Germany European Macedonian Orthodox Diocese United States American Diocese St. Marys, Ohio Macedonian Patriotic Organization Macedonian People's League Transnational Macedonian Scientific and Literary Society World Macedonian Congress Portals : Australia North Macedonia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jkdsv
Cached time: 20250817070347
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.129 seconds
Real time usage: 1.350 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7789/1000000
Revision size: 104230/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 203299/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18284/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 226330/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.645/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27340305/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1091.543      1 -total
 28.56%  311.782      1 Template:Reflist
 11.51%  125.680     10 Template:Cite_book
 10.40%  113.530      1 Template:Langx
  8.80%   96.037      1 Template:Ethnic_Macedonians
  8.46%   92.368      1 Template:Ethnic_group_sidebar
  8.11%   88.519      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.28%   79.467      2 Template:Short_description
  6.52%   71.190     26 Template:Main_other
  6.15%   67.157      1 Template:Multiple_issues Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4758655:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817070347 and revision id 1301953466. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macedonian_Australians&oldid=1301953466 " Categories : Macedonian given names Australian people of Macedonian descent European diaspora in Australia Macedonian diaspora Australia–North Macedonia relations Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Wikipedia introduction cleanup from August 2020 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from August 2020 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from July 2020 Use Australian English from August 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Short description matches Wikidata "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles needing additional references from May 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Macedonian-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2016 Articles needing additional references from August 2009 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2009 This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 15:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macedonian Australians 2 languages Add topic

