Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Private law in common law jurisdictions 3 European Union law 4 Areas of private law 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Private law 49 languages العربية Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Civil legal system involving relationships between individuals Not to be confused with Private bill or Private member's bill .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Private law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) It has been suggested that Ius privatum be merged into this article. ( Discuss ) Proposed since August 2025.

Private law is the part of a legal system that governs interactions between individual persons. It is distinguished from public law , which deals with relationships between both natural and artificial persons (i.e., organizations) and the state , including regulatory statutes , penal law and other law that affects the public order . In general terms, private law involves interactions between private individuals, whereas public law involves interrelations between the state and the general population. In legal systems of the civil law tradition , it is that part of the jus commune that involves relationships between individuals, such as the law of contracts and torts [ 1 ] (as it is called in the common law tradition), and the law of obligations (as it is called in the civil law tradition).

Concept [ edit ] One of the five capital lawyers in Roman law , Domitius Ulpianus , (170–223) – who differentiated ius publicum from ius privatum – the European, more exactly the continental law, philosophers and thinkers want(ed) to put each branch of law into this dichotomy: Public and Private Law.

[ 2 ] " huius studdii duæ sunt positiones: publicum et privatum. Publicum ius est, quod statum rei Romanæ spectat, privatum, quod ad singulorum utilitatem; sunt enim quædam publice utila, quædam privatim ". (Public law is that which concerns the Roman state, private law is concerned with the interests of citizens.) In the modern era, Charles-Louis Montesquieu (1689–1755) amplified supremely this distinction: International (law of nations), Public (politic law) and Private (civil law) Law, in his major work: (On) The Spirit of the Law (1748). "Considered as inhabitants of so great a planet, which necessarily contains a variety of nations, they have laws relating to their mutual intercourse, which is what we call the law of nations. As members of a society that must be properly supported, they have laws relating to the governors and the governed, and this we distinguish by the name of politic law. They have also another sort of law, as they stand in relation to each other; by which is understood the civil law." Private law in common law jurisdictions [ edit ] The concept of private law in common law countries is somewhat broader, as it also encompasses private relationships between governments and individuals or other entities. In other words, relationships between governments and individuals based on contract or tort law are governed by private law and fall outside the scope of public law.

European Union law [ edit ] The European Commission and the European Council have stated a desire to achieve greater approximation of private law across its (now) 27 member states of the European Union , including within the fields of contract law, property law and family law. In regard to contract law, it the Commission and Council have argued that there are problems resulting from divergences in this field of law across the EU, and in regard to family law, the Council suggests that this field is "a possible subject for a discussion on ... approximation".

[ 3 ] Areas of private law [ edit ] Agricultural law Business law Company law Commercial law Civil law Law of obligations Contract law Tort law Law of unjust enrichment and quasi-contracts Trust law Law of agency Property law Family law - family-related issues and domestic relations including marriage , civil unions , divorce, spousal abuse, child custody and visitation, property, alimony, and child support awards, child abuse issues, and adoption.

Succession - estate planning, testate and intestate succession, probate, and law of wills Consumer protection International private law Labour law Some aspects of transport law , for example contracts of carriage See also [ edit ] International Institute for the Unification of Private Law International Journal of Private Law Polycentric law Private law society Social law References [ edit ] ^ Mattei, Ugo; BussaVni, Mauro (18 May 2010).

"The Project - Delivered at the first general meeting on July 6, 1995 - The Trento Common Core Project" .

The Common Core of European Private Law . Turin, Italy: Common Core Organizing Secretariat, The International University College of Turin . Retrieved 8 September 2011 .

^ Vértesy, László (2007). "The Place and Theory of Banking Law - Or Arising of a New Branch of Law: Law of Financial Industries".

Collega . 2-3. XI.

SSRN 3198092 .

^ EUR-Lex , Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council: A More Coherent European Contract Law - An Action Plan , 2003/C 63/01, published 15 March 2003, accessed 16 September 2023 v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Latvia Korea Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Private_law&oldid=1305270472 " Category : Private law Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles to be merged from August 2025 All articles to be merged Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 02:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Private law 49 languages Add topic

