Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cities Toggle Cities subsection 1.1 Chaonia 1.2 Molossia 1.3 Thesprotia 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents List of cities in ancient Epirus 3 languages Български Deutsch Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia See also: Epirus (ancient state) Epirus in antiquity.

This is a list of cities in ancient Epirus . These were Greek poleis , komes or fortresses except for Nicopolis , which was founded by Octavian . Classical Epirus was divided into three regions: Chaonia , Molossia , Thesprotia , each named after the dominant tribe that lived there. A number of ancient settlements in these regions remain unidentified.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Cities [ edit ] Epirus in antiquity, reproduced from a map made by Heinrich Kiepert , published in 1902.

Chaonia [ edit ] Amantia , main settlement of the Amantes Antigonia (Chaonia) , [ 3 ] polis founded by Pyrrhus of Epirus Artichia , [ 4 ] polis Aulon , modern-day Vlorë , first attested in the 2nd century AD Baiake [ 5 ] pre-Hellenistic polis Bouthroton , [ 6 ] Chaonian polis Cestrine or Cammania , [ 7 ] modern-day Filiates Chimaera (Chaonia) , [ 1 ] [ 8 ] or Chimera (polis) Chaonian polis, modern-day Himara Hekatompedon , [ 1 ] pre-Hellenistic polis Olympe , [ 9 ] polis in the region of the Amantes Onchesmos , [ 10 ] pre-Hellenistic polis, modern-day Saranda Orikos , founded by Euboeans [ 11 ] Euboeans colony Panormos (Epirus) or Panormus (Epirus) , [ 12 ] pre-Hellenistic polis Phanoteia , [ 13 ] polis Phoenice , [ 14 ] chief polis of the Chaonians , modern-day Finiq Photike , [ 1 ] pre-Hellenistic polis, modern-day Paramythia Thronion , [ 15 ] colony of the Euboeans - Locrians Molossia [ edit ] Dodona , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] sanctuary, the second most important oracle in ancient Greece after Delphi Eurymenai (Epirus) , [ 18 ] polis Orraon , [ 19 ] founded 385 BC polis Passaron , [ 20 ] polis Thesprotia [ edit ] Bouneima [ 21 ] pre Hellenistic Korkyra (polis) [ 22 ] polis Tekmona or Tekmon [ 18 ] polis Charadros (Epirus) [ 21 ] pre Hellenistic Chyton founded [ 23 ] by Ionians from Klazomenai Zmaratha [ 24 ] polis Gitanae [ 25 ] polis Elateia (Epirus) founded by Elisians [ 26 ] polis Batiai founded by Elisians [ 26 ] polis Thesprotia (polis) [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Trampya [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Helikranon [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Ilium (Epirus) [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Elina (Epirus) [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Elaias Limen [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Sybota [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Cheimerion [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Ephyra (Epirus) or Kichyros [ 27 ] founded by Chaonians in Parthenius 's story of Anthippe [ 28 ] polis Oropos (Epirus) [ 1 ] pre Hellenistic Toryne [ 29 ] or Torone polis Pandosia (Epirus) [ 26 ] founded by Elisians polis Elaea founded by Corinthians [ 26 ] polis Bucheta founded by Elisians [ 26 ] polis Cassope [ 30 ] [ 31 ] pre Hellenistic Elatria founded by Elisians [ 32 ] Poionos [ 13 ] polis Berenike (Epirus) [ 4 ] polis Kastrosykia [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] List of ancient Epirotes List of Ancient Greek tribes List of ancient Greek cities List of ancient Greeks List of cities in ancient Acarnania References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 340 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 353 ^ The Cambridge Ancient History, Volume 7, Part 1: The Hellenistic World by F. W. Walbank, A. E. Astin, M. W. Frederiksen, and R. M. Ogilvie,1984,Index: "... 183 Anticythera instrument, 336-7 Antigone, wife of Pyrrhus, io6, 107 Antigoneia, as new name of Mantinea, 470, 473 Antigoneia (Epirus), y Ab, 452 Antigoneia (Paeonia), y Ba, ..." ^ a b c An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 342 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis by Mogens Herman, ISBN 0-19-814099-1 ,2004,page 339 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis by Mogens Herman, ISBN 0-19-814099-1 ,2004,page 343,"Bouthroton (Bouthrotios)" ^ Bell, Robert (1989).

Place names in classical mythology . ABC-CLIO. p. 78.

ISBN 9780874365078 .

^ Springs and Wells in Greek and Roman Literature: Their Legends and Locations by James Reuel Smith,2003, ISBN 0-7661-8028-X ,page 263 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 347 ^ Bowden, William. Epirus Vetus: The Archaeology of a Late Antique Province. London: Duckworth, 2003, ISBN 0-7156-3116-0 , p. 14. "Anchiasmos (Onchesmos)" ^ Robin Lane Fox, Travelling Heroes: Greeks and Their Myths in the Epic Age of Homer (London: Allen Lane, 2008, ISBN 978-0-7139-9980-8 ), p. 123.

^ Epirus: the geography, the ancient remains, the history and topography of Epirus and adjacen areas by Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière Hammond,1967,page 473 ^ a b An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 348 ^ The Hellenistic Age: A Short History (Modern Library Chronicles) by Peter Green,2008,page 80,"... to the conference table, and negotiated their own peace at Phoenice in Epirus (205). ..." ^ The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation. An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted, 2005, ISBN 0-19-814099-1 , p. 322. "...expansion of Apollonia is implied in the dedication at Olympia of spoils from the destruction of the Euboian-Lokrian settlement at Thronion." ^ Ambrose (The Early Church Fathers) by Boniface Ramsey,1997,Back Matter: "... the Gauls when they captured Rome in 390 BC. 100 Dodona was a town in ancient Greece that was famous for its temple and ..." ^ Potter, John. Archaeologia Graeca or the Antiquities of Greece. Blackie, 1840 (Original from the University of Lausanne), p. 258. "Dodona is by some thought to have been a city of Thessaly; by others it was placed in Epirus; and others, to reconcile these two opinions, will have two Dodonas, one in Thessaly, and another in Epirus. They that place it in Epirus (and that is generally believed to have been the seat of the oracle, whether there was another Dodona in Thessaly or not), are no less divided in their opinions about it; for some of them will have it in Thesprotia, others in Chaonia, or Molossia; but Eustathius has undertaken to decide the controversy, telling us that it did indeed once belong to the Thesprotians, but afterwards fell into the hands of the Molossians; and he is herein confirmed by Strabo." ^ a b An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen, 2005, page 349 ^ dans le secteur proche d'Orraon ^ Rome's Mediterranean Empire Book 41-45 and the Periochae (Oxford World's Classics) (Books 41-45) by Livy and Jane D. Chaplin,2007,page 195,"... had been made public, Anicius returned to winter quarters at Passaron in Epirus. 27. ..." ^ a b An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 339 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 361 ^ Travels in Northern Greece. In four volumes. Volume 4 by 	William Martin Leake, ISBN 1-4021-6770-9 ,page 76,"name was Chyton, which, according to Ephorus, was a colony settled in Epirus" ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 349 ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen, 2005, page 345 ^ a b c d e An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,Index ^ Anthology Of Classical Myth: Primary Sources in Translation : with Additional Translations by Other Scholars and an Appendix on Linear B sources by Thomas G. Palaima by Stephen Trzaskoma, R. Scott Smith, and Stephen Brunet,2004,page 44: "... the Calydonians against the Thesprotians. After capturing the city of Ephyra, where King Phylas ruled, he slept with the king’s daughter ..." ^ Parthenius ^ Makers of Rome: Nine Lives (Penguin Classics) by Plutarch and Ian Scott-Kilvert,1965,page 328,"... the Ionian sea and seizing a town in Epirus named Toryne, the name of which means 'ladle'. ..." ^ Travels in Northern Greece: Volume 1 by William Martin Leake,2001,page 252,"... marching from Acarnania into Epirus, pitched his camp near the city Cassopia 3. ..." ^ An Inventory of Archaic and Classical Poleis: An Investigation Conducted by The Copenhagen Polis Centre for the Danish National Research Foundation by Mogens Herman Hansen,2005,page 346 ^ The Cambridge Ancient History Volume 3, Part 3: The Expansion of the Greek World, Eighth to Sixth Centuries BC by John Boardman and N. G. L. Hammond,1982,page 337,"... Eleans planted two other colonies in the same part of Epirus, Elatria and Pandosia. Their colonies were in terrain similar to coastal ..." v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_cities_in_ancient_Epirus&oldid=1106663174 " Categories : Populated places established in the 1st millennium BC Cities in ancient Epirus Former populated places in Greece Chaonia Thesprotia Ancient Greece-related lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 August 2022, at 20:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of cities in ancient Epirus 3 languages Add topic

