Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Explanation 2 Definition 3 Constellations 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Circumpolar star 35 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Igbo Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Star that never sets due to its apparent proximity to a celestial pole This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Circumpolar star" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Circumpolar star trails in a long-exposure photo of several hours. The stars near the celestial pole leave shorter trails with the long exposure.

A circumpolar star is a star that, as viewed from a given latitude on Earth, never sets below the horizon due to its apparent proximity to one of the celestial poles . Circumpolar stars are therefore visible from said location toward the nearest pole for the entire night on every night of the year (and would be continuously visible throughout the day too, were they not overwhelmed by the Sun 's glare). Others are called seasonal stars.

All circumpolar stars lie within a circumpolar circle whose size is determined by the observer's latitude. Specifically, the angular measure of the radius of this circle equals the observer's latitude. The closer the observer is to the North or South Pole , the larger its circumpolar circle.

Before the definition of the Arctic was formalized as the region north of the Arctic Circle which experiences the midnight sun , it more broadly meant those places where the 'bear' constellations ( Ursa Major , the Great Bear, and Ursa Minor , the Little Bear) were high in the sky. Thus the word 'Arctic' is derived from the Greek ἀρκτικός ( arktikos ), 'bearish', from ἄρκτος ( arktos ), 'bear'.

Explanation [ edit ] Geometric diagram proving that the angle between the North Celestial Pole and the observer's horizon, i.e., the angle that spans the radius of the circumpolar circle, is equal to the observer's latitude.

As Earth rotates daily on its axis, the stars appear to move in circular paths around one of the celestial poles (the north celestial pole for observers in the Northern Hemisphere , or the south celestial pole for observers in the Southern Hemisphere ). Stars far from a celestial pole appear to rotate in large circles; stars located very close to a celestial pole rotate in small circles and hence hardly seem to engage in any diurnal motion at all. Depending on the observer's latitude on Earth, some stars – the circumpolar ones – are close enough to the celestial pole to remain continuously above the horizon, while other stars dip below the horizon for some portion of their daily circular path (and others remain permanently below the horizon).

The circumpolar stars appear to lie within a circle that is centered at the celestial pole and tangential to the horizon. At the Earth's North Pole , the north celestial pole is directly overhead, and all stars that are visible at all (that is, all stars in the Northern Celestial Hemisphere ) are circumpolar.

[ 1 ] As one travels south, the north celestial pole moves towards the northern horizon. More and more stars that are at a distance from it begin to disappear below the horizon for some portion of their daily " orbit ", and the circle containing the remaining circumpolar stars becomes increasingly small. At the Equator , this circle vanishes to a single point – the celestial pole itself – which lies on the horizon, and so all of the stars capable of being circumpolar are for half of every 24 hour period below the horizon. There, the pole star itself will only be made out from a place of sufficient height.

As one travels south of the Equator, the opposite happens. The south celestial pole appears increasingly high in the sky, and all the stars lying within an increasingly large circle centred on that pole become circumpolar about it. This continues until one reaches the Earth's South Pole where, once again, all visible stars are circumpolar.

The celestial north pole is located very close (less than 1° away) to the pole star (Polaris or North Star), so from the Northern Hemisphere, all circumpolar stars appear to move around Polaris. Polaris itself remains almost stationary, always at the north (i.e.

azimuth of 0°), and always at the same altitude (angle from the horizon), equal to the observer's latitude . These are then classified into quadrants.

Polaris always has an azimuth equal to zero . The pole's altitude for a given latitude Ø is fixed, and its value is given by Ø. All stars with a declination less than 90° – Ø are not circumpolar.

[ 2 ] Definition [ edit ] Circumpolar star trails captured with an extended exposure Diagram of circumpolar stars assuming an observer is at latitude +19°.

Whether a star is circumpolar depends upon the observer's latitude .

[ 3 ] Since the altitude of the north or south celestial pole (whichever is visible) equals the absolute value of the observer's latitude, [ 3 ] any star whose angular distance from the visible celestial pole is less than the absolute latitude will be circumpolar. For example, if the observer's latitude is 50° N, any star will be circumpolar if it is less than 50° from the north celestial pole. If the observer's latitude is 35° S, then all stars within 35° of the south celestial pole are circumpolar. Stars on the celestial equator are not circumpolar when observed from any latitude in either hemisphere of the Earth.

Whether a given star is circumpolar at the observer's latitude ( θ ) may be calculated in terms of the star's declination ( δ ). The star is circumpolar if θ + δ is greater than +90° (observer in Northern Hemisphere ), or θ + δ is less than −90° (observer in Southern Hemisphere ). Similarly, the star will never rise above the local horizon if δ − θ is less than −90° (observer in Northern Hemisphere), or δ − θ is greater than +90° (observer in Southern Hemisphere). Thus, Canopus is invisible from San Francisco and London , and marginally visible from Seville , Seoul , and Nashville .

Some stars within the far northern constellation (such as Cassiopeia , Cepheus , Ursa Major , and Ursa Minor ) roughly north of the Tropic of Cancer (23° 26′ N) will be circumpolar stars, which never rise or set.

[ 3 ] For British Isles observers, for example, the first magnitude stars Capella (declination +45° 59′) and Deneb (+45° 16′) do not set from anywhere in the country.

Vega (+38° 47′) is technically circumpolar north of latitude 51° 13′ N (just south of London ); taking atmospheric refraction into account, it will probably only be seen to set at sea level from Cornwall .

Stars in the far southern constellations (such as Crux , Musca , and Hydrus ) roughly south of the Tropic of Capricorn (23° 26′ S) are circumpolar to typical points of observation beyond that tropic.

[ 3 ] Stars (and constellations) that are circumpolar in one hemisphere are always invisible at the same latitude (or higher) of the opposite hemisphere, and these never rise above the horizon. For example, the southern star Acrux is invisible from most of the contiguous United States ; likewise, the seven stars of the northern Big Dipper asterism are invisible from most of the Patagonia region of South America .

Constellations [ edit ] A circumpolar constellation is a constellation (group of stars ) that never sets below the horizon , as viewed from a location on Earth . As viewed from the North Pole , all fully visible constellations north of the celestial equator are circumpolar, and likewise for constellations south of the celestial equator as viewed from the South Pole . As viewed from the Equator , there are no circumpolar constellations. As viewed from mid-northern latitudes (40–50° N), circumpolar constellations may include Ursa Major , Ursa Minor , Draco , Cepheus , Cassiopeia , and the less-known Camelopardalis , Lynx and Lacerta .

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Celestial pole Celestial sphere Magellan expedition Pole star Voyages of Christopher Columbus References [ edit ] ^ Ridpath, Ian (2006).

Eyewitness Companions: Astronomy . Penguin. p. 148.

ISBN 0756648459 .

^ Karttunen, Hannu; Kröger, Pekka; Oja, Heikki; Poutanen, Markku; Donner, Karl Johan, eds. (2007).

Fundamental Astronomy (5th ed.).

Springer Science & Business Media . p. 19.

ISBN 978-3540341444 .

^ a b c d Norton, A. P. (1986).

Norton's 2000.0 Star Atlas and Reference Handbook . Longman Scientific and Technical. pp.

39– 40.

^ Young, Charles Augustus (1897), Uranography: A Brief Description of the Constellations Visible in the United States, with Star-maps, and Lists of Objects Observable with a Small Telescope , Ginn, pp.

9– 14.

"Circumpolar Stars." Web. 7 Jan. 2015.

http://www.astronomygcse.co.uk/AstroGCSE/New [ permanent dead link ] Site/Topic 3/circumpolar_stars.htm.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Circumpolar stars .

Bartleby.com: Circumpolar Star North Circumpolar Star Trails South Circumpolar Star Trails Star Trails Photography Tutorial v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Portals : Astronomy Outer space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Circumpolar_star&oldid=1282262100 " Categories : Astronomical coordinate systems Star types Spherical astronomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 10:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Circumpolar star 35 languages Add topic

