Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 2.1 Consonants 2.2 Vowels 3 Grammar Toggle Grammar subsection 3.1 Nouns 3.1.1 Case 3.1.2 State 3.2 Verbs 3.2.1 Barth-Ginsberg alternation 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Classical Arabic 34 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català الدارجة Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English ไทย Türkçe اردو 粵語 中文 Kumoring Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of the Arabic language Classical Arabic Quranic Arabic العربية الفصحى al-ʻArabīyah al-Fuṣḥā Verses from the Quran vocalized in a reading tradition considered normative Classical Arabic, written in the cursive Arabic .

Pronunciation /al ʕaraˈbijja lˈfusˤħaː/ Native to Early Islamic Caliphates Region Muslim World Ethnicity Arabs Era 7th–9th centuries AD Continued as a liturgical language of Islam Spoken with a modernized pronunciation Language family Afro-Asiatic Semitic West Semitic Central Semitic Arabic Classical Arabic Early form Old Arabic Writing system Arabic abjad Language codes ISO 639-3 – Glottolog None This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

Classical Arabic or Quranic Arabic (Arabic: العربية الفصحى , romanized: al-ʻArabīyah al-Fuṣḥā , lit.

'the most eloquent Arabic') is the standardized literary form of Arabic used from the 7th century and throughout the Middle Ages , most notably in Umayyad and Abbasid literary texts such as poetry, elevated prose and oratory, and is also the liturgical language of Islam , "Quranic" referring to the Quran . Classical Arabic is, furthermore, the register of the Arabic language on which Modern Standard Arabic is based.

Several written grammars of Classical Arabic were published with the exegesis of Arabic grammar being at times based on the existing texts and the works of previous texts, in addition to various early sources considered to be of most venerated genesis of Arabic.

[ 1 ] The primary focus of such works was to facilitate different linguistic aspects.

Modern Standard Arabic is its direct descendant used today throughout the Arab world in writing and in formal speaking, for example prepared speeches, some radio and television broadcasts and non-entertainment content.

[ 2 ] The lexis and stylistics of Modern Standard Arabic are different from Classical Arabic, and Modern Standard Arabic uses a subset of the syntactic structures available in Classical Arabic, but the morphology and syntax have remained basically unchanged.

[ 3 ] In the Arab world little distinction is made between Classical Arabic and Modern Standard Arabic and both are normally called al-fuṣḥā ( الفصحى ) in Arabic, meaning 'the most eloquent'.

Classical Arabic is considered a conservative language among Semitic languages, it preserved the complete Proto-Semitic three grammatical cases and declension (ʾIʿrab) , and it was used in the reconstruction of Proto-Semitic since it preserves as contrastive 28 out of the evident 29 consonantal phonemes.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] See also: Pre-classical Arabic Distribution of Arabic dialects before the Rashidun Islamic conquests .

[ 5 ] The earliest forms of Arabic are known as Old Arabic and survive in inscriptions in Ancient North Arabian scripts as well as fragments of pre-Islamic poetry preserved in the classical literature. It is hypothesized that by the late 6th century AD a relatively uniform intertribal "poetic koiné ", a synthetic language distinct from the spoken vernaculars, had developed with conservative as well as innovative features, including the case endings known as ʾiʿrab .

[ 6 ] It is uncertain to what degree the spoken vernaculars corresponded to the literary style, however, as many surviving inscriptions in the region seem to indicate simplification or absence of the inflectional morphology of Classical Arabic. It is often said that the Bedouin dialects of Najd were probably the most conservative (or at least resembled the elevated intertribal idiom morphologically and lexically more than the other contemporary vernaculars), a view possibly supported by the romanticization of the ‘purity’ of the language of the desert-dwellers (as opposed to the " corrupted " dialects of the city-dwellers) expressed in many medieval Arabic works, especially those on grammar, though some argue that all the spoken vernaculars probably deviated greatly from the supraregional literary norm to different degrees, while others, such as Joshua Blau , believe that "the differences between the classical and spoken language were not too far-reaching".

[ 7 ] The Arabic script is generally believed to have evolved from local cursive varieties of the Aramaic script , which have been adopted to write Arabic, though some, such as Jean Starcky , have postulated that it instead derives direct from the Syriac script since, unlike Aramaic, the scripts of Arabic and Syriac are both cursive. Indigenous speculations concerning the history of the script sometimes ascribe the origins of the script, and oftentimes the language itself also, to one of the ancient major figures in Islam, such as Adam or Ishmael , though others mention that it was introduced to Arabia from afar.

[ 6 ] In the 7th century AD the distinctive features of Old Hijazi , such as loss of final short vowels, loss of hamza , lenition of final /-at/ to /-ah/ and lack of nunation , influenced the consonantal text (or rasm ) of the Qur'an (and also many of its readings also) and the later normalized orthography of Classical Arabic as a standard literary register in the 8th century.

[ 8 ] By the 2nd century AH (9th century AD ) the language had been standardized by Arabic grammarians and knowledge of Classical Arabic became a prerequisite for rising into the higher classes throughout the Islamic world, since it was the lingua franca across the Middle East , North Africa , and the Horn of Africa , and thus the region eventually developed into a widespread state of diglossia . Consequently the classical language, as well as the Arabic script , became the subject of much mythicization and was eventually associated with religious, ethnic, and racial conflicts, such as the rise of many groups traditionally categorized under the broad label of al-Shu'ibiyya (roughly meaning "those of the nations", as opposed to Arab tribes), who, despite the remarkable differences in their views, generally rejected the stressed and often dogmatized belief that the Arabs, as well as their language, were far superior to all other races and ethnicities, [ note 1 ] and so the term later came to be applied pejoratively to such groups by their rivals.

[ note 2 ] Moreover, many Arabic grammarians strove to attribute as many words as possible to a "pure Arabic origin", especially those in the Qur'an. Thus, exegetes, theologians, and grammarians who entertained the idea of the presence of "impurities" (for example, naturalized loanwords) in the Qur'an were severely criticized and their proposed etymologies denounced in most cases.

[ note 3 ] Nonetheless, the belief in the racial and ethnic supremacy of the Arabs and the belief in the linguistic supremacy of Arabic did not seem to be necessary entailments of each other.

[ note 4 ] Poems and sayings attributed to Arabic-speaking personages who lived before the standardization of the Classical idiom, which are preserved mainly in far later manuscripts, contain traces of elements in morphology and syntax that began to be regarded as chiefly poetic or characteristically regional or dialectal. Despite this, these, along with the Qur'an, were perceived as the principal foundation upon which grammatical inquiry, theorizing, and reasoning were to be based. They also formed the literary ideal to be followed, quoted, and imitated in solemn texts and speeches. Lexically, Classical Arabic may retain one or more of the dialectal forms of a given word as variants of the standardized forms, albeit often with much less currency and use.

[ 6 ] Various Arabic dialects freely borrowed words from Classical Arabic, a situation similar to the Romance languages , wherein scores of words were borrowed directly from Classical Latin . Arabic-speakers usually spoke Classical Arabic as a second language (if they spoke the colloquial dialects as their first language) or as a third language (if they spoke another language as their first language and a regional variety of colloquial Arabic as their second language). Nonetheless, the pronunciation of Classical Arabic was likely influenced by the vernaculars to different degrees (much like Modern Standard Arabic ). The differences in pronunciation and vocabulary in the regional Arabic varieties were in turn variously influenced by the native languages spoken in the conquered regions, such as Coptic in Egypt; Berber and Punic in the Maghreb; Himyaritic , Modern South Arabian , and Old South Arabian in Yemen; and Aramaic in the Levant.

[ 9 ] Phonology [ edit ] Consonants [ edit ] See also: Arabic phonology Like Modern Standard Arabic, Classical Arabic had 28 consonant phonemes: Classical Arabic consonant phonemes [ 10 ] Labial Dental Denti-alveolar Palatal Velar Uvular Pharyngeal Glottal plain emphatic Nasal m م n ن Plosive voiceless t ت tˁ 1 ط k ك q 2 ق ʔ ء voiced b ب d د ɮ ˁ 5 ~ dˤ ض ɟ 3 ج Fricative voiceless f ف θ ث s س sˁ ص ʃ ش χ خ ħ ح h ه voiced ð ذ z ز ðˁ ظ ʁ غ ʕ ع Trill / Tap r 7 ر Approximant l ل ( lˁ ) 6 ل j ي w و Notes: ^1 Sibawayh described the consonant ⟨ ط ⟩ as voiced ( /dˁ/ ), but some modern linguists cast doubt upon this testimony.

[ 11 ] It is likely that the word used to describe it did not mean voiced but rather unaspirated.

^2 The 14th century historian Ibn Khaldun described the pronunciation of ⟨ ق ⟩ as a voiced velar / ɡ / and that it might have been the old Arabic pronunciation of the letter, he even describes that the prophet Muhammad may have used the / ɡ / pronunciation.

[ 12 ] ^3 As it derives from Proto-Semitic *g, / ɟ / may have been a palatalized velar: / ɡʲ / .

^5 This is retrospectively reconstructed based on ancient texts describing the proper pronunciation and discouraging the use of any other pronunciation.

[ 13 ] ^6 / lˁ / is a marginal phoneme that only appears in /(ʔa)lːˁɑːh/ , the name of God, Allah , [ 14 ] except after /i/ or /iː/ when it becomes unemphatic /l/ : bismi l–lāhi /bismi‿lːaːhi/ ('in the name of God').

^7 / rˁ / is emphatic except before /i/ , /iː/ and /j/ when it becomes unemphatic [ r ] .

Vowels [ edit ] Monophthong phonemes Short Long Front Back Front Back Close i u iː uː Mid ( eː ) [ 15 ] Open a aː Notes: [ɑ(ː)] is the allophone of /a/ and /aː/ after uvular and emphatic consonants [eː] arose from two separate sources, often conflated: The contraction of the triphthong *ayV . Some Arabs said banē (< *banaya) for banā ("he built") and zēda (< *zayida) for zāda ("it increased"). This /eː/ merged with /aː/ in later Classical Arabic and most modern Arabic dialects.

[ 15 ] A completely different phenomenon called imāla led to the raising of / a / and /aː/ adjacent to a sequence i(ː)C or Ci(ː) , where C was a non-emphatic, non-uvular consonant, e.g.

al-kēfirīna < al-kāfirīna ("the infidels"). Imala could also occur in the absence of an i-vowel in an adjacent syllable. It was considered acceptable Classical Arabic by Sibawayh, and still occurs in numerous modern Arabic dialects, particularly the urban dialects of the Fertile Crescent and the Mediterranean.

[ eː ] may have been the original pronunciation of a final ی which is otherwise pronounced as [ aː ]. In the Kisā'i and Hamzah recitations of the Qur'an, this pronunciation is used, whereas in the Hafs pronunciation aː is used instead. An example of this can be seen in the names Mūsā (Moses), 'īsā (Jesus), and Yahyā (John), which would be pronounced as Musē, 'īsē and Yahyē in the former two manners of recitation.

Grammar [ edit ] Nouns [ edit ] Main article: Arabic nouns and adjectives Case [ edit ] The A1 inscription dated to the 3rd or 4th century AD in the Greek alphabet in a dialect showing affinities to that of the Safaitic inscriptions shows that short final high vowels had been lost in at least some dialects of Old Arabic at that time, obliterating the distinction between nominative and genitive case in the singular, leaving the accusative the only marked case: [ 16 ] Translation Original Greek transcription Arabic approximate transcription ʾAws son of ʿūḏ (?) Αυσος Ουδου أوس عوذ son of Bannāʾ son of Kazim Βαναου Χαζιμ بناء كازم the ʾidāmite came μου αλΙδαμι αθα الإدامي أتو because of scarcity; he came οα μισειαζ αθαοευ̣ من شحاص أتو to Bannāʾ in this region α Βαναα αδαυρα بناء الدور and they pastured on fresh herbage αουα ειραυ βακλα ويرعو بقل during Kānūn βιΧανου بكانون Safaitic (ca. 3rd – 4th century AD) Triptote Diptote Dual Masculine plural Feminine plural Nominative ∅..الـ (ʾal-)...-∅ - ∅ الـ)..ـَان) (ʾal-)...-ān الـ)..ـُون) (ʾal-)...-ūn الـ)..ـَات) (ʾal-)...-āt Accusative الـ..ـَا (ʾal-)...-a الـ)..ـَيْن) (ʾal-)...-ayn الـ)..ـِين) (ʾal-)...-īn Genitive ∅..(الـ) (ʾal-)...-∅ Classical Arabic however, shows a far more archaic system, essentially identical with that of Proto-Arabic : Classical Arabic (ca. 7th century AD) Triptote Diptote Dual Masculine plural Feminine plural Nominative ـٌ -un الـ..ـُ ʾal-...-u ـُ - u الـ)..ـَانِ) (ʾal-)...-āni الـ)..ـُونَ) (ʾal-)...-ūna ـَاتٌ -ātun الـ..ـَاتُ ʾal-...-ātu Accusative ـًا، ـً -an الـ..ـَ ʾal-...-a ـَ - a الـ)..ـَيْنِ) (ʾal-)...-ayni الـ)..ـِينَ) (ʾal-)...-īna ـَاتٍ -ātin الـ..ـَاتِ ʾal-...-āti Genitive ـٍ -in الـ..ـِ ʾal-...-i State [ edit ] The definite article spread areally among the Central Semitic languages and it would seem that Proto-Arabic lacked any overt marking of definiteness. Besides dialects with no definite article, the Safaitic inscriptions exhibit about four different article forms, ordered by frequency: h- , ʾ- , ʾl- , and hn- . The Old Arabic of the Nabataean inscriptions exhibits almost exclusively the form ʾl- . Unlike the Classical Arabic article, the Old Arabic ʾl almost never exhibits the assimilation of the coda to the coronals; the same situation is attested in the Graeco-Arabica, but in A1 the coda assimilates to the following d , αδαυρα * ʾad-dawra الدورة 'the region'.

In Classical Arabic, the definite article takes the form al- , with the coda of the article exhibiting assimilation to the following dental and denti-alveolar consonants. Note the inclusion of palatal /ɕ/ , which alone among the palatal consonants exhibits assimilation, indicating that assimilation ceased to be productive before that consonant shifted from Old Arabic /ɬ/ : Sun consonants in Classical Arabic Dental Denti-alveolar Palatal plain emphatic plain emphatic n n – ن t t – ت tˤ ṭ – ط d d – د θ ṯ – ث s s – س sˤ ṣ – ص ð ḏ – ذ ðˤ ẓ – ظ z z – ز ɕ (< *ɬ) š – ش ɮˤ ḍ – ض l l – ل r r – ر Verbs [ edit ] Main article: Arabic verbs Barth-Ginsberg alternation [ edit ] Proto-Central Semitic, Proto-Arabic, various forms of Old Arabic, and some modern Najdi dialects to this day have alternation in the performative vowel of the prefix conjugation, depending on the stem vowel of the verb. Early forms of Classical Arabic allowed this alternation, but later forms of Classical Arabic levelled the /a/ allomorph: Pre-Classical ( taltalah ) Classical 1 sg.

ʾi-rkabu ʾa-qtulu ʾa-...-u 2 m.sg.

ti-rkabu ta-qtulu ta-...-u 3 m.sg.

ya-rkabu (< * yi- ) ya-qtulu ya-...-u 1 pl.

ni-rkabu na-qtulu na-...-u See also [ edit ] Islam portal Arabic in Islam Quranic Arabic Corpus Arabic–English Lexicon Notes [ edit ] ^ Such views were not held only by Arabs. Many Islamized Persians appear to have internalized similar beliefs, and they are expressed in the works of such renowned Persian scholars as al-Farisi and his pupil Ibn Jinni .

^ The term is used disparagingly in the introduction to Al-Mufaṣṣal , a treatise on Arabic grammar by the Persian theologian and exegete al-Zamakhshari , wherein he begins by attacking "al-Shu'ubiyya" and thanking Allah for making him "a faithful ally of the Arabs". However the term was also used positively as it derives from the Qur'an.

^ Versteegh (1997) believes that early Medieval Arabic etymologists and philologists, be they exegetes, grammarians, or both, were noticeably far more eager to ascribe words to historically non-Arabic origins, and so he concludes that the spread of the association of "linguistic supremacy" with "etymological purity" was a later development, though he mentions al-Suyuti as a notable exception to this puristic attitude, which eventually became prevalent.

^ Abu 'Ubayda , a Persian philologist, exegete, and historian who was later accused of "hating Arabs", asserted that "the Qur'an was revealed in a clear Arabic tongue, and so whosoever claims that [the word] " taha " is Nabatean has committed a great error".

^ Al-Jallad, Ahmad (2011-05-30).

"Polygenesis in the Arabic Dialects" .

Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics .

^ Bin-Muqbil 2006 , p. 14.

^ Bin-Muqbil 2006 , p. 15.

^ Versteegh, Cornelis Henricus Maria "Kees" (1997).

The Arabic Language . Columbia University Press. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-231-11152-2 .

^ Einführung, Eine (2005).

Arabische Dialektgeographie . Brill. p. 27.

ISBN 978-90-47-40649-5 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ a b c Versteegh, Kees; Versteegh, C. H. M. (1997).

The Arabic Language . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-11152-2 .

^ Blau, Joshua (1970).

On Pseudo-corrections in Some Semitic Languages . Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities.

^ Putten, Marijn van; Stokes, Phillip (January 2018).

"Case in the Qurˀānic Consonantal Text. Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes 108 (2018), pp. 143–179" .

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes .

^ Hickey, Raymond (2013-04-24).

The Handbook of Language Contact . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-118-44869-4 .

^ Watson 2002 , p. 13.

^ Danecki, Janusz (2008). "Majhūra/Mahmūsa".

Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics . Vol. III. Brill. p. 124.

^ Heinrichs, Wolfhart.

"Ibn Khaldūn as a Historical Linguist with an Excursus on the Question of Ancient gāf" .

Harvard University .

^ Kinberg, Naphtali (2001). "Treatise on the Pronunciation of the Dad". In Kinberg, Leah; Versteegh, Kees (eds.).

Studies in the Linguistic Structure of Classical Arabic . Leiden; Boston; Koln: Brill. pp.

197 -267.

ISBN 9004117652 .

^ Watson 2002 , p. 16.

^ a b Studies, Sibawayhi.

"solomon i.sara_sibawayh on imalah-text translation" .

Academia.edu .

^ Al-Manaser, Ali; Al-Jallad, Ahmad (19 May 2015).

"New Epigraphica from Jordan I: a pre-Islamic Arabic inscription in Greek letters and a Greek inscription from north-eastern Jordan" .

Arabian Epigraphic Notes 1 . Retrieved 2015-12-09 .

References [ edit ] Bin-Muqbil, Musaed (2006).

Phonetic and Phonological Aspects of Arabic Emphatics and Gutturals .

Open Journal of Modern Linguistics (PhD thesis). Madison: University of Wisconsin.

Holes, Clive (2004) Modern Arabic: Structures, Functions, and Varieties Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 1-58901-022-1 Versteegh, Kees (2001) The Arabic Language Edinburgh University Press ISBN 0-7486-1436-2 (Ch.5 available in link below) Watson, Janet C. E. (2002).

The Phonology and Morphology of Arabic . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-925759-1 .

External links [ edit ] Look up Classical Arabic , Modern Standard Arabic , or Fus-ha in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Classical Arabic Grammar Documentation – Visualization of Classical Quranic Grammar ( iʻrāb ) [1] – Lectures on Quranic Arabic by Khalid Zaheer (CA) Institute of the Language of the Quran – Free Video lectures on basic and advanced Classical Arabic grammar [2] – A hub for learners of Classical Arabic.

v t e Phonologies of the world's languages Phonologies Orthographies Grammars Adjectives Determiners Nouns Prepositions Pronouns Verbs A–E Abkhaz Acehnese Adyghe Afrikaans American Sign Language Arabic Standard Egyptian Hejazi Levantine Moroccan Tunisian Avestan Belarusian Bengali Bulgarian Burmese Catalan Chinese Mandarin Cantonese Hokkien Northern Wu Old Historical Chukchi Cornish Czech Danish Dutch Standard Orsmaal-Gussenhoven dialect English Australian General American New Zealand Received Pronunciation Regional North American White South African Standard Canadian Old Middle Esperanto Estonian F–L Faroese Finnish French Parisian Quebec Galician German Standard Bernese Greek Standard Modern Ancient Koine Greenlandic Gujarati Hawaiian Hebrew Modern Biblical Tiberian Samaritan Hindustani Hungarian Icelandic Ingrian Inuit Irish Italian Japanese Kiowa Konkani Korean Kurdish Kyrgyz Latgalian Latin Latvian Limburgish Maastrichtian Lithuanian Luxembourgish M–S Macedonian Malay Maldivian Māori Marathi Massachusett Medumba Navajo Nepali Norwegian Occitan Ojibwe Old Saxon Oromo Ottawa Pashto Persian Polish Portuguese Proto-Indo-European Ripuarian Colognian Kerkrade dialect Romanian Russian Sardinian Scots Scottish Gaelic Serbo-Croatian Slovak Slovene Somali Sotho Spanish Dialects and varieties Swedish T–Z Tagalog Tamil Taos Turkish Ubykh Ukrainian Uyghur Vietnamese Welsh West Frisian Yiddish Zuni v t e Arabic language Overviews Language Alphabet History Romanization Numerology Influence on other languages Scripts Nabataean script Arabic script Ancient North Arabian Ancient South Arabian script Arabic numerals Eastern numerals Arabic Braille Algerian Braille Maltese Braille Diacritics i‘jām Tashkil Harakat Nunation (tanwin) Shaddah Hamza Dagger alif Maltese alphabet Letters ʾAlif Bāʾ Tāʾ Ṯāʾ Ǧīm Ḥāʾ Ḫāʾ Dāl Ḏāl Rāʾ Zāy Sīn Šīn Ṣād Ḍād Ṭāʾ Ẓāʾ ʿAyn Ġayn Fāʾ Qāf Kāf Lām Mīm Nūn Hāʾ Wāw Yāʾ Varieties Pre-Islamic Proto-Arabic Nabataean Arabic Old Arabic Old Hijazi Arabic Pre-classical Arabic Literary Classical Modern Standard Modern spoken Maghrebi Pre-Hilalian Andalusi Sicilian Maltese Australian Cottenera Gozitan Qormi Żejtun Żurrieqi Urban Tunis (North-Eastern Tunisian) Village Eastern Sahili (Sahel) Sfaxian Jijel (Lesser Kabylia) Western Traras-Msirda Jebli (Mountain) Judeo-Maghrebi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Hilalian Central Hilal Algerian koiné Judeo-Algerian Algerian Saharan Eastern Algerian Eastern Hilal Tunisian koiné Maqil Fessi Hassaniya Nemadi Moroccan koiné Eastern Western Western Algerian Sulaym Libyan koiné Western Egyptian Bedawi Nile Valley Egyptian Saʽidi Sudanese Levantine North Cilician Lebanese Syrian Aleppine Damascene South Jordanian Palestinian Mesopotamian Gilit Baghdadi Khuzestani Shawi South North (Qeltu) Anatolian Cypriot Judeo-Iraqi Baghdadi Peninsular Bahrani Bareqi Bedawi Dhofari Gulf Bahraini Emirati Kuwaiti Khamseh Hejazi Najdi Omani Shihhi Yemeni Hadhrami Sanʽani Taʽizzi-Adeni Tihami Judeo-Yemeni Others Central Asian Bakhtiari Bukhara Kashkadarya Khorasani Shirvani Chadian Nigerian Sociological Bedouin Arabic Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Algerian Judeo-Egyptian Judeo-Iraqi Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Kjal Wqal Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Tunisene Judeo-Yemeni Adeni Beda Habban Sanʽani Creoles and pidgins Bimbashi Bongor Gulf Pidgin Jordanian Bengali Pidgin Juba Maridi Nubi Pidgin Madam Turku Academic Literature Names Linguistics Standard Arabic phonology Sun and moon letters Tajwid Imāla ʾIʿrāb (case) Grammar Triliteral root Mater lectionis IPA Quranic Arabic Corpus Calligraphy · Script Ajami script Diwani Hijazi script Jawi script Jeli Thuluth Kairouani Kufic Maghrebi Mashq Muhaqqaq Naskh (script) Nastaliq Rasm Ruqʿah script Shahmukhi Sini (script) Taliq script Tawqi Thuluth Technical Arabic keyboard Arabic script in Unicode ISO/IEC 8859-6 Windows-1256 MS-DOS codepages 708 709 710 711 720 864 MacArabic encoding Other Islam and Arabic language Italics indicate extinct languages Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left.

Category Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6vnjn
Cached time: 20250817183454
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.970 seconds
Real time usage: 1.155 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5973/1000000
Revision size: 28804/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 207557/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5221/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86559/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.600/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18002183/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  961.600      1 -total
 23.84%  229.286      1 Template:Infobox_language
 21.81%  209.723      1 Template:Infobox
 18.32%  176.168      2 Template:Reflist
 17.56%  168.848     48 Template:Lang
 15.78%  151.711      7 Template:Navbox
 11.25%  108.191      5 Template:Cite_journal
  7.59%   73.001      1 Template:Language_phonologies
  6.90%   66.312      1 Template:Short_description
  6.67%   64.172      1 Template:Arabic_language Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:547964:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817183454 and revision id 1301990182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classical_Arabic&oldid=1301990182 " Categories : Classical Arabic Arabic languages Classical languages Verb–subject–object languages Sacred languages Medieval languages Languages attested from the 7th century 7th-century establishments in Asia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with plain IPA Languages without Glottolog code Historical forms of languages with ISO codes Language articles with unreferenced extinction date This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 20:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classical Arabic 34 languages Add topic

