Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Editions 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Haly Abenragel 9 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Bahasa Melayu Русский کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab astrologer Complete Book on the Judgment of the Stars from 1523 Abū l-Ḥasan 'Alī ibn Abī l-Rijāl al-Shaybani [ 1 ] ( Arabic : أبو الحسن علي ابن أبي الرجال ) (commonly known in European languages as Haly , Hali , Albohazen Haly filii Abenragel or Haly Abenragel , from ibn Rijal ) was an Arab [ 2 ] astrologer of the 10th to 11th century CE / 4th to 5th century AH best known for his Kitāb al-bāri' fī aḥkām an-nujūm .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] He was a court astrologer to the Tunisian prince al-Mu'izz ibn Bâdis in the first half of the 11th century CE / 5th century AH. Haly died after 1037/428 in Kairouan in what is now Tunisia.

Preclarissimus liber completus in iudiciis astrorum ( Kitāb al-bāri' fi akhām an-nujūm ), 1485 Works [ edit ] His Kitāb al-bāri' fī aḥkām an-nujūm was translated by Yehudā ben Moshe into Old Castilian for Alfonso X of Castile in 1254 under the title El libro conplido en los iudizios de las estrellas ("The complete book on the judgment of the stars "). The only surviving manuscript of the Old Castilian translation is MS 3065 at the National Library in Madrid , which however only contains 5 of the 8 books of the complete Old Castilian translation.

[ 3 ] An edition created in 1523, created in Venice and presented in Latin, is held in the Qatar National Library .

[ 4 ] In 1485 at Venice a complete copy of the Old Castilian manuscript was translated into Latin and published by Erhard Ratdolt as Praeclarissimus liber completus in judiciis astrorum ("The very famous complete book on the judgment of the stars"). This printing (and later Latin versions) is commonly known as De iudiciis astrorum (or De judiciis astrorum ).

[ 3 ] His Tractatus de cometarum significationibus per xii signa zodiaci ( Treatise on the Significations of Comets in the twelve Signs of the Zodiac ) was printed in Nürnberg in 1563 as an addendum to Marcus Frytsch's Meteororum, hoc est, impressionum aerearum et mirabilium naturæ operum, loci ferè omnes ... Item catalogus prodigiorum atque ostentorum, tam cœlo quam in terra ... omnia ab authore recognita et locupletata. (Tractatus Albohazenhalii, filii Abenragelis, de cometarum significationibus per XII. signa Zodiaci.) [ 5 ] Editions [ edit ] Kitāb al-bāri' fi akhām an-nujūm (in Latin). Venezia: Erhard Ratdolt. 1485.

See also [ edit ] List of Arab scientists and scholars Alchabitius Biruni Judicial astrology References [ edit ] ^ Brockelmann, Carl (2016). History of the Arabic Written Tradition. BRILL. p. 233."Abu 'l- Hasan Ali b. Abi 'l-Rijal Abi'l-Rijál (the Abenragel of the Latins) al-Shaybáni al-Kātib al-Maghribi al-Qayrawāni, who may have taken partin al-Kuhi's observations in Baghdad." ^ Barnes, Robin Bruce (2016).

Astrology and Reformation . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199736058 .

^ a b c "Complete Book on the Judgment of the Stars" .

World Digital Library . 1485 . Retrieved 2013-07-14 .

^ "Complete Book on the Judgment of the Stars" .

World Digital Library . 1523 . Retrieved 2013-07-14 .

^ Fritsch, Marcus (1563).

" Treatise on the Significations of Comets in the twelve Signs of the Zodiac " . Retrieved 2017-11-07 .

External links [ edit ] De iudiciis astrorum, Basel, 1551; pdf format [ permanent dead link ] (106 MB) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 3 Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX This Tunisian biographical article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haly_Abenragel&oldid=1255099398 " Categories : 10th-century births 11th-century deaths Astrologers of the medieval Islamic world 11th-century people from Ifriqiya 11th-century astrologers Tunisian people stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 Latin-language sources (la) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links All stub articles This page was last edited on 3 November 2024, at 03:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haly Abenragel 9 languages Add topic

