Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Materials and equipment 3 Launch time, location, and uses 4 Environmental issues 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Weather balloon 32 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Català Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia High-altitude balloon to which meteorological instruments are attached "Sounding balloon" redirects here; not to be confused with observation balloon .

This article is about atmospheric and meteorological sounding balloons. For balloon space probes, see List of Solar System probes .

Transosonde ready for release Picture taken at approximately 30 km above Oregon using a 1,500 gram weather balloon Rawinsonde weather balloon just after launch. Notice a parachute in the center of the string and a small instrument box at the end. After release it measures many parameters. These include temperature, relative humidity , pressure, and wind speed and wind direction. This information is transmitted back to surface observers.

A weather balloon , also known as a sounding balloon , is a balloon (specifically a type of high-altitude balloon ) that carries instruments to the stratosphere to send back information on atmospheric pressure , temperature , humidity and wind speed by means of a small, expendable measuring device called a radiosonde . To obtain wind data, they can be tracked by radar , radio direction finding , or navigation systems (such as the satellite-based Global Positioning System , GPS).  Balloons meant to stay at a constant altitude for long periods of time are known as transosondes .  Weather balloons that do not carry an instrument pack are used to determine upper-level winds and the height of cloud layers.  For such balloons, a theodolite or total station is used to track the balloon's azimuth and elevation, which are then converted to estimated wind speed and direction and/or cloud height, as applicable.

Weather balloons are launched around the world for observations used to diagnose current conditions as well as by human forecasters and computer models for weather forecasting . Between 900 and 1,300 locations around the globe do routine releases, typically two or four times daily.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] History [ edit ] One of the first people to use weather balloons was the French meteorologist Léon Teisserenc de Bort . Starting in 1896 he launched hundreds of weather balloons from his observatory in Trappes , France. These experiments led to his discovery of the tropopause and stratosphere .

[ 5 ] Transosondes, weather balloons with instrumentation meant to stay at a constant altitude for long periods of time to help diagnose radioactive debris from atomic fallout, were experimented with in 1958.

[ 6 ] The drone technology boom has led to the development of weather drones since the late 1990s.

[ 7 ] These may begin to replace balloons as a more specific means for carrying radiosondes.

[ 8 ] Materials and equipment [ edit ] The balloon itself produces the lift , and is usually made of a highly flexible latex material, though chloroprene may also be used. The unit that performs the actual measurements and radio transmissions hangs at the lower end of the string, and is called a radiosonde . Specialized radiosondes are used for measuring particular parameters, such as determining the ozone concentration.

The balloon is usually filled with hydrogen , though helium – a more expensive, but viable option nonetheless – is also frequently used.  The ascent rate can be controlled by the amount of gas with which the balloon is filled, usually at around 300 metres per minute (980 ft/min).

[ 9 ] : 24–54 Weather balloons may reach altitudes of 40 km (25 mi) or more, limited by diminishing pressures causing the balloon to expand to such a degree (typically by a 100:1 factor) that it disintegrates. In this instance the instrument package is usually lost, [ 10 ] although a parachute may be employed to help in allowing retrieval of the instrument. Above that altitude sounding rockets are used to carry instruments aloft, and for even higher altitudes satellites are used.

Launch time, location, and uses [ edit ] A hydrogen filled balloon at Cambridge Bay Upper Air station, Nunavut, Canada Launch of wiki payload into stratosphere Weather balloons are launched around the world for observations used to diagnose current conditions as well as by human forecasters and computer models for weather forecasting . Between 900 and 1,300 locations around the globe do routine releases, two or four times daily, usually at 0000 UTC and 1200 UTC.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Some facilities will also do occasional supplementary special releases when meteorologists determine there is a need for additional data between the 12-hour routine launches in which time much can change in the atmosphere.  Military and civilian government meteorological agencies such as the National Weather Service in the US typically launch balloons, and by international agreements, almost all the data are shared with all nations.

Specialized uses also exist, such as for aviation interests, pollution monitoring, photography or videography, and research. Examples include pilot balloons (Pibal). Field research programs often use mobile launchers from land vehicles as well as ships and aircraft (usually dropsondes in this case). In recent years, weather balloons have also been used for scattering human ashes at high altitudes.
The weather balloon was also used to create the fictional entity 'Rover' during the production of the 1960s TV series The Prisoner in Portmeirion, Gwynedd, North Wales, UK in September 1966. This was retained in further scenes shot at MGM Borehamwood UK during 1966–67.

[ 11 ] Environmental issues [ edit ] While weather forecasting is increasingly reliant on satellites and radar technology, it still heavily involves the use of weather balloons. These devices, launched from thousands of stations worldwide, ascend into the atmosphere to collect meteorological data. The United States, for example, releases approximately 76,600 balloons annually (an average of around 210 per day), while Canada launches 22,000.

[ 12 ] Weather balloons, after reaching an altitude of approximately 35 kilometers, burst, releasing their instruments and the latex material they are made of. While the instruments are often recovered, the latex remains in the environment, posing a significant threat to marine ecosystems. Studies have shown that a substantial portion of weather balloons eventually end up in the ocean. For instance, one Australian researcher collected over 2,460 pieces of weather balloon debris from the Great Barrier Reef , estimating that up to 300 balloons per week may be released into the marine environment. This environmental impact underscores the need for sustainable alternatives in weather data collection.

[ 12 ] Scientists and environmentalists have raised concerns about weather balloons' environmental impact. The latex material, which can persist in the ocean for extended periods, can harm marine life, including sea turtles , birds, and fish. Efforts to minimize the environmental impact of weather balloons include developing biodegradable materials and improved recovery methods. However, the continued reliance on weather balloons for meteorological data challenges balancing the need for accurate weather forecasts with environmental sustainability.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Atmospheric sounding Ceiling balloon High-altitude balloon SCR-658 radar Skyhook balloon Timeline of hydrogen technologies High-altitude platform References [ edit ] ^ a b "NWS factsheet" . Archived from the original on 20 February 2016.

^ a b "Weather Facts: Radiosonde | weatheronline.co.uk" .

www.weatheronline.co.uk . Retrieved 6 April 2023 .

^ a b "Observations - Data - Modelling" .

public.wmo.int . 1 December 2015. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 .

^ a b WeatherSTEM.

"Upper-Air Observations" .

WeatherSTEM . Retrieved 6 April 2023 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1922).

"Teisserenc de Bort, Léon Philippe" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (12th ed.). London & New York: The Encyclopædia Britannica Company.

^ Staff (February 1958).

"Chief Special Projects Section: Dr. Lester Machta" (PDF) .

United States Weather Bureau . pp.

39– 41. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2012 .

^ Holland, G. J.; Webster, P. J.; Curry, J. A.; Tyrell, G.; Gauntlett, D.; Brett, G.; Becker, J.; Hoag, R.; Vaglienti, W. (1 May 2001).

"The Aerosonde Robotic Aircraft: A New Paradigm for Environmental Observations" .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

82 (5): 889– 902.

Bibcode : 2001BAMS...82..889H .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0477(2001)082<0889:TARAAN>2.3.CO;2 .

ISSN 0003-0007 .

^ "Drones May Replace Weather Balloons Soon" .

www.outlookindia.com/ . 8 June 2022 . Retrieved 7 November 2022 .

^ "FAA-H-8083-28A, Aviation Weather Handbook" .

Federal Aviation Administration . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ Dabberdt, W F; Shellhorn, R; Cole, H; Paukkunen, A; Horhammer, J; Antikainen, V (2003).

"Radiosondes" (PDF) . Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Paul-Davies, Steven (2002).

The Prisoner Handbook . London: Pan Books.

ISBN 978-0-230-53028-7 .

^ a b c Magazine, Hakai (11 October 2024).

"Weather Forecasting Is Deadly for Marine Wildlife" .

Hakai Magazine . Retrieved 14 October 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Weather balloon .

Atmospheric Soundings for Canada and the United States – University of Wyoming Balloon Lift With Lighter Than Air Gases Archived 24 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine – University of Hawaii Examples of Launches of Instrumented Balloons in Storms Archived 21 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine – NSSL Federal Meteorological Handbook No. 3 – Rawinsonde and Pibal Observations Kites and Balloons – NOAA Photo Library NASA Balloon Program Office – Wallops Flight Facility, Virginia National Science Digital Library: Weather Balloons – Lesson plan for middle school Pilot Balloon Observation Theodolites – Martin Brenner, CSULB StratoCat – Historical recompilation project on the use of stratospheric balloons in scientific research, the military field, and aerospace activity WMO spreadsheet of all Upper Air stations around the world (revised location September 2008) v t e Earth-based meteorological equipment and instrumentation Anemometer Atmometer Barograph Barometer Ceiling balloon Ceiling projector Ceilometer Dark adaptor goggles Dewcell Disdrometer Dropsonde Field mill Heat flux sensor Hygrometer Ice accretion indicator Lidar Lightning detector Nephelometer Nephoscope Pan evaporation Pyranometer Pyrheliometer Present weather sensor Radiosonde Rain gauge Snow gauge Snowboard Snow pillow SODAR Solarimeter Sounding rocket Stevenson screen Sunshine recorder Tethersonde Thermo-hygrograph Thermometer Tide gauge Transmissometer Weather balloon Weather buoy Weather radar Weather vane Whole sky camera Wind profiler Windsock v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Weather_balloon&oldid=1305312571 " Categories : Earth observation balloons Atmospheric sounding Meteorological instrumentation and equipment Scientific observation French inventions Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1922 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Commons link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Weather balloon 32 languages Add topic

