Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ecclesiastical history Toggle Ecclesiastical history subsection 2.1 Latin titular see 3 Main sights Toggle Main sights subsection 3.1 Amasra Castle 3.2 Fatih Mosque 3.3 Bird's Rock Road Monument 4 Coal mine and proposed power station 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Amasra 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Cebuano Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Кырык мары مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Нохчийн Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°44′58″N 32°23′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.74944°N 32.38639°E ﻿ / 41.74944; 32.38639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small Black Sea port town in Turkey Not to be confused with Asmara or Amasya .

Municipality in Bartın, Turkey Amasra Municipality View of Amasra Castle Amasra Location in Turkey Coordinates: 41°44′58″N 32°23′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.74944°N 32.38639°E ﻿ / 41.74944; 32.38639 Country Turkey Province Bartın District Amasra Government • Mayor Recai Çakır ( CHP ) Elevation 123 m (404 ft) Population (2021) [ 1 ] 6,098 Time zone UTC+3 ( TRT ) Postal code 74300 Area code 0378 Climate Cfb Website www .amasra .bel .tr Amasra (from Greek Amastris Ἄμαστρις, gen . Ἀμάστριδος) is a small Black Sea port town in the Bartın Province , Turkey . It is the seat of Amasra District .

[ 2 ] Its population is 6,098 (2021).

[ 1 ] The town today is much appreciated for its beaches and natural setting, which has made tourism the most important activity for its inhabitants. Amasra has two islands: the bigger one is called Büyük ada ('Great Island'), the smaller one Tavşan adası ('Rabbit Island'). It was annexed by the Ottoman Empire after the Siege of Amasra .

History [ edit ] Situated in the ancient region of Paphlagonia , the original city seems to have been called Sesamus (Greek: Σήσαμος), and it is mentioned by Homer [ 3 ] in conjunction with Cytorus .

Stephanus [ 4 ] says that it was originally called Cromna ( Ancient Greek : Κρῶμνα ); but in another place, [ 5 ] where he repeats the statement, he adds, as it is said; but some say that Cromna is a small place in the territory of Amastris, which is the true account. The place derived its name Amastris from Amastris , the niece of the last Persian king Darius III , who was the wife of Dionysius , tyrant of Heraclea , and after his death the wife of Lysimachus . Four small Ionian colonies, Sesamus, Cytorus, Cromna, also mentioned in the Iliad , [ 6 ] and Tium , were combined by Amastris, after her separation from Lysimachus, [ 7 ] to form the new community of Amastris, placed on a small river of the same name and occupying a peninsula.

[ 8 ] According to Strabo , Tium soon detached itself from the community, but the rest kept together, and Sesamus was the acropolis of Amastris. From this it appears that Amastris was really a confederation or union of three places, and that Sesamus was the name of the city on the peninsula. This may explain the fact that Mela [ 9 ] mentions Sesamus and Cromna as cities of Paphlagonia, while omitting Amastris.

[ 10 ] The territory of Amastris produced a great quantity of boxwood , which grew on the nearby Mount Cytorus . Its tyrant Eumenes presented the city of Amastris to Ariobarzanes of Pontus in c. 265–260 BC rather than submit it to domination by Heraclea, and it remained in the Pontic kingdom until its capture by Lucius Lucullus in 70 BC in the second Mithridatic War .

[ 11 ] The younger Pliny , when he was governor of Bithynia and Pontus , describes Amastris, in a letter to Trajan , [ 12 ] as a handsome city, with a very long open place ( platea ), on one side of which extended what was called a river, but in fact was a filthy, pestilent, open drain. Pliny obtained the emperor's permission to cover over this sewer. On a coin of the time of Trajan, Amastris has the title Metropolis . It continued to be a town of some note to the seventh century of our era. From Amasra got its name an important place of Constantinople, the Amastrianum .

Arrian writes that the Amastris was a Greek city, which had a port for ships. He also adds that it was 90 stadia from the river Parthenius and 60 stadia from the Erythini [ 13 ] The city was not abandoned in the Byzantine Era, when the acropolis was transformed into a fortress and the still surviving church was built. It was sacked by the Rus during the First Russo-Byzantine War in the 830s. Speros Vryonis states that in the 9th century a "combination of local industry, trade, and the produce of its soil made Amastris one of the more prosperous towns on the Black Sea." [ 14 ] In the 13th century Amastris exchanged hands several times, first, seized by a Georgian army, [ 15 ] led by David Komnenos , becoming a possession of the Empire of Trebizond in 1204, [ 16 ] then at some point in the next ten years being captured by the Seljuk Turks , until finally in 1261, in her bid to monopolize the Black Sea trade, the town came under the control of the Republic of Genoa . Genoese domination ended when the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II conquered the whole Anatolian shores of the Black Sea.

[ 17 ] The ancient Greek writer Myronianus ( Ancient Greek : Μυρωνιανὸς ), was from the Amastris.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Ecclesiastical history [ edit ] The bishopric of Amastris was established early: according to Eusebius , its congregation received a letter from the second-century bishop, Dionysius, Bishop of Corinth , wherein he names their bishop, one Palmas.

[ 20 ] The see was initially a suffragan of the metropolitan of Gangra , capital of the Roman province of Paphlagonia .

In the late 8th century its bishop obtained from the Byzantine Emperor its elevation to the rank of autocephalous archeparchy . It is listed as such in the Notitia Episcopatuum attributed to Basil the Armenian (c. 840) and in that of Leo VI the Wise (early 10th century).

In the middle of the 10th century, it obtained the rank of metropolitan see without suffragans, a rank it held until, due to the diminution in the number of Christians in the area, it was suppressed.

From the 14th century to the second half of the 15th, the town was also the seat of a bishopric of the Latin Church .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Latin titular see [ edit ] No longer a residential bishopric, Amastris (Curiate Italian Amastri ) is today listed by the Catholic Church as a titular see.

[ 24 ] The diocese was nominally restored in the 19th century as a Latin Catholic titular bishopric and had the following incumbents of the episcopal (lowest) rank : Titular Michael Francis Howley (1892.04.28 – 1895.01.05) as Apostolic Vicar of Western Newfoundland (Canada) (1892.04.28 – 1895.01.05), later Bishop of Saint John’s, Newfoundland (Canada) (1895.01.05 – 1904.02.08), promoted first Metropolitan Archbishop of Saint John’s, Newfoundland (1904.02.08 – 1914.10.15) Titular Bishop Antonio Maria Roveggio, Comboni Missionaries (F.S.C.I.) (1895.02.08 – 1902.05.02), Apostolic Vicar of Central Africa (Anglo-Egyptian Sudan) (1895.02.08 – death 1902.05.02) Titular Bishop John Joseph O’Gorman, Holy Ghost Fathers (C.S.Sp.) (1903.09.14 – death 1935.04.13), as Apostolic Vicar of Sierra Leone (Sierra Leone) (1903.11.09 – 1932) In 1929 it was promoted to titular archbishopric . It is vacant as such since decades, having had the following incumbents of the archiepiscopal (intermediary) rank : Titular Archbishop Efrem Hykary (1936.07.22 – death 1958.02.09), as Patriarchal Vicar of Antioch of the Syriacs (Lebanon) (1936.07.22 – 1958.02.09) Titular Archbishop Teopisto Valderrama Alberto (1959.09.07 – 1965.04.06), as Coadjutor Archbishop of Caceres (Philippines) (1959.09.07 – 1965.04.06), later succeeded as Metropolitan Archbishop of Caceres (1965.04.06 – retired 1983.10.20) Main sights [ edit ] With its architectural heritage, Amasra is a member of the Norwich -based European Association of Historic Towns and Regions.

[ 25 ] Archaeological Museum:  there is a fine medium-sized archaeological museum by the sea with remains from both land and underwater.  Of particular interest is a statue of the snake god Glykon, a fraudulent creation of a local entrepreneur during Roman imperial times.

Panoramic view of the town Amasra Castle [ edit ] Amasra Castle was built during the Roman period. The walls of the castle were built by the Byzantines. The front walls and gates were built by the Genoese in the 14th and 15th centuries.

[ 26 ] Though located on a narrow peninsula, a tunnel under the castle leads to a fresh water pool.

Fatih Mosque [ edit ] It was originally built as a Byzantine church in the 9th century AD. The church narthex section consists of three parts. After the Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II conquered Amasra in 1460, it was converted to a mosque. It is open to prayers. There is also a chapel on the same street but it is closed to prayers since 1930.

[ 26 ] Amasra church mosque Bird's Rock Road Monument [ edit ] Bird's Rock Road Monument was created between AD 41-54 by the order of Bithynia et Pontus Governor Gaius Julius Aquila. It was a resting place and monument. At the time when Claudius was the Roman Emperor, Aquila was the commander of the building army in the eastern provinces.

[ 26 ] It is located a little outside Amasra, and is easily accessed by steps leading from the roadside.

Bird's Rock Road Monument Coal mine and proposed power station [ edit ] In 2009, a coal-fired power station of 2640 MWe (or 1200 MWe) was proposed by a subsidiary of Hattat Holding , [ 27 ] but after concerns were raised about the effect on air quality, [ 28 ] marine ecology, [ 29 ] and ash [ 30 ] it was not built. They now propose just a coal mine.

[ 31 ] References [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Amasra .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amasra .

^ a b "Address-based population registration system (ADNKS) results dated 31 December 2021" (XLS) (in Turkish).

TÜİK . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ İlçe Belediyesi , Turkey Civil Administration Departments Inventory. Retrieved 30 January 2023.

^ Homer, Iliad , ii. 853 ^ Stephanus, Ethnica , s.v. "Amastris" ^ Stephanus, Ethnica , s.v. "Cromna" ^ Homer, ii. 855 ^ Memnon , History of Heraclea , 5 , 9 ^ Strabo, Geography , xii. 3 ^ Pomponius Mela, De chorographia , i. 93 ^ Pliny the Elder , Natural History , vi. 2 ^ Appian , The Foreign Wars , "The Mithridatic Wars", 82 ^ Pliny the Younger, Letters , x. 99 ^ Arrian, Periplus of the Euxine Sea, § 20 ^ Vryonis, The decline of medieval Hellenism in Asia Minor: and the process of Islamization from the eleventh through the fifteenth century , (Berkeley: University of California, 1971), p. 14 ^ Basil Ezosmodzghuari, "Tskhovrebay Mepet-mepisa Tamarisi", Kartlis Tskhovreba , (2008), p. 507 ^ Anthony Bryer, "David Komnenos and Saint Eleutherios", Archeion Pontou , 42 (1988-1989), p. 179 ^ Franz Babinger dates the conquest to autumn of 1460, although Halil İnalcık would date its capture to A.H. 863 (AD 1458/1459). Babinger, Mehmed the Conqueror and his Time (Princeton: University Press, 1978), p. 181 and note.

^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Philosophers, §4.14 ^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives of the Philosophers, §5.36 ^ Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiastica , 4.23 ^ Michel Lequien, Oriens christianus in quatuor Patriarchatus digestus , Paris 1740, Vol. I, coll. 561-566 ^ Jean Richard, La Papauté et les missions d'Orient au Moyen Age (XIII-XV siècles) , École Française de Rome, 1977, pp. 236 and 246 ^ Siméon Vailhé, v.

Amastris , in Dictionnaire d'Histoire et de Géographie ecclésiastiques , vol. XII, Paris 1953, coll. 971-973 ^ Annuario Pontificio 2013 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2013 ISBN 978-88-209-9070-1 ), p. 830 ^ "Turkey" . European Association of Historic Towns and Regions. Archived from the original on 10 September 2008 . Retrieved 13 April 2012 .

^ a b c Local signage ^ "Hema Enerji Sanayi ve Tic.A.Ş." Archived from the original on 7 March 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2010 .

^ "On new thermal power plant investment in Amasra" .

Energy Newsletter TURKEY . 18 April 2010.

^ "New Thermal Power Plant investment 4x660 MWe in Amasra County of BARTIN Province" .

Energy Newsletter TURKEY . 26 December 2009.

^ "Amasra'yı Seviyorum, Termik Santral İstemiyorum!.. - Amasra" . Archived from the original on 3 August 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2010 .

^ "Hattat Holding'ten yeni hamle! Türkiye ekonomisi için, çok büyük bir katkı olacak!" .

İMZA GAZETESİ - ZONGULDAK HABER - SON DAKİKA GELİŞMELERİ ZONGULDAK | ZONGULDAK HABERLERİ (in Turkish) . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Amastris" from the Catholic Encyclopedia (1913) GCatholic Richard Stillwell, William L. MacDonald, Marian Holland McAllister (editors); The Princeton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites , "Amastris" , Princeton , (1976) This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857). " Amastris ".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

v t e Ancient settlements in Turkey Aegean Abbassus Abrostola Achaion Limen Acharaca Acmonia Acrassus Adramyttium Agatheira Aegae Airai Aizanoi Alabanda Alia Alinda Allianoi Almura Amnista Amorium Amos Amynanda Amyzon Anaua Anineta Annaea Antandrus Antioch on the Maeander Apamea in Phrygia Aphrodisias Apollonia in Mysia Apollonia Salbaces Apollonis Apollonos Hieron Appia Appolena Aragokome Araukome Arcadiopolis Arilla Aroma Aspaneus Astragon Astyra near Adramyttium Astyra near Pergamon Astyria Atarneus Atarneus sub Pitanem Attea Attuda Augustopolis Aulae Aurelia Neapolis Aureliopolis in Lydia Aurokra Bageis Bargasa Bargasa in northern Caria Bargylia Beudos Beycesultan Birgena Blaundus Bonitai Boukolion Boutheia Briula Bruzus Bybassus Cadi Callipolis Caloe Canae Carene Carmylessus Carura Caryanda Castabus Casystes Cedreae Celaenae Ceramus Chalcetor Choria Chrysaoris Chytrium Cidramus Cindye Cisthene Clannuda Claros Colophon Colossae Conium Coryphas Cybeleia Cyllandus Cyme Daldis Dareioukome Dideiphyta Didyma Digda Dioclea Dionysiopolis Dios Hieron in Ionia Dios Hieron in Lydia Dioskome Docimium Doroukome Eibeos Eiokome Elaea Eluza Embatum Emoddi Ephesus Erines Erythrae Erythras Etsyena Euaza Eukarpia Euhippe Eumeneia Euromus Euthenae Euxine Gambrium Gerga Gergitha Gerriadai Glauke Gryneium Halicarnassus Halisarna Harpasa Helos Heraclea at Latmus Heraclea in Aeolis Heraclea in Lydia Heraclea Salbace Hermocapelia Hierapolis Hieropolis Hierocaesarea Homadena Hydai Hydas Hydissus Hygassos Hyllarima Hypaepa Hypokremnos Hyrcanis Iasos Iaza Idyma Ioniapolis Ioudda Ipsus Isinda in Ionia Iskome Kadyie Kaira Kalabantia Kasara Kasossos Kaualena Kaunos Kaymakçı Tepe Kilaraza Kildara Klazomenai Kleimaka Kleros Politike Knidos Koddinou Petra Koraia Korakoe Koresa Kouara Kyllene Kymnissa Kys Labraunda Lagina Lalandos Lamyana Lankena Laodicea on the Lycus Larisa in Caria Larisa in Ionia Larisa in Lydia Larissa Phrikonis Larymna Lasnedda Latmus Lebedus Leimon Leucae Leucophrys Limantepe Lobolda Loryma Lunda Lydae Lyrna Lysimachia Madnasa Maeandropolis Magnesia ad Sipylum Magnesia on the Maeander Maiboza Maionia in Lydia Malene Marathesium Mastaura Meiros Meiros Megale Melampagos Meloukome Metropolis in Lydia Metropolis in southern Phrygia Miletus Mylasa Mobolla Mokolda Mossyna Mostene Motella Myloukome Myndus Myrina Myus Nais Nasos Naulochon Naulochus Naxia Neapolis Neonteichos Nisyra Notion Nymphaeum Nysa on the Maeander Odon Oenoanda Olaeis Olymos Oroanna Orthoisa Ortygia Otrus Palaemyndus Palaeopolis Panasion Panormus near Miletus Panormus near Halicarnassus Parsada Parthenium Passala Passanda Pedasa Peltae Pepuza Pergamon Perperene Philadelphia in Lydia Phocaea Phoenix in Caria Physcus Phyteia Pidasa Pinara Pisilis Pisye Pitane Pladasa Plarasa Polichna in Ionia Polichne in Ionia Polybotus Pordoselene Priene Prymnessus Pteleum Pydnae Pygela Pyrnus Pyrrha Saouenda Sardis Satala in Lydia Sebaste in Phrygia Sebastopolis in Caria Setae Side in Caria Sidussa Silandus Sillyos Sion Skolopoeis Smyrna Soa Spore Stadia Stectorium Stratonicea in Lydia Stratonicea in Caria Strobilos Syangela Symbra Synaus Syneta Synnada Syrna Tabae Tabala Tateikome Taza Teichiussa Telandrus Temenothyra Temnos Tempsis Tendeba Teos Termera Teuthrania Thasthara Theangela Thebe Hypoplakia Thebes Thera Thyaira Thyatira Thymbrara Thyssanus Tisna Tlos in Caria Tomara Traianopolis Trapezopolis Trarium Triopium Tripolis on the Meander Troketta Tyanollos Tymion Tymnos Ula Uranium Zemmeana Zingotos Kome Black Sea Abonoteichos Aegialus Aiginetes Alaca Höyük Amasia Amastris Ancon Anticinolis Argyria Armene Athenae Berissa Bonita Boon Cabira Cales Callistratia Carambis Carissa Carussa Cerasus Chadisia Cinolis Cizari Colonia in Armenia Colussa Comana in the Pontus Coralla Cordyle Cratia Crenides Cromen Cromna Cyptasia Cytorus Dia Diacopa Elaeus Endeira Erythini Euchaita Eusene Gadilon Garius Garzoubanthon Gaziura Gozalena Hadrianopolis in Paphlagonia Hattusa Heraclea Pontica Heracleium Hermonassa Hieron Oros Hüseyindede Tepe Hyssus Ibora Ischopolis Karza Kelesa Kimista Laodicea Pontica Libiopolis Lillium Metroon Mokata Naustathmus Nerik Nicopolis Ophis Oxinas Patara Pharnacia Phazemon Philocaleia Pida Pimolisa Polemonium Pompeiopolis Potami Prusias ad Hypium Pteria in Paphlagonia Salatiwara Samuha Sandaraca Sapinuwa Satala Saurania Sebastopolis in Pontus Stephane Syderos Themiscyra Thymena Timolaeum Tium Tripolis Virasia Yazılıkaya Zagorus Zaliche Zephyrium in Paphlagonia Ziporea Central Anatolia Abouadeineita Alişar Hüyük Amblada Anadynata Anastasiopolis Andabalis Anisa Anniaca Antoniopolis Anzoulada Aquae Saravenae Aralla Arasaxa Archalla Ardistama Ariaramneia Ariarathia Armaxa Artiknos Aspenzinsos Astra Atenia Balbissa Balgatia Barate Bathys Rhyax Binbirkilise Blucium Borissos Campae Camuliana Candara Carus Vicus Çatalhöyük Cimiata Ciscissus Cinna Claneus Comitanassus Congustus Corna Corniaspa Coropassus Cotenna Cybistra Cyzistra Dadastana Dasmenda Derbe Diocaesarea Doara Dometiopolis Dorylaeum Ecdaumava Ecobriga Ergobrotis Euaissa Eudocia (Cappadocia) Eudocia (Phrygia) Eulepa Faustinopolis Germa Gorbeus Gordium Hadrianopolis in Phrygia Heraclea Cybistra Herpha Hieropotamon Homana Hyde Ilistra Irenopolis Isauropolis Juliopolis Kaman-Kalehöyük Kanotala Karbala Keissia Kerkenes Kilistra Kindyria Kobara Kodylessos Korama Koron Kültepe (Kanesh) Lageina Lamatorma Laodicea Combusta Laroumada Lauzadus Limnae Lystra Malandasa Malus in Galatia Malus in Phrygia Meloë Metropolis in northern Phrygia Midaeium Mistea Mnizus Mokissos Mourisa Moutalaske Musbanda Myrika Nakoleia Nazianzus Nitazi Nora Nyssa Ochras Olosada Orcistus Papirion Parnassus Pedachtoë Pedaia Peium Perta Pessinus Pharax Phlara Pillitokome Pissia Pithoi Pontanena Posala Pteria Purushanda Pyrgoi Sadagolthina Salamboreia Salarama Sasima Savatra Sbida Sedasa Senzousa Sereana Sibora Sidamaria Skandos Soanda Soandos Sora Takourtha Tavium Thebasa Thouththourbia Tiberiopolis Trocmades Tyana Tynna Tyriaeum Vasada Verinopolis Zeita Zizima Eastern Anatolia Altıntepe Ani Arsamosata Cafer Höyük Camachus Citharizum Dadima Justinianopolis Melid Sugunia Theodosiopolis Tushpa Marmara Abarnis Abydos Achaiion Achilleion Ad Statuas Adrasteia Aegospotami Agora Aianteion in Thrace Aianteion in the Troad Ainos Alexandria Troas Alopeconnesus Ammoi Amycus Anaplous Apamea Myrlea Aphrodisias Apollonia on the Rhyndacus Aprus Apsoda Arbeila Argiza Argyria Argyronion Argyropolis Arisba Artace Artaiouteichos Artanes Assos Astacus Astyra in Troad Athyras Aureliane Aureliopolis Baradendromia Baris Basilica Therma Basilinopolis Bathonea Bathys Limen Beodizo Bergule Birytis Bisanthe Bitenas Bithynium Blachernae Bolos Boradion Brunca Burtudizon Bythias Byzantium Byzapena Caenophrurium Callum Calpe Canopus Cardia Cebrene Cenchreae Cenon Gallicanon Chalcaea Chalcedon Charax Charmidea Chelae on the Black Sea Chelae on the Asian coast of the Bosphorus Chelae on the European coast of the Bosphorus Choiragria Chryse Chrysopolis Cius Clitae Cobrys Cocylium Colla Colonae Cremaste Crenides Cressa Crithote Cypasis Cypsela Cyzicus Dadokome Dacibyza Damalis Daphne Mainomene Daphnus Dardanus Dascylium Dascylium in Bithynia Dekaton in Bithynia Dekaton in Thrace Delkos Delphin Deris Desa Didymateiche Diolkides Drabus Drizipara/Drusipara Eirakla Elaea in Bithynia Elaeus Elekosmioi Embolos Ergasteria Eribolum Gargara Gentinos Gergis Germa Germanicopolis Hadriani ad Olympum Hadriania Hadrianotherae Halone Hamaxitus Harpagion Hebdomon Helenopolis/Drepanum Heracleium Hermaion Hieria Hierion Iasonion Ide Ilieon Kome Kabia Kalamos Kalasyrta Kale Peuke Kalos Agros Kampos Kassa Katapaspanas Kepos Kizoura Koila Kolonai Kosilaos Koubaita Kyparodes Kypra Lamponeia Lampsacus Larisa in Troad Lasthenes Leptoia Liada Libum Libyssa Limnae in Bithynia Limnae in Thrace Linus Lupadium Lygos Lysimachia Madytus Mantineion Marpessos Miletopolis Mocasura Mochadion Modra Morzapena Mossynea Moukaporis Myrileion Narco Nassete Nausikleia Nausimachion Neandreia Neapolis on the Bosphorus Neapolis on the Thracian Chersonese Neonteichos Nerola Nicomedia Oka Ontoraita Ophryneion Orestias Orni Ostreodes Pactya Paeon Paesus Palodes Panion Pantichium Parabolos Parium Paulines Pegae in Mysia Pegae in Thrace Pege Pentephyle Percote Pericharaxis Perinthus Petrozetoi Pharmakia Phidalia Petra Phiela Philia Phosphorus Pionia Pitheci Portus Placia Ploketta Poemanenum Poleatikon Polychron Polymedium Potamoi Potamonion Praenetus Pratomysia Prepa Priapus Prindea Proconnesus Proochthoi Prusa Psarela Psyllium Pyrrhias Cyon Pytheion Rhebas Rhegion Rhesion Rhoiteion Rouphinianai Salmydessus Sangarus Scamandria Scamandrus Scepsis Scylace Scylla Selymbria Semystra Serrion Teichos Sestos Sigeion Sirkanos Smintheion Soka Strobilos Sykai Syllanta Tarpodizo Tarsus in Bithynia Tattaios Tenba Terbos Tesderamoska Tetrakomia Tipaso Tragasai Thynias Traron Tricomia in Bithynia Troy ( Hisarlik ) Tyrodiza Tzurulum Urisio Utsurgae Zeleia Mediterranean Acalissus Acarassus Adada Adrasus Aegae Agrae Alalakh Amelas Anabura in Pisidia Anazarbus Anchiale Andeda Andriaca Anemurium Ano Kotradis Antigonia Antioch on the Orontes Antioch of Pisidia Antiochia Lamotis Antioch on the Cragus Antioch on the Pyramis Antiphellus Aperlae Aphrodisias of Cilicia Apollonia in Lycia Arabissus Araxa Ariassus Arima Arnabanda Arneae Arsada Arsinoe Artanada Arycanda Aspendos Augai Augusta Aulae Aunesis Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing Balbura Baris Bindaios Bubon Cabassus Cadrema Cadyanda Callimache Calynda Carallia Carmylessus Casae Castabala Ceretapa Cestrus Charadrus Choma Cibyra Mikra Claudiopolis Colybrassus Comama Comana in Cappadocia Comba Conana Coracesium Corycium Antrum Corycus (Kızkalesi) Corydala Cremna Cretopolis Crya Cyaneae Cyrrhus Daedala Dalisandus in Isauria Dalisandus in Pamphylia Damasei Dias Diocaesarea Domuztepe Elaiussa Sebaste Elbessos Emirzeli Epiphania Erymna Etenna Eudocia (Lycia) Eudocias (Pamphylia) Flaviopolis Gagae Gözlükule Hacilar Hadrianopolis in Pisidia Halae Hamaxia Hierapolis Hippucome Holmi Hyia Idebessos Idyros Iotape Irenopolis Isaura Nea Isaura Palaea Isba Isinda in Lycia Isinda in Pisidia Issus Istlada Juliosebaste Kalanthia Kalelibelen Kandyba Kanytelis Karakabaklı Karatepe Karkabo Kastellon Kendema Keraia Kibyra Kiphisos Kirkota Kitanaura Kodroula Kolbasa Korasion Korma Kynosarion Laertes Lagbe Lamos Lebessus Legeita Limnae in Pamphylia Limnae in Pisidia Limyra Lissa Lycae Lyrbe Lysinia Magarsa Magastara Magydus Mallus Malus in Pisidia Mampsoukrenai Mamure Castle Manava Mandane Marciana Marmara (Mnara) Mastaura Meloë Melanippe Meriana Mezgitkale Moatra Mopsucrene Mopsuestia Morka Moron Hydor Moumoustra Mylae Mylios Myra Myriandus Nagidos Nauloi Neapolis in Pisidia Nephelis Nisa Octapolis Olba Olbasa Olbia Olympus Öküzlü Onobara Orokenda Otanada Ouerbe Padyandus Palaeopolis Panemotichus Panhormus Pargais Parlais Patara Pednelissus Perga Perminounda Phaselis Phellus Philadelphia in Cilicia Philaea Phoenicus Phoenix in Lycia Pisarissos Pisurgia Placoma Platanus Podalia Pogla Prostanna Pseudokorasion Ptolemais Rhodiapolis Rhoscopus Rhosus Rygmanoi Sabandus Sagalassos Sandalium Saraganda Sebeda Seleucia in Pamphylia Seleucia Pieria Seleucia Sidera Selge Selinus Seroiata Serraepolis Sia Sibidounda Sibyla Side Siderus Sidyma Sillyon Simena Sinda Siricae Soli Solyma Sozopolis Sura Syca Syedra Takina Tapureli Tardequeia Tarsus Teimiussa Tell Judaidah Tell Tayinat Telmessos Telmessos (Caria) Tenedos Termessos Tetrapyrgia in Cappadocia Tetrapyrgia in Pamphylia Titiopolis Tityassus Tlos Toriaeum Tragalassus Trebendae Trebenna Trysa Tyberissus Tyinda Tymandus Tynada Typallia Xanthos Yanıkhan Yumuktepe Zenopolis in Isauria Zenopolis in Lycia Zephyrium on the Calycadnus Southeastern Anatolia Amida Antioch in the Taurus Antioch in Mesopotamia (Constantia) Apamea on the Euphrates Carcathiocerta Carchemish Çayönü Dabanas Dara Doliche Edessa Göbekli Tepe Hallan Çemi Tepesi Harran Khashshum Kussara Matiate Nevalı Çori Nicopolis in Cilicia Nisibis Sakçagözü Sam'al Samosata Sareisa Seleucia at the Zeugma Sitai Sultantepe Tille Tushhan Urima Urshu Zeugma v t e Amasra District Municipalities Amasra Villages Acarlar Ahatlar Akkonak Aliobası Bostanlar Çakrazboz Çakrazova Çakrazşeyhler Çanakçılar Cumayanı Esenler Göçkün Göçkündemirci Gömü Hatipler İnciğez İnpiri Kalaycı Karakaçak Kazpınarı Kocaköy Makaracı Saraydüzü Şenyurt Şükürler Tarlaağzı Topallar Topderesi Yahyayazıcılar Yukarısal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Kulturenvanteri monument NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s4l4n
Cached time: 20250817083916
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.772 seconds
Real time usage: 1.028 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5421/1000000
Revision size: 17211/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152882/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12030/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72460/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.412/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24507519/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  739.458      1 -total
 28.42%  210.160      1 Template:Infobox_Turkey_place
 27.87%  206.098      1 Template:Infobox_settlement
 23.78%  175.838      1 Template:Infobox
 16.68%  123.342      1 Template:Reflist
 13.91%  102.893      2 Template:Langx
 13.37%   98.885      7 Template:Cite_web
 12.65%   93.509      2 Template:Navbox
 11.74%   86.777      1 Template:Former_settlements_in_Turkey
  7.92%   58.577      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2597532:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817083916 and revision id 1305462030. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amasra&oldid=1305462030 " Categories : Amasra Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Turkey Greek colonies in Pontus Populated places in Bartın Province Black Sea port cities and towns in Turkey Populated coastal places in Turkey Genoese colonies Amasra District District municipalities in Turkey Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRG This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 05:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amasra 33 languages Add topic

