Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prophecies Toggle Prophecies subsection 1.1 Prelude 1.2 Arrival 1.3 Dominance 1.4 Death of Sufyani 2 Claimants 3 Skepticism 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sufyani 5 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی پنجابی Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Evil figure in Islamic eschatology Part of a series on Shia Islam Beliefs and practices Monotheism Holy Books Prophethood Succession to Muhammad Imamate Ismaili Twelver Zaydi Angels Judgment Day Mourning of Muharram Intercession Clergy The Four Companions Arbaʽeen Pilgrimage Days of remembrance Ashura Arba'een Mawlid Eid al-Fitr Eid al-Adha Eid al-Ghadir Mourning of Muharram Omar Koshan History Verse of purification Two weighty things Mubahala Khumm Fatimah's house First Fitna Second Fitna Battle of Karbala Origin Persecution Branches and sects Ja'fari Akhbari Usuli Shaykhi Zaydi Isma'ili Musta'li Tayyibi Dawoodi Bohra Progressive Hebtiahs Bohra Atba-i-Malak Bohra Sulaymani Bohra Alavi Bohra Qutbi Bohra Hafizi Nizari Khoja Satpanth Ghulat Alawi Alevi Bektashi Bektashism and folk religion Qizilbash Ishiki Extinct Shi'a sects Ahl al-Kisa Muhammad Ali Fatima Hasan Husayn Holy women Fatima Khadija bint Khuwaylid Umm Salama Zaynab bint Ali Umm Kulthum bint Ali Umm al-Banin Fatima bint Hasan Ruqayya bint Husayn Rubab Shahrbanu Fatima bint Musa Hakimah Khātūn Narjis Fatimah bint Asad Umm Farwah bint al-Qasim Ruqayya bint Ali Sayyida Nafisa Shia Islam portal v t e Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e The Sufyani ( Arabic : السفیاني ) is a figure in Islamic eschatology who is usually portrayed in hadiths as a tyrant who will spread corruption and mischief. According to Shia Hadith , the Sufyani will rise in the month of Rajab .

[ 1 ] Reports about the Sufyani are found also found in Sunni Hadith .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Sufyani is not to be confused with another figure of the end times, the Dajjal .

[ 4 ] It is said that he: will kill children and rip out the bellies of women, murder those from the household of the Prophet, and will rule over Syria .

It is also said that when the Mahdi appears, the Sufyani will send an army to seize and kill him, but, when the Sufyani and his army reach the desert of Bayda , they would be swallowed up .

[ 5 ] However, some mostly Sunni sources claim Hadith describing the Sufyani are unreliable, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] based on a "garbled version" of a legend "fabricated by traditionists with Shia and pro- 'Abbasid sentiments".

[ 8 ] Others reverse his role as an evil-doer, describing him as an ally not an enemy of the Mahdi.

[ 9 ] Prophecies [ edit ] Prelude [ edit ] Before the Sufyani appears, a sedition will arise in the Maghreb and spread in every direction such that no party or group could protect itself from it.

Disorder, strife, and fear will emerge in the Magrib (west)... Strife will proliferate.

[ 10 ] A kind of corruption will surface from which no party will be able to protect itself, and spread immediately in every direction. This situation will persist until one comes and says: "O people, from now on your leader is Imam Mahdi(as)." [ 11 ] Later the sedition which started in the west will arrive in Shaam ( Levant ): two banners will fight for control over the region; fighting until their armies are exhausted.

Arrival [ edit ] It is said that following these events, the Sufyani will appear in Damascus , and that he will start an uprising in the dry valley of Transjordan and move to seize Damascus ; it is said that he will gain much support and that he will advance to capture the rest of Syria, defeating the two other competing forces. It is said that once he captures the five districts of Shaam , he will send armies to Iraq .

Abu Hurayrah narrates that the Prophet said: A man will emerge from the depths of Damascus. He will be called Sufyani. Most of those who follow him will be from the tribe of Kalb. He will kill by ripping the stomachs of women and even kill the children. A man from my family will appear in the Haram, the news of his advent will reach the Sufyani and he will send to him one of his armies. He (referring to the Mahdi) will defeat them. They will then travel with whoever remains until they come to a desert and they will be swallowed. None will be saved except the one who had informed the others about them.

[ 12 ] Nu'aym bin Hammad quotes Khalid bin Ma'dan as saying, "The Sufyani will emerge with three staffs in his hand. Anyone whom he strikes with them will die." Dominance [ edit ] It is said that the Sufyani will be followed, for the most part, by the tribe of Banu Kalb , and will fight with anyone daring to oppose him. Injustice will rule the day and the Sufyani's disregard for life will extend to women and children. The tribe of Qays will rise up against him; however, they will not succeed, and he will slaughter all of them. One of the Sufyani’s wonders consists of his staffs, which would kill anyone when he strikes them.

It is also said that the Sufyani's army will go to Kufa , a city in Iraq , and from there, he will launch an attack against the Khurasan . At the Gate of Istakhr , Shu'ayb bin Salih and the Hashimites will join forces and engage his army. The battle will cost many lives and Sufyani will suffer a temporary defeat. It is at this time that a yearning for the Mahdi's appearance becomes universal.

It is also said that the army of the Sufyani will march from the Iraq to seize the Mahdi. However, when they reach the desert near Dhi Hulayfah, the ground will swallow them up. Two will escape to convey the news, but even when he learns of the occurrence, he will not be deterred. Some people from the Quraysh escape to Constantinople , which will not be under Muslim control. The Sufyani will ask for their return, and when they arrive, they and their allies will be killed.

Death of Sufyani [ edit ] Main article: Khasf al-Bayda According to prophecies, when the Sufyani learns of the Mahdi , he and his army will go towards Iraq to attack Mahdi . When the army enters the territory of Bayda , the Earth will consume his army except 2 or 3 individuals.

[ 13 ] In regards to the event of Khasf-al-Bayda, diverse Hadiths describe the size of his army.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Some sources say that the army  Sufyani will number 12,000; [ 18 ] [ 19 ] while some say 170,000 [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and some sources say 300,000 [ 22 ] Shia commentator Shaikh Tabarsi interprets Quran verse 34:51 concerning the fate of the army of the Sufyani, referring to it as the army of the desert of Bayda , where the earth will swallow them .

[ 5 ] Claimants [ edit ] At least nine figures revolted in the Levant using Sufyani as their title between 749 and 1413 CE. The first one was Ziad ibn Abdollah ibn Yazid ibn Muawiah ibn Abi Sufyan who revolted against Abbasids . The second Sufyani revolted in 754. Abu Harb al-Muburqa claimed the mantle about one hundred years later. In 1413, someone used this title and revolted against the Mamluk Sultanate . He tried to exactly follow the Hadiths, but Mamluks suppressed and killed him.

[ 23 ] Skepticism [ edit ] On some of the details of the Sufyani tale, scholar Muhammad Benshili casts doubt, stating, it is not possible to determine whether he will send two armies against the Mahdi or only one, or if he himself will be swallowed up with his troops or remain in Baghdad.

[ 24 ] Going beyond details to essence, at least one source (the Salafi fatwa site IslamQA.info ) considers the hadith of Sufyani unsound, quoting Al-Albani (1914-1999) as declaring it munkar (going against another sahih hadith and reported to have a weak narrator) and citing imperfections in the isnad .

[ 6 ] Ibn ‘Uthaymeen also considered hadith of Sufyaani as weak narration.

[ 25 ] (Mansour Leghaei also has his doubts about the veracity of the story.

[ 7 ] Scholar Wilferd Madelung writes that the prophesy of the Sufyani "as the rival and opponent of the Mahdi, has repeatedly attracted the attention of modern scholars", who trace it not to divine revelation but to enemies of the Abbasid dynasty and their various hopes that some "member of the Sufyinid branch of the house of Umayy" would lead an overthrow of the Abbasids and restore the Umayyad dynasty . Supporters of Abbasid dynasty then turned this into a prophesy of an AntiChrist figure who would kill good Muslims.

"... The Syrians refused to admit the death of Abi Muhammad and believed that he was hiding in the mountains of al-Tā'if , from where he would reappear in triumph, a belief presumably patterned upon the Kaysini belief about Muhammad b.

al-Ḥanafiyya . They created a legend with purely Syrian elements about him. Some of these are still recognizable in the garbled version fabricated by traditionists with Shi'ite and pro- 'Abbasid sentiments in which he was transformed from a Syrian hero into a figure resembling the Dajjal ." [ 8 ] William McCants also finds a connection between Shia historical anger and the prophecy of an apocalyptic enemy named Sufyani. He writes that the Sufyani is alleged in-hadith to descend from Abu Sufyan, whose son fought Muhammad's son-in-law, Ali , for control of the Islamic empire. Ibn Abu Sufyan eventually became caliph and established the Umayyad dynasty, but followers of "the losing side", who thought Ali should be Caliph Shia and "began circulating words of the Prophet prophesying the new dynasty's downfall at the hands of the Mahdi", quoting one prophecy as saying: "When the Sufyani reaches Kufa [a city in Iraq] and kills the supporters of the family of Muhammad, the Mahdi will come," [ 9 ] In contrast, McCants writes that while Sunnis also have prophecies about a Sufyani, some include him in a heroic mode, "fighting on the side of the Mahdi against his enemies: 'The Sufyani and the Mahdi will come forth like two race horses. The Sufyani will subdue (the region) that is next to him, and the Mahdi will subdue (the region) next to him.'"  McCants quotes Adnan al-Aroor , a "popular Syrian Salafi cleric", hoping for the appearance of the Sufyani to lead the  Sunni rebels to victory in the Syrian civil war : "God willing, all of us will be in the army of the Sufyani, who will appear in (Syria) by the permission of God," prayed Adnan al-Arur, a popular Syrian Salafi cleric and supporter of the rebellion who currently lives in Saudi Arabia.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Khasf al-Bayda' Abu Muhammad al-Sufyani Al-Mubarqa Yamani Mahdi Al-Masih ad-Dajjal Islamic eschatology Nafs-e-Zakiyyah (Pure soul) Reappearance of Muhammad al-Mahdi Signs of the reappearance of Muhammad al-Mahdi Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "18: The rising of as-Sufyani".

Kitab al-Ghayba: The Book of Occultation (in Arabic and English). Al-Islam. 2015-07-23 . Retrieved 2021-08-14 .

^ Madelung, Wilferd (1986). "The Sufyānī between Tradition and History".

Studia Islamica (63): 5– 48.

doi : 10.2307/1595566 .

JSTOR 1595566 .

^ Close Relationship Between Sufies and Shias - Dr bilal , April 2013, archived from the original on 2021-12-15 , retrieved 2021-03-13 ^ "Sunan Ibn Majah 4072 - Tribulations - كتاب الفتن - Sunnah.com - Sayings and Teachings of Prophet Muhammad (صلى الله عليه و سلم)" .

sunnah.com . Retrieved 2021-03-13 .

^ a b "Chapter 3: Mahdi in classical and modern" . 30 September 2015.

^ a b "136772. How sound is the hadith of as-Sufyaani?" .

Islam Question and Answer . 6 November 2015 . Retrieved 21 April 2022 .

^ a b Leghaei, Sheikh Mansour (7 March 2012).

"WHO IS THE SUFYANI, KHURASANI, AND YAMANI, AND WHICH ONE OF THOSE IS WITH THE TRUTH?" .

Ask the Sheikh . Retrieved 21 April 2022 .

^ a b Madelung, Wilferd (1986).

"The Sufyānī between Tradition and History" .

Studia Islamica .

63 (63): 5– 48.

doi : 10.2307/1595566 .

JSTOR 1595566 . Retrieved 21 April 2022 .

^ a b c McCants, William (26 October 2014).

"The Foreign Policy Essay: The Sectarian Apocalypse" .

Brookings Institution . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ Ash-Sharani, Mukhtasar Tazkirah al-Qurtubi, p. 440 ^ Ibn Hajar al-Haythami, Al-Qawl al-Mukhtasar fi `Alamat al-Mahdi al-Muntadhar, p. 23 ^ Found in Mustadrak of al-Hakim (8586) Abu Rahma (26 December 2016).

"End times prophecies surrounding Arabia, Shaam, and the East" .

Quranic Answers . Retrieved 22 April 2022 .

^ What is the purpose of Khasfe-Bayda that is said will be happened at the time of the reappearance of Imam Zaman (Mahdi) (a.j.)?

andisheqom.com ^ Khasf-al-Bayda ensani.ir ^ Mohammad ibn Ali (Sadoogh), Kamalodin o TamamolNe'mah, Vol. 1, P. 331 ^ Mohammad ibn Ibrahim (Na'mani), Alqeibah, Tehran, MaktabolSaduq, P. 257 ^ Khasf-e-Bayda from decisive Signs of the reappearance 2noor.com ^ Sulayman, Ruzigar-i rahayi, p. 317.

^ Sufyani in Iran porseman.com ^ Al-Malahim wal-fitan, Ebnetawus, p. 136.

^ Decisive Signs of the reappearance entezar14.ir ^ Nahawandi, al-Aqbari al-ḥisan, p. 128.

^ Albert I. Baumgarten (January 2000).

Apocalyptic Time . BRILL. p. 49.

ISBN 90-04-11879-9 .

^ Ahmad Lala Anas, The Coming of the Mahdi According to Muslim Tradition , Paris, Tawhid, 2002, p.53 ^ "ص62 - كتاب مجموع فتاوى ورسائل العثيمين - سئل فضيلة الشيخ حفظه الله عن أسماء القيامة وسبب تعددها - المكتبة الشاملة الحديثة" .

al-maktaba.org . Retrieved 2022-07-06 .

حديث السفياني أخرجه الحاكم في مستدركه، وقال: حديث صحيح الإسناد، ولكن الحاكم - رحمه الله - معروف بالتساهل بالتصحيح، Translation: The hadith of as-Sufyaani was narrated by al-Haakim in his Mustadrak, and he said that its isnaad is saheeh. But al-Haakim was known to be lenient in accepting hadiths as saheeh  - Shaykh Ibn ‘Uthaymeen References [ edit ] Wessinger, Catherine; Yamauchi, REV H James (2016).

The Oxford Handbook of Millennialism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190611941 .

External links [ edit ] Do we believe in the Sufyani who will allegedly come before the Dajjal?

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sufyani&oldid=1292213565 " Categories : Islamic eschatology Shia eschatology Islamic terminology Mahdism Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sufyani 5 languages Add topic

