Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academics 3 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 3.1 Campus 3.2 Community 3.3 Global travel 4 Notes and references 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Boston Baptist College Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°15′14″N 71°6′36″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.25389°N 71.11000°W ﻿ / 42.25389; -71.11000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Private college in Boston, MA Boston Baptist College Former names Baptist Bible Institute East, Baptist Bible College East Motto Think-Discover-Impact Type Private college Established 1976 Religious affiliation Baptist Bible Fellowship International President David Melton Undergraduates 130 Location Boston and Milton , Massachusetts , United States 42°15′14″N 71°6′36″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.25389°N 71.11000°W ﻿ / 42.25389; -71.11000 Campus Urban / Suburban Nickname Revolution Website www.boston.edu Boston Baptist College is a private Baptist college in Boston , Massachusetts .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Boston Baptist was founded in 1976 by A.V. Henderson and John Rawlings of Baptist Bible Fellowship International as Baptist Bible Institute East at Shrub Oak , New York . In 1981, the school moved to its present location in Boston. In 2002, the name was changed from Baptist Bible College East to Boston Baptist College.

Academics [ edit ] Boston Baptist College offers a bachelor's degree, an associate degree, and a certificate, all in Biblical Studies.

[ 2 ] The library collection holds over 75,000 volumes.

[ 3 ] The college is accredited by the Transnational Association of Christian Schools (TRACS), [ 4 ] a member of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in Massachusetts (AICUM), and approved by the Massachusetts Department of Higher Education.

Student life [ edit ] Campus [ edit ] Boston Baptist College's five-acre campus rests in a quiet suburban residential neighborhood accessible to downtown Boston. The tree-lined campus includes separate housing for men and women, lecture halls, library, dining hall, a gym, Charles River Coffeehouse, and other amenities. Convocation ceremonies are traditionally held in Boston's historic Faneuil Hall .

Community [ edit ] Student Government and the Director of Student Life organize activities for students, including community service projects, activities on-campus and off-campus, concerts, intramural sports, and trips into Boston and the surrounding areas. Students take advantage of a number of service opportunities for personal and community growth, such as prayer groups, small groups, or accountability groups, weekly student-led worship events, and book discussions, and also actively serve in a number of churches in the greater Boston area.

Global travel [ edit ] One of the highlights of the college curriculum is their annual study tour for academic credit, teaching students on-location in major historical centers like Israel, Turkey, Greece, Italy, and the British Isles.

Notes and references [ edit ] ^ The campus of Boston Baptist, officially at 950 Metropolitan Avenue, straddles the Hyde Park Boston city line shared with Milton, with the drive entrance on the Boston side and the campus itself in Milton.

^ "Boston.edu" .

boston.edu . Retrieved 2017-03-07 .

^ "Boston Baptist College Library -- Boston Baptist College" .

librarytechnology.org . Retrieved 2017-03-07 .

^ TRACS members: B Archived September 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Colleges and universities in metropolitan Boston Current Babson College Benjamin Franklin Institute of Technology Bentley University Berklee College of Music Boston Architectural College Boston Baptist College Boston College Boston Conservatory Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis Boston University Brandeis University Bunker Hill Community College Cambridge College Curry College Eastern Nazarene College Emerson College Emmanuel College Fisher College Harvard University Hebrew College Hellenic College Hult International Business School Labouré College Lasell University Lesley University Longy School of Music Massachusetts Bay Community College Massachusetts College of Art and Design Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Massachusetts Institute of Technology MGH Institute New England College of Optometry New England Conservatory of Music New England School of Law Northeastern University North Shore Community College Quincy College Roxbury Community College St. John's Seminary Simmons University Suffolk University Tufts University University of Massachusetts Boston Urban College of Boston Wellesley College Wentworth Institute of Technology William James College Former Episcopal Divinity School Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boston_Baptist_College&oldid=1305251575 " Categories : Baptist universities and colleges in the United States Bible colleges in the United States Transnational Association of Christian Colleges and Schools Universities and colleges established in 1976 1976 establishments in Massachusetts Seminaries and theological colleges in Massachusetts Education in Boston Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 00:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boston Baptist College Add languages Add topic

