Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summits 2 President pro tempore 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America 9 languages العربية Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مازِرونی Nederlands Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Intergovernmental regional organization This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America Spanish : Foro para el Progreso e Integración de América del Sur Portuguese : Fórum para o Progresso e Desenvolvimento da América do Sul Dutch : Forum voor de Vooruitgang en Integratie van Zuid-Amerika Logo Member states Suspended member states Administrative center Rotational: currently Asunción , Paraguay Official languages Spanish Portuguese English Dutch Demonym(s) South American Type International organization Membership 9 members [ 1 ] Argentina Brazil Chile (participation suspended) Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Observers Bolivia Uruguay Leaders • President pro tempore Santiago Peña Establishment Formation • Santiago Declaration 22 March 2019 [ 2 ] Website foroprosur .org A clickable Euler diagram showing the relationships between various multinational organizations in the Americas v t e The Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America ( Spanish : Foro para el Progreso e Integración de América del Sur , PROSUR ; Portuguese : Fórum para o Progresso e Desenvolvimento da América do Sul , PROSUL , Dutch : Forum voor de Vooruitgang en Integratie van Zuid-Amerika , FVIZA ) is an initiative by Sebastián Piñera and Iván Duque , for the creation of an integration body to replace the Union of South American Nations .

In the words of the Colombian president, who made the announcement on 14 January 2019, PROSUR would be "a South American coordination mechanism for public policies , in defense of democracy , the independence of powers , the market economy , the social agenda, with sustainability and with due application".

[ 3 ] On 18 February 2019, the President of Chile , Sebastián Piñera , said "this new forum will be open to all South American countries that meet two requirements: full validity of the rule of law and full respect for freedoms and human rights ".

[ 4 ] It has been characterised as a right-wing response to the left-wing UNASUR .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] On April 3, 2022, the new president of Chile, Gabriel Boric , announced that the country was suspending its participation in the alliance.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Suriname joined the alliance in 2022.

[ 9 ] Summits [ edit ] The first PROSUR Summit, called the "Meeting of Presidents of South America", took place on 22 March 2019 in Santiago , Chile. Eight South American countries taking part ( Argentina , Brazil , Chile , Colombia , Ecuador , Guyana , Paraguay and Peru ) signed the Declaration of Santiago for the renewal and strengthening of South America , which begins the process of creating of PROSUR. The representatives of Bolivia, Suriname and Uruguay abstained from signing the declaration.

[ 10 ] Representatives from Venezuela were not invited to the summit in Santiago.

[ 11 ] The second PROSUR Summit took place on 12 December 2020; due to the COVID-19 pandemic , it was held virtually . The heads of state of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru participated in the summit, with Prime Minister Mark Phillips of Guyana and President Luis Lacalle Pou of Uruguay invited as special guests. During the summit, the presidency pro tempore was transferred from its inaugural holder, Chilean President Sebastián Piñera to Colombian President Iván Duque . A presidential declaration was adopted to formalize the transfer and promote regional cooperation between its members in matters related to the pandemic.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The third PROSUR summit was held in Cartagena de Indias , Colombia on 26–27 January 2022; the 2022 summit of the Pacific Alliance was also held at the same date and venue. It was attended by five heads of state; its host President Iván Duque of Colombia, President Mario Abdo Benítez of Paraguay , President Guillermo Lasso of Ecuador , Prime Minister Mark Phillips of Guyana and President Sebastián Piñera of Chile . In representation of their respective countries were Vice-president Hamilton Mourão of Brazil and Foreign Minister of Peru Óscar Maúrtua .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Argentina sent no delegation, while the President-elect of Chile, Gabriel Boric , declined an invitation by President Sebastián Piñera to attend the two summits in Colombia.

[ 16 ] During the summit, Mario Abdo Benítez succeeded Iván Duque as president pro tempore but attended the summit virtually due to having tested positive for COVID-19.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Year # Date Place Host 2019 1st 22 March Santiago , Chile Sebastian Piñera 2020 2nd [ 19 ] 12 December Videoconference Sebastian Piñera 2022 3rd 27 January Cartagena , Colombia Iván Duque Márquez There have also been numerous extraordinary meetings; Year # Date Place Host 2020 1st [ 20 ] 16 March Videoconference Sebastian Piñera 2020 2nd 6 April Videoconference Sebastian Piñera 2020 3rd 19 May Videoconference Sebastian Piñera 2020 4th 27 August Videoconference Sebastian Piñera 2021 5th 25 February Videoconference Iván Duque Márquez 2021 6th 16 March Videoconference Iván Duque Márquez President pro tempore [ edit ] The presidency is exercised for a period of one year and will be rotated among the member countries between each PROSUR meeting. Since January 2022, the current president pro tempore of PROSUR is Paraguayan President Santiago Peña .

No.

President pro tempore Portrait Country Beginning of the mandate End of the mandate 1 Sebastián Piñera Chile 22 March 2019 12 December 2020 2 Iván Duque Colombia 12 December 2020 27 January 2022 3 Mario Abdo Benítez Paraguay 27 January 2022 15 August 2023 4 Santiago Peña Paraguay 15 August 2023 Incumbent See also [ edit ] Politics portal South America portal Andean Community Conservative wave Mercosur Union of South American Nations References [ edit ] ^ "PAÍSES MIEMBROS" . Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America.

^ Patricia Luna (22 March 2019).

"South American leaders launch new bloc to replace Unasur" .

The Star . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ República, Presidencia de la.

"Texto de la declaración del Presidente Duque sobre Prosur en entrevista con 'Oye Cali' " (in Spanish) . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

^ "South American presidents announce creation of new regional bloc" .

Reuters . 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2019 .

^ "Why Prosur is not the way to unite South America" .

The Economist . 21 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2019 .

^ "Bolsonaro says Brazil owes world nothing on environment" .

Business Standard . Agence France-Presse. 24 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 March 2019 .

^ "Boric suspende participación de Chile en foro Prosur" .

DW (in Spanish). 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 April 2022 .

^ "Gobierno de Chile envió nota formal para suspender su participación en Prosur" [Government of Chile sent formal notice to suspend its participation in Prosur].

CNN Chile (in Spanish). 3 April 2022. Archived from the original on 10 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ "Suriname officieel lid PROSUR" . Government of Suriname.

^ "Líderes sul-americanos assinam documento para criação do Prosul" .

G1 (in Portuguese). 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ "South America leaders form Prosur to replace defunct Unasur bloc" .

DW News . 23 March 2019 . Retrieved 24 September 2021 .

^ "Cumbre Presidencial PROSUR" .

foroprosur.org (in Spanish). 12 December 2020 . Retrieved 24 September 2021 .

^ "Prosur backs Chile's initiative to promote a global treaty on pandemics" .

gob.cl . 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 24 September 2021 .

^ "VP Mourão to represent Brazil in Prosur meeting, in Colombia" .

The Brazilian Report . 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "Peru's FA Min participates in Prosur Presidential Summit" .

andina.pe . 27 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "Boric will not travel to Colombia with Piñera: priority is "organizing my administration's team" " .

en.mercopress.com . 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 January 2022 .

^ "Además de Mercosur, desde el 27 de enero Paraguay también presidirá Prosur" .

ultimahora.com (in Spanish). 24 December 2021 . Retrieved 2 January 2022 .

^ "El presidente de Paraguay no acudirá a la cumbre del Prosur por covid-19" .

efe.com (in Spanish). 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "Prosur agrees to joint efforts on the environment and vaccines against covid" .

Explica.co .

Explica . 12 December 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2020 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Informe de Gestión PROSUR" (PDF) .

foroprosur.org (in Spanish). 11 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America at Wikimedia Commons v t e Pan-Americanism History Spanish American wars of independence Decolonization of the Americas Latin American integration North American integration Patria Grande Simón Bolívar José de San Martín Lucas Alamán Inter-American Commission of Women United States involvement in regime change in Latin America Organizations Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization (ACTO) Andean Community (CAN) Association of Caribbean States (ACS) Bolivarian Alliance for the Americas (ALBA) Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System (SICA) Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) Contadora group Contadora support group Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America (PROSUR) Latin American Economic System (SELA) Latin American Integration Association (ALADI) Lima Group (LG) Mercosur Organization of American States (OAS) Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) Organization of Ibero-American States (OEI) Pacific Alliance Petrocaribe Rio Group Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, CEPAL) United States Pirate Party (USPP) Projects Andean passport CARICOM passport CARICOM Single Market and Economy CARIPASS Central America-4 Border Control Agreement Central America-4 passport Eastern Caribbean Currency Union Initiative for the Integration of the Regional Infrastructure of South America (IIRSA) Interoceanic Highway SUCRE Institutions Andean Parliament Bank of the South Caribbean Court of Justice Caribbean Development Bank Central American Parliament Development Bank of Latin America and the Caribbean (CAF) Inter-American Development Bank Latin American Parliament Mercosur Parliament South American Parliament Free trade areas Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA) CARIFORUM Dominican Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) Economic Partnership Agreements Free Trade Area of the Americas G3 Free Trade Agreement United States–Mexico–Canada Agreement (USMCA) Events Pan American Games Pan-American Congress v t e Regional organizations Bodies African Union Alliance of Sahel States Amazon Cooperation Treaty Organization Arab League Arctic Council Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council Asia-Europe Foundation Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation Assembly of European Regions Association of Caribbean States AUKUS Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America – Peoples' Trade Treaty Benelux British–Irish Council Bucharest Nine Caribbean Community (CARICOM) Central American Integration System Central European Free Trade Agreement Central European Initiative Collective Security Treaty Organization Commonwealth of Independent States Commonwealth of Nations Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations Community of Democratic Choice Community of Latin American and Caribbean States Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership Conference of European Regions with Legislative Power Council of the Baltic Sea States Council of Europe Craiova Group East African Community Eastern Partnership Economic Community of West African States Economic Cooperation Organization Eurasian Economic Union European Political Community European Union Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development Gulf Cooperation Council Indian Ocean Rim Association International Conference on the Great Lakes Region Liptako–Gourma Authority Latin American Economic System Latin American Integration Association Latin American Parliament Lublin Triangle Melanesian Spearhead Group Mercosur New Hanseatic League Nordic-Baltic Eight Nordic Council North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Open Balkan Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe Organization of American States Organization of Ibero-American States Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation Pacific Alliance Pacific Islands Forum Paneuropean Union Polynesian Leaders Group Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Regional Cooperation Council Shanghai Cooperation Organisation South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation South Atlantic Peace and Cooperation Zone South-East European Cooperation Process Southern African Development Community TAKM Three Seas Initiative Trilateral Cooperation Secretariat Organization of Turkic States Union of South American Nations Visegrád Group West African Economic and Monetary Union West Nordic Council Western Balkans Quad Topics Regional integration Regional organizations by population Regionalism (international relations) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forum_for_the_Progress_and_Integration_of_South_America&oldid=1251461563 " Categories : Proposed international organizations Development in South America Regionalism (international relations) South American integration Organizations established in 2019 Sebastián Piñera Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 October 2024, at 07:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forum for the Progress and Integration of South America 9 languages Add topic

