Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient history 2 Modern history 3 Lucentum today 4 See also 5 External links 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Lucentum 7 languages Català Cebuano Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°21′52″N 00°26′18″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.36444°N 0.43833°W ﻿ / 38.36444; -0.43833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human settlement in Alicante, L'Alacantí, Alicante Province, Spain Lucentum The archaeological site is surrounded by the buildings of modern Alicante.

Shown within Province of Alicante Show map of Province of Alicante Lucentum (Valencian Community) Show map of Valencian Community Lucentum (Spain) Show map of Spain Location Alicante , Province of Alicante , Valencian Community , Spain Coordinates 38°21′52″N 00°26′18″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.36444°N 0.43833°W ﻿ / 38.36444; -0.43833 Type Settlement History Founded End of the 3rd century BC Abandoned Between the 2nd and 3rd centuries AD Lucentum ( Ancient Greek : Λούκεντον , Loúkenton ), [ 1 ] called Lucentia by Pomponius Mela , [ 2 ] is the Roman predecessor of the city of Alicante , Spain . Particularly, it refers to the archaeological site in which the remains of this ancient settlement lie, at a place known as El Tossal de Manises , in the neighborhood of Albufereta .

Ancient history [ edit ] Funerary vase from the necropolis of Lucentum.

Diodorus ascribes Lucentum's foundation to the Carthaginian leader Hamilcar Barcas .

[ 3 ] As a Mediterranean and Iberian commercial center, it had trading contacts with Greece , Phoenicia ,  and the southern Iberian city of Tartessos , absorbing some of their influences.

[ citation needed ] This unique mixture gave rise to a culture called Contestani by Pliny the Elder and Strabo . Its ruins include various distinctly Carthaginian features.

[ citation needed ] [ clarification needed ] The Punic town was known to the Greeks as the "White Promontory" or "White Citadel", variously given as Ákra Leuká ( Ancient Greek : Ἄκρα Λευκά ), Ákra Leukḗ ( Ἄκρα Λευκή ), and Leukḕ Ákra ( Λευκὴ Ἄκρα ).

[ 4 ] Livy translated the second sense of the Greek name into Latin, calling the settlement Castrum Album .

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] The Greek probably translated the site's Punic name, although some prefer to imagine it transcribes an Iberian placename involving the words lug ("water") and cant ("cliff").

[ 6 ] The city enjoyed its peak between the 1st century BC and the 1st century AD, and the majority of the city's remains bear a Roman stamp. The town was refounded as Lucentum (from Latin lucere , referring to the same geographical feature, the "white promontory") [ 4 ] after P. Cornelius Scipio conquered the area in the course of the Second Punic War . Over the years it gained a thoroughly Roman character, complete with baths , forums, temples, sewers, etc. It was one of the major cities of the Roman province of Hispania Tarraconensis .

[ 7 ] It entered into a decline in the 2nd century and was effectively abandoned by the end of the 3rd century. The chief cause of this decline was competition from the neighboring city of Ilici (today's Elche ), which had better water and land communications and began to usurp Lucentum's trade. Eventually, the settlement was completely depopulated, the site used only for a Muslim cemetery during the 10th and 11th centuries.

Modern history [ edit ] The first modern evidence concerning the location of the ancient city came in 1780, when the Count of Lumiares, Antonio Valcárcel Pío de Saboya , suggested that the ruins of Tossal de Manises , which he personally had excavated for a number of years, were in fact Lucentum. This contradicted the common wisdom at the time, which held that the Roman city was well outside the town of Alicante. Later, the ruins were excavated by Lafuente and Figueras, who found the more ancient Carthaginian city. In the 1930s they were again excavated by a Professor Belda, around which time a necropolis was discovered during road construction.

Hypothetical reconstruction of the city plan circa 1st century AD The site contains evidence of both the Iberian and the Roman epochs, although in terms of material recovered and ruins remaining the Roman influences (especially from the 1st century AD and afterwards) predominate. The Roman city was constructed over the Iberian one, of which practically nothing remains except for the walls. The lower level is contemporary with a necropolis excavated in the 1930s to make way for a road, and whose materials are now housed in the Archaeological Museum of Alicante . Among these, a number of cauldrons stand out as well as Iberian ceramics decorated with geometric shapes, birds, and fish, sculptures, jewelry, amulets of Egyptian origin, terracotta ware, and weapons. Of the jewelry recovered, a type of pendant, possibly for masculine use, is quite notable as it suggests that there was a local workshop whose production made its way into other local burial sites. Finally, the "Kore de Alicante", currently housed in the Archaeological Museum of Catalonia could have come from this site.

In the post-war period, the site (located in a privileged place, with an excellent view of the ancient lagoon and bay) was in danger of disappearing, a victim of real estate speculation. However, efforts by those in favor of its preservation, most notably the Swedish archaeologist Solveig Nordström , succeeded in defending the site. This effort culminated in the 1961 designation as an "Artistic and Historic Monument", which afforded some legal protection. Unfortunately, the preservation movement could not stop much development around the site, with the result that the ruins are surrounded by tall buildings and is in no way "visually pure".

Despite the legal protections which had been won for the ruins, they suffered from neglect and exposure for a number of years, until efforts were finally made in the 1990s to conserve them. This resulted in recent construction, directed by the architect Rafael Pérez Jiménez and the archaeologist Manuel Olcina Doménech , which aims at the definitive and irreversible conservation of what remains of the ruins. Such a recuperation represents a cultural milestone for Alicante.

Lucentum today [ edit ] The Roman forum of Lucentum Currently, one can visit the archaeological site, which covers an area of some 30,000 m 2 (7.4 acres). The most noticeable features are the remains of the fortifying wall (including the foundations of the pre-Roman defensive towers), the baths, the forum, part of the Muslim necropolis, and a multitude of houses. In addition, a part of the Tossal de Manisses is currently being excavated, which it is hoped will increase the size and importance of the site.

The influence of Lucentum is also present in the culture of the area, with many businesses, associations, and sports clubs in the Alicante area bearing the name of the ancient city.

See also [ edit ] Roman Hispania History of Alicante Timeline of Alicante External links [ edit ] A Visit Report of a visit on the archaeological site (in Spanish) Miguel de Cervantes Virtual Library Article on Lucentum (in Spanish) Miguel de Cervantes Virtual Library Images of the Lucentum site (in Spanish) Terra Antiquae Another Gallery of Photos (in Spanish) Universitat d'Alacant Article on Solveig Nordstrom (in Spanish) Universitat d'Alacant - Article on the Count of Luminares (in Spanish) Via arquitectura Report on recent architectural efforts at the site.

(in Spanish) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lucentum .

Citations [ edit ] ^ Ptolemy .

The Geography . Vol. 2.6.14.

^ Pomponius Mela .

De situ orbis . Vol. 2.6.6.

^ Diodorus Siculus .

Bibliotheca historica (Historical Library) . Vol. 25.2.

^ a b c "Roman Policy in Spain", Harvard Studies in Classical Philology , p.

209 .

^ Livy .

Ab urbe condita Libri [ History of Rome ]. Vol. 24.41.

^ See Jacques R. Pauwels, Beneath the Dust of Time: A History of the Names of Peoples and Places, London, 2009.

^ Smith, William , ed. (1854–1857). "Acra Leuce".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography . London: John Murray.

Bibliography [ edit ] Conesa, Enrique Llobregat.

Ilucant : un cuarto de siglo investigación histórico-arqueológica en tierras de Alicante . 1991 ISBN 84-7784-917-X Conesa, Enrique Llobregat, Manuel H. Olcina Domenech, Rafael Pérez Jiménez.

Trabajos de consolidación en la ciudad ibero-romana de Lucentum (Tossal de Manises, Alicante) .

ISBN 84-89479-13-5 Díaz, Alicia Fernández.

Algunos restos pictóricos de la ciudad de Lucentum .

PDF Ibanez, Miguel.

Estudio paleopatológico de las cremaciones procedentes de la necrópolis ibérica de la Albufereta (Alicante).

PDF v t e Phoenician cities and colonies Algeria Camarata Cartennae ( Tenes ) Hippo Regius Icosium ( Algiers ) Igilgili ( Jijel ) Iol (Cherchell) Iomnium ( Tigzirt ) Cirta ( Constantine ) Kissi (Djinet) Macomades Malaca Rachgoun Rusazus ( Azeffoun ) Rusguniae ( Tamentfoust ) Rusicade (Skikda) Rusippisir (Taksebt) Rusubbicari ( Zemmouri El Bahri) Rusuccuru (Dellys) Sarai ( Aïn Oulmene ) Thagora ( Taoura ) Tipasa in Mauretania Tipasa in Numidia Timici Cyprus Dhali Kition ( Larnaca ) Lapathus Marion Greece Callista (Santorini) Paxi Rhodes Delos Israel Tell Abu Hawam ( Haifa ) Achzib Akka (Acre) Dora Michal Jaffa Reshef Shikmona ( Haifa ) Strato's Tower (Caesarea) Italy Bitan ( Chia ) Cape Melqart (Cefalù) Drepanum ( Trapani ) Eryx ( Erice ) Heraclea Minoa Kapara (Soluntum) Karaly ( Cagliari ) Lilybaeum Motya Neapolis Nora Olbia Pantelleria Selinunte Sulci ( Sant'Antioco ) Tharros Ṣiṣ (Palermo) Lebanon Amia Ampi Arqa Athar (Tripoli) Baalbek Birut ( Beirut ) Botrys (Teros) Gebal (Byblos) Ornithon (Tell el-Burak) Porphyreon (Jieh) Sarepta Sidon Sur (Tyre) , Ushu (Palaetyrus) Umm al-Amad Libya Lepcis ( Khoms ) Oyat ( Tripoli ) Tsabratan Malta Maleth ( Cospicua ) Ann ( Mdina ) Gaulos (Gozo) Għajn Qajjet Mtarfa Ras il-Wardija Tas-Silġ Morocco Azama (Azemmour) Arambys (Mogador) Caricus Murus Heq she Elisha (Ksar es-Seghir) Likush ( Larache ) Shalat (Chellah) Tamusida Tinga ( Tangier ) Anfa ( Casablanca ) Volubilis 1 Mogador Rusadir Oualidia Zilil Gadir Sala Thymiaterium Rusibis Portugal Portus Hannibalis Portus Magonis (Portimão) Olissipona (Lisbon) Ossonoba (Faro) Balsa ( Tavira ) Spain Abdera ( Adra ) Abyla ( Ceuta ) Akra Leuka ( Alicante ) Gadir (Cadiz) Herna Iboshim ( Ibiza ) Mahón Malake ( Málaga ) Onoba Carthage (Cartagena) Rushadir ( Melilla ) Saguntum Sexi ( Almunecar ) Tagilit (Tíjola) Toscanos ( Velez ) Tyreche Syria Arwad Marat (Amrit) Balanaea (Baniyas) Carne Paltus Safita Shuksi Sumur Ugarit Tunisia Aspis (Kelibia) Bulla Regia Carthage Hadrumetum ( Sousse ) Hippo Diarrhytus (Bizerte) Kerkouane Lepcis ( Monastir ) Maqom Hadesh (Ounga) Meninx ( Djerba ) Ruspe Ruspina Sicca (El Kef) Tabarka Tayinat ( Thyna ) Thapsus Thysdrus ( El Djem ) Utica Other Myriandus Phoenicus Gibraltar Tahpanhes Authority control databases International VIAF Other IdRef Kulturenvanteri monument Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lucentum&oldid=1260062212 " Categories : History of Alicante Phoenician colonies in Spain Roman towns and cities in Spain Former populated places in Spain Tourist attractions in Spain Populated places in Hispania Tarraconensis Bien de Interés Cultural landmarks in the Province of Alicante Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRG without Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2018 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 November 2024, at 16:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lucentum 7 languages Add topic

