Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Liberalism 3 Feminism 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Equality before the law 41 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Latina Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Judicial principle Graffiti in Cape Town : "All shall be equal before the law." Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Equality before the law , also known as equality under the law , equality in the eyes of the law , legal equality , or legal egalitarianism , is the principle that all people must be equally protected by the law.

[ 1 ] The principle requires a systematic rule of law that observes due process to provide equal justice , and requires equal protection ensuring that no individual nor group of individuals be privileged over others by the law. Also called the principle of isonomy , it arises from various philosophical questions concerning equality, fairness and justice. Equality before the law is one of the basic principles of some definitions of liberalism .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The principle of equality before the law is incompatible with and does not exist within systems incorporating legal slavery , servitude , colonialism , or monarchy .

[ citation needed ] Article 7 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) states: "All are equal before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal protection of the law".

[ 1 ] Thus, it states that everyone must be treated equally under the law regardless of race , gender , color , ethnicity , religion , disability , or other characteristics, without privilege , discrimination or bias . The general guarantee of equality is provided by most of the world's national constitutions, [ 4 ] but specific implementations of this guarantee vary. For example, while many constitutions guarantee equality regardless of race, [ 5 ] only a few mention the right to equality regardless of nationality.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Statue of Equality in Paris as an allegory of equality The legalist philosopher Guan Zhong (720–645 BC) declared that "the monarch and his subjects no matter how great and small they are complying with the law will be the great order".

[ 7 ] The 431 BC funeral oration of Pericles , recorded in Thucydides 's History of the Peloponnesian War , includes a passage praising the equality among the free male citizens of the Athenian democracy : If we look to the laws, they afford equal justice to all in their private differences; if to social standing, advancement in public life falls to reputation for capacity, class considerations not being allowed to interfere with merit; nor again does poverty bar the way.

[ 8 ] The Bible says that "You and the foreigner shall be the same before the Lord: The same laws and regulations will apply both to you and to the foreigner residing among you." (Numbers 15:15f) The US state of Nebraska adopted the motto "Equality Before the Law" in 1867. It appears on both the state flag and the state seal .

[ 9 ] The motto was chosen to symbolize political and civil rights for Black people and women in Nebraska, particularly Nebraska's rejection of slavery and the fact that Black men in the state could legally vote since the beginning of statehood.

[ 10 ] Activists in Nebraska extend the motto to other groups, for example, to promote LGBT rights in Nebraska .

[ 11 ] The fifth demand of the South African Freedom Charter , adopted in 1955, is "All Shall Be Equal Before The Law!" [ 12 ] Article 200 of the Criminal Code of Japan , the penalty regarding parricide , was declared unconstitutional for violating the equality under the law by the Supreme Court of Japan in 1973. This was a result of the trial of the Tochigi patricide case .

[ 13 ] Liberalism [ edit ] Liberalism calls for equality before the law for all persons.

[ 2 ] Classical liberalism as embraced by libertarians and modern American conservatives opposes pursuing group rights at the expense of individual rights .

[ 3 ] Proclamation by Sir George Arthur to Indigenous Tasmanians , purporting to show the equality of white and black before the law In his Second Treatise of Government (1689), John Locke wrote: "A state also of equality, wherein all the power and jurisdiction is reciprocal, no one having more than another; there being nothing more evident, than that creatures of the same species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without subordination or subjection, unless the lord and master of them all should, by any manifest declaration of his will, set one above another, and confer on him, by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to dominion and sovereignty." [ 14 ] In 1774, Alexander Hamilton wrote: "All men have one common original, they participate in one common nature, and consequently have one common right. No reason can be assigned why one man should exercise any power over his fellow creatures more than another, unless they voluntarily vest him with it".

[ 15 ] In Social Statics , Herbert Spencer defined it as a natural law "that every man may claim the fullest liberty to exercise his faculties compatible with the possession of like liberty to every other man". Stated another way by Spencer, "each has freedom to do all that he wills provided that he infringes not the equal freedom of any other".

[ 16 ] Feminism [ edit ] Equality before the law is a tenet of some branches of feminism . In the 19th century, gender equality before the law was a radical goal, but some later feminist views hold that formal legal equality is not enough to create actual and social equality between women and men. An ideal of formal equality may penalize women for failing to conform to a male norm while an ideal of different treatment may reinforce sexist stereotypes.

[ 17 ] In Reed v. Reed, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg highlighted the evolving the nature of the phrase, "We, the People" in the U.S Constitution emphasizing how it has become more inclusive over time. She discussed the progression of women's roles in society, noting that women were fully recognized as citizens and gained the right to vote, which allowed them to be treated equally under the Fourteenth Amendment. Ginsburg's comments focus on the historical and legal advancements regarding gender equality without promoting a specific ideological stance.

[ 18 ] In 1988, prior to serving as a Justice of the Supreme Court, Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote: "Generalizations about the way women or men are – my life experience bears out – cannot guide me reliably in making decisions about particular individuals. At least in the law, I have found no natural superiority or deficiency in either sex. In class or in grading papers from 1963 to 1980, and now in reading briefs and listening to arguments in court for over seventeen years, I have detected no reliable indicator or distinctly male or surely female thinking – even penmanship".

[ 19 ] In an American Civil Liberties Union 's Women's Rights Project in the 1970s, [ 20 ] Ginsburg challenged in Frontiero v. Richardson the laws that gave health service benefits to wives of servicemen, but not to husbands of servicewomen.

[ 21 ] There are over 150 national constitutions that currently mention equality regardless of gender.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-discrimination law Civil and political rights Equal justice under law Equality of opportunity Global justice Isonomia Law of equal liberty Meritocracy Political egalitarianism Prerogative , the inverse of equality before the law Rule according to higher law Rule of law Selective enforcement Social equality List of civil rights leaders List of suffragists and suffragettes List of women's rights activists Völkisch equality References [ edit ] ^ a b "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

United Nations . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ a b Chandran Kukathas , "Ethical Pluralism from a Classical Liberal Perspective", in The Many and the One: Religious and Secular Perspectives on Ethical Pluralism in the Modern World , ed. Richard Madsen and Tracy B. Strong, Ethikon Series in Comparative Ethics (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2003), p. 61 ( ISBN 0-691-09993-6 ).

^ a b Mark Evans, ed., Edinburgh Companion to Contemporary Liberalism: Evidence and Experience (London: Routledge, 2001), p. 55 ( ISBN 1-57958-339-3 ).

^ "Read about "Equality" on Constitute" .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ "Read about "Equality regardless of race" on Constitute" .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ "Read about "Equality regardless of nationality" on Constitute" .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ Xia Zhang: Further Discussion on the Spirit of Rule of Law Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 233. 3rd International Conference on Contemporary Education, Social Sciences and Humanities (ICCESSH 2018).

^ Thucydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War , Written 431 BCE, Translated by Richard Crawley (1874), retrieved via Project Gutenberg.

^ Nebraska State Motto 50 State Guide, eReferenceDesk.

^ Potter, James E. (2010).

" "Equality Before the Law": Thoughts on the Origin of Nebraska's State Motto" (PDF) .

Nebraska History . No. 91. pp.

116– 121 . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ Kindschuh, Hilary (April 11, 2002).

"Human chain circles Capitol in support of gay community" .

The Daily Nebraskan . Lincoln, Nebraska . Retrieved June 1, 2021 .

^ Congress of the People (June 26, 1955).

"The Freedom Charter" .

Walter Sisulu Square .

Kliptown . Retrieved June 8, 2021 .

^ Dean, Meryll (2002).

Japanese legal system .

Routledge via Google Books . p. 535 ^ John Locke (1689).

Second Treatise of Government . Chapter 2.

^ Alexander Hamilton (15 December 1774).

"A Full Vindication of the Measures of the Congress" . National Archives of Founders Online. Harold C. Syrett, ed. (1961).

The Papers of Alexander Hamilton .

1 (1768–1778). New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 45–78.

^ Herbert Spencer .

Social Statics . c. 4, § 3.

^ Jaggar, Alison. (1994) "Part One: Equality. Introduction." In Living with Contradictions: Controversies in Feminist Social Ethics [ permanent dead link ] . Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

^ American University of Gender, Social Policy, and the Law (2012).

"Reed v. Reed at 40: Equal Protection and Women's Rights" . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jeff Rosen , "The Book of Ruth", New Republic, August 2, 1993, p. 19.

^ "Redirecting..." heinonline.org . Retrieved 2024-09-10 .

{{ cite web }} : Cite uses generic title ( help ) ^ O'Dea, Suzanne.

From Suffrage to the Senate: An Encyclopedia of American Women in Politics , ABC-CLIO, 1999 ^ "Read about "Equality regardless of gender" on Constitute" .

constituteproject.org . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hudson, Adelbert Lathrop (1913).

"Equality Before the Law" .

The Atlantic Monthly . Vol. CXII. pp. 679–688.

Shenfield, Arthur A. (1973). "Equality Before the Law".

Modern Age . Vol. XVII. No. 2, pp. 114–124.

v t e Suffrage Basic topics Universal suffrage Right to run for office Age of candidacy banned Women Suffragette Women's liberation movement Men Black Youth Demeny voting Non-citizen Non-resident citizen One man, one vote Multiple citizenship Voting age Free and fair election Secret ballot Compulsory voting Disfranchisement Voter turnout Wasted vote By country Austria Australia 1902 Commonwealth Franchise Act aboriginal women Canada Chile Colombia Ecuador Hong Kong India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein Mexico New Zealand Spain (Civil War, Francoist) Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom women Cayman Islands Scotland Wales laws 1832 1918 1928 United States women African Americans Native Americans felons foreigners District of Columbia Puerto Rico states Constitutional amendments: 15th , 19th , 23rd , 24th , 26th Indian Citizenship Act 1965 Voting Rights Act Events International International Woman Suffrage Alliance conferences 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th Hong Kong Hong Kong 1 July marches 2014 Hong Kong protests 2019–2020 Hong Kong protests United Kingdom WSPU march (1906) Mud March (1907) Women's Sunday (1908) Black Friday (1910) Battle of Downing Street (1910) Women's Coronation Procession (1911) Great Pilgrimage (1913) Open Christmas Letter (1914) Suffragette bombing and arson campaign United States Seneca Falls Convention (1848) Declaration of Sentiments (1848) Rochester Convention (1848) Ohio Women's Convention (1850) Ohio Women's Convention (1851) National Women's Rights Convention (1850–1869) Trial of Susan B. Anthony (1872–1873) Suffrage Hikes (1912–1914) Woman Suffrage Procession (1913) Suffrage Torch Suffrage Special (1916) Silent Sentinels (1917–1919) Night of Terror Prison Special 1920 United States presidential election "Give Us the Ballot" (1957) Freedom Summer (1964) Selma to Montgomery marches (1965) Women (memorials) List of suffragists and suffragettes Timeline of women's suffrage US in majority-Muslim countries Historiography of the Suffragettes Women's suffrage organizations and publications Women's rights activists Leser v. Garnett Belmont–Paul Monument Rise up, Women (Emmeline Pankhurst statue) Emmeline and Christabel Pankhurst Memorial Elizabeth Cady Stanton statue Suffragette Memorial Portrait Monument Women's Rights Pioneers Monument Forward statue Kate Sheppard National Memorial Millicent Fawcett statue Great Petition (2008 sculpture) Centenary of Women's Suffrage Commemorative Fountain Resilience Turning Point Suffragist Memorial Eagle House Pankhurst Centre Paulsdale Suffragette Handkerchief Holloway banner Holloway brooch Holloway Jingles Hunger Strike Medal Justice Bell Suffrage jewellery Suffragette penny Suffrage Oak Women's Rights National Historical Park Women's Suffrage National Monument International Women's Day Susan B. Anthony Day Women's Equality Day Popular culture " The Women's Marseillaise " "The March of the Women" (1910 song) The Mother of Us All (1947 opera) "Sister Suffragette" (1964 song) Suffrage plays Women's suffrage in film Votes for Women (1912 film) Shoulder to Shoulder (1974 series) Not for Ourselves Alone (1999 documentary) Iron Jawed Angels (2004 film) Up the Women (2013 sitcom) Selma (2014 film) Suffragette (2015 film) Sylvia (2018 musical) Suffs (2022 musical) Lioness (upcoming film) Susan B. Anthony dollar National Voting Rights Museum (US) New Zealand ten-dollar note Women's Suffrage Centennial silver dollar (2020 U.S. commemorative) 2020 US ten-dollar bill Art in the women's suffrage movement in the United States Music and women's suffrage in the United States v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equality_before_the_law&oldid=1288646419 " Categories : Egalitarianism Political theories Political science terminology Equality rights Western culture Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: generic name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: generic title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equality before the law 41 languages Add topic

