Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Activism Toggle Activism subsection 2.1 Strike at the Riksdag 2.2 Social media activism 2.3 Protests and speeches in Europe 2.4 Sabbatical year 2.5 UN Climate Action Summit 2.6 Autumn global climate strikes 2.7 Participation at COP25 2.8 Further activism in Europe and end of sabbatical year 2.9 Activism from 2020 to 2021 2.10 Activism from 2022 to early 2023 2.11 Post-high school graduation 2.12 Pro-Palestinian activism 2.12.1 Gaza Freedom Flotilla 2.13 Boycott of COP29 3 Position on climate change 4 Public response and impact Toggle Public response and impact subsection 4.1 Academics 4.2 Politicians 4.3 Press 4.4 "The Greta effect" 4.5 Flight shame 4.6 X-Site sticker 5 In popular culture and art 6 Honours and awards Toggle Honours and awards subsection 6.1 Species named in Thunberg's honour 7 Works 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Greta Thunberg 119 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी ဘာသာမန် Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Kadazandusun Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swedish activist (born 2003) Greta Thunberg Thunberg in 2024, wearing a Palestinian keffiyeh Born Greta Tintin Eleonora Ernman Thunberg ( 2003-01-03 ) 3 January 2003 (age 22) Stockholm , Sweden Occupation Climate activist Years active 2018–present Movement Climate movement Fridays for Future Pro-Palestine movement June 2025 Freedom Flotilla Parents Svante Thunberg (father) Malena Ernman (mother) Relatives Olof Thunberg (grandfather) Signature Greta Tintin Eleonora Ernman Thunberg ( Swedish: [ˈɡrêːta ˈtʉ̂ːnbærj] ⓘ ; born 3 January 2003) is a Swedish climate and political activist initially known for challenging world leaders to take immediate action to mitigate the effects of climate change .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Born in Stockholm , Thunberg's climate activism began when she persuaded her parents to adopt lifestyle choices that reduced her family's carbon footprint . In August 2018, aged 15, Thunberg began skipping school, vowing to remain out of school until after a Swedish election to attempt to influence the outcome. She protested outside the Swedish parliament where she called for stronger action on climate change by holding up a Skolstrejk för klimatet ( School Strike for Climate ) sign and handing out informational flyers.

[ 5 ] After the election, Thunberg spoke in front of supporters, telling them to use phones to film her. She then said she would continue school striking for the climate every Friday until Sweden was in compliance with the Paris climate agreement .

[ 6 ] Thunberg's youth and blunt speaking manner fueled her rise to the status of a global icon.

[ 7 ] After Thunberg's first school strike for the climate, other students engaged in similar protests. They united and organized the school strike for climate movement. After Thunberg addressed the 2018 United Nations Climate Change Conference , weekly climate strike protests took place on Fridays around the world. In 2019, coordinated multi-city protests involved over a million students each.

[ 8 ] To avoid carbon-intensive flying, Thunberg sailed on a carbon-free yacht from England to New York where she addressed the 2019 UN Climate Action Summit .

[ 9 ] In her speech, Thunberg scolded the world's leaders by exclaiming " How dare you " in reference to their perceived indifference and inaction to the climate crisis. Her admonishment made worldwide headlines.

[ 10 ] After Thunberg graduated from high school in 2023, her activism continued to gain international attention and her protest tactics have become increasingly assertive.

[ 11 ] As an adult, her protests have included both peaceful demonstrations and acts of civil disobedience such as defying lawful orders to disperse, which have led to arrests, convictions, and an acquittal.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Thunberg's activism has evolved to include other causes, supporting Ukraine, [ 2 ] Palestine, [ 14 ] Armenia [ 15 ] and Western Sahara [ 16 ] in their respective conflicts with Russia , Israel , Azerbaijan and Morocco . Thunberg's rise to world fame made her an ad hoc leader in the climate activist community.

[ 17 ] She faced heavy criticism, especially due to her age.

[ 18 ] Thunberg's influence on the world stage has been described by The Guardian and other media as the "Greta effect".

[ 19 ] She has received honours and awards , including in Time 's 100 most influential people , named the youngest Time Person of the Year in 2019, inclusion in the Forbes list of The World's 100 Most Powerful Women (2019), [ 20 ] and nominations for the Nobel Peace Prize .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Early life Greta Tintin Eleonora Ernman Thunberg [ 24 ] [ 25 ] was born on 3 January 2003, in Stockholm , Sweden, [ 26 ] [ 27 ] to opera singer Malena Ernman and actor Svante Thunberg .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Her paternal grandfather was actor and director Olof Thunberg .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] As explained by The Week , "with a thespian father" and singer mother, "it is perhaps unsurprising that [Thunberg] has a slightly unusual name.... Thunberg shares her second name with the adventuring creation of Belgian cartoonist Georges Remi, better known as Hergé ." [ 33 ] She has a younger sister, Beata.

[ 29 ] Thunberg says she first heard about climate change in 2011, when she was eight years old, and could not understand why so little was being done about it.

[ 34 ] [ 29 ] The situation depressed her, and as a result, at the age of 11, she largely stopped talking, severely restricted her eating, and lost ten kilograms (22 lb) in two months.

[ 35 ] Eventually, she was diagnosed with Asperger syndrome , obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and selective mutism .

[ 34 ] [ 29 ] In one of her first speeches demanding climate action, Thunberg described her selective mutism as meaning she "only speaks when necessary".

[ 34 ] She struggled with depression for almost four years before she began her school strike campaign.

[ 36 ] When she started protesting, her parents did not support her activism. Her father said he did not like her missing school but added: "[We] respect that she wants to make a stand. She can either sit at home and be really unhappy, or protest and be happy." [ 37 ] From her TEDx Talk I was diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome , OCD and selective mutism . That basically means I only speak when I think it's necessary. Now is one of those moments.

Greta Thunberg, Stockholm [ 38 ] November 2018 Thunberg's diagnosis of Asperger's syndrome was made public nationwide in Sweden by her mother in May 2015, in order to help families in similar situations.

[ 39 ] While acknowledging that her diagnosis "has limited [her] before", Thunberg does not view her Asperger's as an illness, and has instead called it her "superpower".

[ 40 ] She was later described as not only the best-known climate change activist, but also the best-known autism rights activist .

[ 41 ] In 2021, Thunberg said that many people in the Fridays for Future movement are autistic, and very inclusive and welcoming. She thinks that the reason so many autistic people become climate activists is that they cannot look away, and have to tell the truth as they see it: "I know lots of people who have been depressed, and then they have joined the climate movement or Fridays for Future and have found a purpose in life and found friendship and a community that they are welcome in." She considers the best things that have resulted from her activism to be friendships and happiness.

[ 41 ] For about two years, Thunberg challenged her parents to lower the family's carbon footprint and overall impact on the environment by becoming vegan , upcycling , and giving up flying .

[ 28 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] She has said she showed them graphs and data, but when that did not work, she warned her family that they were stealing her future.

[ 44 ] Giving up flying in part meant her mother had to abandon international ventures in her opera career.

[ 37 ] Interviewed in December 2019 by the BBC , her father said: "To be honest, [her mother] didn't do it to save the climate. She did it to save her child, because she saw how much it meant to her, and then, when she did that, she saw how much [Greta] grew from that, how much energy she got from it." [ 45 ] Thunberg credits her parents' eventual response and lifestyle changes with giving her hope and belief that she could make a difference.

[ 28 ] Asked in September 2021 whether she felt guilty about ending her mother's international career, she was surprised by the question: "It was her choice. I didn't make her do anything. I just provided her with the information to base her decision on." [ 41 ] The family's story is recounted in the 2018 book Scenes from the Heart , [ 46 ] updated in 2020 as Our House Is on Fire: Scenes of a Family and a Planet in Crisis , with contributions from the girls, and the whole family credited as authors.

[ 41 ] [ 47 ] Activism Thunberg in front of the Swedish parliament , holding a " Skolstrejk för klimatet " ( transl.

School Strike for the Climate ) sign, Stockholm , August 2018 Strike at the Riksdag Further information: School Strike for Climate Bicycle in Stockholm with references to Thunberg: "The climate crisis must be treated as a crisis! The climate is the most important election issue!" (11 September 2018) Sign in Berlin , 14 December 2018 Thunberg speaking at the annual climate conference, Austrian World Summit, 2019 In August 2018, Thunberg began the school climate strikes and public speeches for which she has become an internationally recognized climate activist . In an interview with Amy Goodman of Democracy Now!

, she said she got the idea of a climate strike after school shootings in the United States in February 2018 led several youths to refuse to return to school.

[ 28 ] These teen activists at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida , went on to organize the March for Our Lives in support of greater gun control .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] In May 2018, Thunberg won a climate change essay competition held by Swedish newspaper Svenska Dagbladet . In part, she wrote: "I want to feel safe. How can I feel safe when I know we are in the greatest crisis in human history?" [ 50 ] After the paper published her article, Thunberg was contacted by Bo Thorén from Fossil Free Dalsland, a group interested in doing something about climate change. Thunberg attended a few of their meetings. At one of them, Thorén suggested that school children could strike for climate change.

[ 51 ] Thunberg tried to persuade other young people to get involved but "no one was really interested", so eventually she decided to go ahead with the strike by herself.

[ 28 ] On 20 August 2018, Thunberg, who had just started ninth grade, decided not to attend school until the 2018 Swedish general election on 9 September; her protest began after the heat waves and wildfires during Sweden's hottest summer in at least 262 years.

[ 37 ] Her demands were that the Swedish government reduce carbon emissions in accordance with the Paris Agreement , and she protested by sitting outside the Riksdag every day for three weeks during school hours with the sign reading Skolstrejk för klimatet ("School strike for climate").

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Thunberg said her teachers were divided about her missing class to make her point. She says: "As people, they think what I am doing is good, but as teachers, they say I should stop." [ 37 ] Social media activism After Thunberg posted a photo of her first strike day on Instagram and Twitter , other social media accounts quickly took up her cause. High-profile youth activists amplified her Instagram post, and on the second day, other activists joined her. A representative of the Finnish bank Nordea quoted one of Thunberg's tweets to more than 200,000 followers. Thunberg's social media profile attracted local reporters, whose stories earned international coverage in little more than a week.

[ 54 ] One Swedish climate-focused social media company was We Don't Have Time (WDHT), founded by Ingmar Rentzhog. He said her strike began attracting public attention only after he turned up with a freelance photographer and posted Thunberg's photograph on his Facebook page and Instagram account, and a video in English that he posted on the company's YouTube channel.

[ 55 ] Rentzhog subsequently asked Thunberg to become an unpaid youth advisor to WDHT. He then used her name and image without her knowledge or permission to raise millions for a WDHT for-profit subsidiary, We Don't Have Time AB, of which he is the chief executive officer.

[ 56 ] Thunberg stated that she received no money from the company [ 55 ] and terminated her volunteer advisor role with WDHT once she realized they were making money from her name.

[ 57 ] Throughout 2018, Thunberg's activism evolved from a solitary protest to taking part in demonstrations throughout Europe, making several high-profile public speeches, and mobilizing her followers on social media platforms. In December, after Sweden's 2018 general election, Thunberg continued to school strike – but only on Fridays. She inspired school students across the globe to take part in her Friday school strikes. In December alone, more than 20,000 students held strikes in at least 270 cities.

[ 58 ] Thunberg spoke out against the National Eligibility cum Entrance Test (Undergraduate) 2020 and Joint Entrance Examination 2020 entrance exams, which were conducted in India in September. She said it was unfair for students to have to appear for exams during a global pandemic. She also said that India's students had been deeply impacted by the floods that hit states such as Bihar and Assam , which caused mass destruction.

[ 59 ] On 3 February 2021, Thunberg tweeted [ 60 ] her support of the ongoing 2020–2021 Indian farmers' protest . Effigies of Thunberg were burned in Delhi by Hindutva nationalists who opposed the farmers' protests.

[ 61 ] Thunberg's tweet was criticized by the Bharatiya Janata Party –led Indian government, which said that it was an internal matter.

[ 62 ] In her initial tweet, Thunberg linked to a document that provided a campaigning toolkit for those who wanted to support the farmers' protest. It contained advice on hashtags and how to sign petitions, and it also included suggested actions beyond those directly linked to the farmers' protest. She soon deleted the tweet, saying the document was "outdated", and linked to a different one [ 63 ] [ 64 ] "to enable anyone unfamiliar with the ongoing farmers protests in India to better understand the situation and make decisions on how to support the farmers based on their own analysis".

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] The Indian climate activist who edited the toolkit, Disha Ravi , was arrested under the charges of sedition and criminal conspiracy on 16 February 2021.

[ 67 ] Protests and speeches in Europe Further information: Speeches of Greta Thunberg Thunberg's speech during the plenary session of the 2018 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP24) went viral.

[ 68 ] She said that the world leaders present were "not mature enough to tell it like it is".

[ 69 ] In the first half of 2019, she joined various student protests around Europe, and was invited to speak at various forums and parliaments. At the January 2019 World Economic Forum , Thunberg gave a speech in which she declared: "Our house is on fire." [ 70 ] She addressed the British , European and French parliaments; in the latter case several right-wing politicians boycotted her.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] In a short meeting with Thunberg, Pope Francis thanked her and encouraged her to continue her activism.

[ 73 ] By March 2019, Thunberg was still staging her regular protests outside the Swedish parliament every Friday, where other students occasionally joined her. According to her father, her activism did not interfere with her schoolwork, but she had less spare time.

[ 74 ] She finished lower secondary school with excellent grades: 14 As and three Bs.

[ 75 ] In July 2019, Time magazine reported Thunberg was taking a " sabbatical year " from school, intending to travel in the Americas while meeting people from the climate movement on her way to attend and address 2019 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP25).

[ 76 ] Sabbatical year Further information: Transatlantic voyages of Greta Thunberg United States Congresswoman Dina Titus listening to Thunberg and her fellow activists discussing the urgent need to address climate change, 2019 In August 2019, Thunberg sailed across the Atlantic Ocean from Plymouth, England , to New York City, in the 60-foot (18 m) racing yacht Malizia II , equipped with solar panels and underwater turbines . The trip was announced as a carbon-neutral transatlantic crossing serving as a demonstration of Thunberg's declared beliefs of the importance of reducing emissions.

[ 77 ] The voyage took 15 days, from 14 to 28 August 2019.

France 24 reported that several crew members would fly to New York to sail the Malizia II yacht back to Europe.

[ 78 ] On Thunberg's return voyage aboard the La Vagabonde catamaran, she was quoted that she chose sailing as a way to send a message to the world that there is no real sustainable option to travel across the oceans.

[ 79 ] While in New York, Thunberg was invited to give testimony in the US House Select Committee on the Climate Crisis on 18 September. Instead of testifying, she gave an eight-sentence statement and submitted the IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C as evidence.

[ 80 ] UN Climate Action Summit At the UN Climate Action Summit This is all wrong. I shouldn't be up here. I should be back in school on the other side of the ocean. Yet you all come to us young people for hope.

How dare you!

You have stolen my dreams and my childhood with your empty words. And yet I'm one of the lucky ones. People are suffering. People are dying. Entire ecosystems are collapsing. We are in the beginning of a mass extinction, and all you can talk about is money and fairy tales of eternal economic growth.

How dare you!

Greta Thunberg, New York [ 81 ] 23 September 2019 On 23 September 2019, Thunberg attended the UN Climate Action Summit in New York City.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] On the same day, the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) hosted a press conference where Thunberg joined 15 other children, including Ayakha Melithafa , Alexandria Villaseñor , Catarina Lorenzo , Ridhima Pandey and Carl Smith.

Together, the group announced they had made an official complaint against five nations that were not on track to meet the emission reduction targets they committed to in their Paris Agreement pledges: Argentina, Brazil, France, Germany, and Turkey .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] The complaint challenged these countries under the Third Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child . The Protocol is a quasi-judicial mechanism that allows children or their representatives, who believe their rights have been violated, to bring a complaint before the relevant "treaty body", the Committee on the Rights of the Child.

[ 86 ] If the complaint succeeds, the countries will be asked to respond, but any suggestions are not legally binding.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Autumn global climate strikes In late September 2019, Thunberg entered Canada where she participated in climate protests in Montreal , Edmonton and Vancouver , including leading a climate rally as part of the 27 September 2019 Global Climate Strike in Montreal.

[ 89 ] The school strikes for climate on 20 and 27 September 2019 were attended by over four million people, according to one of the co-organisers.

[ 90 ] Hundreds of thousands took part in the protest, described as the largest in the city's history. The mayor of Montreal gave her the Freedom of the City award. Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was in attendance, and Thunberg spoke briefly with him.

[ 91 ] While in the United States, Thunberg participated in climate protests in New York City with Alexandria Villaseñor and Xiye Bastida ; in Washington, D.C., with Jerome Foster II ; Iowa City ; Los Angeles; Charlotte ; Denver with Haven Coleman ; and the Standing Rock Indian Reservation with Tokata Iron Eyes . In various cities, Thunberg's keynote speech began by acknowledging that she was standing on land that originally belonged to Indigenous peoples , saying: "In acknowledging the enormous injustices inflicted upon these people, we must also mention the many enslaved and indentured servants whose labour the world still profits from today." [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Participation at COP25 Thunberg had intended to remain in the Americas to travel overland to attend the 2019 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP25) originally planned in Santiago, Chile, in December. However, it was announced on short notice that COP25 was to be moved to Madrid, Spain, because of serious public unrest in Chile .

[ 94 ] Thunberg has refused to fly because of the carbon emissions from air travel, so she posted on social media that she needed a ride across the Atlantic Ocean. Riley Whitelum and his wife, Elayna Carausu, two Australians who had been sailing around the world aboard their 48-foot (15 m) catamaran La Vagabonde , offered to take her. On 13 November 2019, Thunberg set sail from Hampton, Virginia , for Lisbon, Portugal. Her departing message was the same as it has been since she began her activism: "My message to the Americans is the same as to everyone – that is to unite behind the science and to act on the science." [ 9 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Thunberg arrived in the Port of Lisbon on 3 December 2019, [ 97 ] [ 98 ] then travelled on to Madrid to speak at COP25 and to participate with the local Fridays for Future climate strikers. During a press conference before the march, she called for more "concrete action", arguing that the global wave of school strikes over the previous year had "achieved nothing" because greenhouse gas emissions were still rising – by 4% since 2015.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Further activism in Europe and end of sabbatical year Thunberg addressing the European Parliament 's Environment Committee about the European Climate Law, 4 March 2020 Thunberg is at the far right of the picture.

Thunberg was guest editor of the BBC Radio's flagship current affairs programme, the Today Programme in late 2019.

[ 101 ] It featured interviews on climate change with Sir David Attenborough , Bank of England chief Mark Carney , Massive Attack 's Robert Del Naja, and Shell Oil executive Maarten Wetselaar, and was released as a podcast [ 102 ] containing these interviews and other highlights. A month later, she called on German company Siemens to stop the delivery of railway equipment to the controversial Carmichael coal mine , operated by a subsidiary of Indian company Adani Group in Australia, [ 103 ] but on 13 January, Siemens said that it would continue to honour its contract with Adani.

[ 104 ] Thunberg returned to the World Economic Forum held in Davos , Switzerland, on 21 January 2020. She delivered two speeches, and participated in panel discussions hosted by The New York Times and the World Economic Forum. Thunberg used many of the themes contained in her previous speeches, but focused on one in particular: "Our house is still on fire." Thunberg joked that she cannot complain about not being heard, saying: "I am being heard all the time." [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] The next month, she travelled to Oxford University to meet Malala Yousafzai , a Nobel Peace Prize-winning Pakistani activist for female education who had been shot in the head by the Taliban as a schoolgirl. Thunberg was later to join a school strike in Bristol .

[ 108 ] She also attended an extraordinary meeting of the European Parliament 's Environment Committee to talk about the European Climate Law. There she declared that she considered the new proposal for a climate law published by the European Commission to be a surrender.

[ 109 ] Thunberg ended her gap year in August 2020. Travel over the next year was restricted because of the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Activism from 2020 to 2021 In early 2020, the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic caused worldwide implementation of mitigation measures , including social distancing , quarantine , and face coverings .

[ 112 ] On 13 March 2020, Thunberg stated that "In a crisis we change our behavior and adapt to the new circumstances for the greater good of society." Thunberg and School Strike for Climate subsequently moved their activities online.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] On 20 August 2020, the second anniversary of Thunberg's first strike, Thunberg and fellow climate activists Luisa Neubauer , Anuna de Wever van der Heyden and Adélaïde Charlier met with German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Berlin.

[ 115 ] They subsequently announced plans for another global climate strike on 25 September 2020. Neubauer said that whether the strike in September is virtual in nature or in the streets would be determined by the pandemic situation. At a joint press conference with fellow activists echoing her sentiment, Neubauer said: "The climate crisis doesn't pause." [ 116 ] On 14 December 2020, Thunberg used Twitter to criticize the New Zealand Labour Government 's recent climate change emergency declaration as " virtue signalling ", tweeting that New Zealand's Labour Government had only committed to reducing less than one percent of New Zealand's carbon emissions by 2025.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] In response, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern and climate change Minister James Shaw defended New Zealand's climate change declaration as only the start of the country's climate change mitigation goals.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] On 29 December 2020, during a BBC interview, Thunberg said that climate experts are not being listened to despite the COVID-19 pandemic highlighting the importance of using science to address such issues. She added that the COVID-19 crisis had "shone a light" on how "we cannot make it without science".

[ 120 ] Thunberg with a megaphone leading an event in Berlin, 2021 Thunberg and other climate activists launched the annual Climate Live concert to highlight climate change. Their first concert was held in April 2021.

[ 121 ] In May 2021, she addressed the COVID-19 crisis again, when she urged a change in the food production system and the protection of animals and their habitats. Thunberg's comments, which came amidst calls for meat-free alternatives, also addressed health concerns regarding animal welfare and the environment. Thunberg said that the way humans are destroying habitats are the perfect conditions for the spread of diseases and noted zoonotic illnesses such as COVID-19, Zika, Ebola, West Nile fever, SARS, MERS, among others.

[ 122 ] In July 2021, Thunberg received her COVID vaccine , saying: "I am extremely grateful and privileged to be able to live in a part of the world where I can already get vaccinated. The vaccine distribution around the world is extremely unequal. No one is safe until everyone is safe. But when you get offered a vaccine, don't hesitate. It saves lives." [ 123 ] The inaugural edition of Vogue Scandinavia (August–September 2021) had a cover photograph of Thunberg shot by Swedish photography and conservationist duo Iris and Mattias Alexandrov Klum and an interview with her.

[ 124 ] The cover shows Thunberg wearing a trench coat while sitting with an Icelandic horse in a woodland outside Stockholm.

[ 124 ] In the interview, Thunberg criticized the promotional campaigns the fashion industry uses to appear sustainable without "actually doing anything to protect the environment" and called the campaigns " greenwashing ".

[ 125 ] On the same day, she used Twitter to criticize the fashion industry as "a huge contributor" to the climate and ecological "emergency" and "not to mention its impact on the countless workers and communities who are being exploited around the world in order for some to enjoy fast fashion that many treat as disposables".

[ 126 ] Thunberg's wearing of wool during the photoshoot garnered criticism from other vegans, who said it promoted animal cruelty. According to People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), she was unaware that the clothing was made of real animal-derived wool.

[ 127 ] On 28 September 2021, Thunberg criticized U.S. president Joe Biden , British prime minister Boris Johnson , Indian prime minister Narendra Modi and other world leaders over their promises to address the climate crisis in a speech at the Youth4Climate Summit in Milan .

[ 128 ] Thunberg also criticized and doubted organizers of climate conferences, saying, "They invite cherry-picked young people to meetings like this to pretend they are listening to us. But they are not." [ 129 ] A month later, Thunberg took part in a protest in London, demanding that the financial system stop funding companies and projects that use fossil fuels , such as coal, oil and natural gas.

[ 130 ] The protest in London is part of a series taking place at the financial centres around the world, including New York City, San Francisco and Nairobi , Kenya.

[ 130 ] She told the BBC journalist Andrew Marr that banks should "stop funding our destruction", ahead of the coming climate summit.

[ 130 ] At the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, Thunberg attended a panel on climate change hosted by British actress Emma Watson .

[ 131 ] In November 2021, Thunberg, along with other climate activists, filed a petition to the United Nations, calling it to declare a level 3 global climate emergency , with the aim of creating a special team that will coordinate the response to the climate crisis at an international level.

[ 132 ] In December 2021, Thunberg reiterated her criticism of U.S. president Joe Biden, saying, "If you call him a leader – I mean, it's strange that people think of Joe Biden as a leader for the climate when you see what his administration is doing", alluding to the United States expansions on use of fossil fuels during the Biden administration. Thunberg further lamented that activists and teenagers are needed to bring awareness about climate change.

[ 133 ] Activism from 2022 to early 2023 In early 2022, Thunberg condemned the British firm Beowulf and its mining of iron on Sámi land. She said, "We believe that the climate, the environment, clean air, water, reindeer herding, indigenous rights and the future of humanity should be prioritized above the short-term profit of a company. The Swedish government needs to stop the colonization of Sami." [ 134 ] Following the invasion of Ukraine by Russian military forces , she combined her usual Friday climate protests to include opposing the invasion. She stood outside the Russian embassy in Stockholm holding a sign that read "Stand With Ukraine".

[ 2 ] On 29 June 2023, Thunberg met with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy and other prominent European figures to form a working group to address ecological damage from the 16-month-old Russian invasion.

[ 135 ] Thunberg criticized the European Parliament in 2022 for voting to label fossil gas and nuclear energy as "green" energy. She called that decision "hypocrisy", and stated that "This will delay a desperately needed real sustainable transition and deepen our dependency on Russian fuels. The hypocrisy is striking, but unfortunately not surprising." [ 136 ] In November , Thunberg, along with over 600 young people from a youth-led Swedish activist group Auroramålet , filed a lawsuit in a Stockholm district court against the Swedish government for climate inaction within Sweden. The Nacka District Court subsequently allowed the class action lawsuit that posits Sweden has an "insufficient climate policy" to proceed.

[ 137 ] In late 2022, The Climate Book was released.

[ 138 ] The book, written by Thunberg, is a compilation in which she brought together over one hundred experts – geophysicists, oceanographers and meteorologists; engineers, economists and mathematicians; historians, philosophers and indigenous leaders – who wrote essays focusing on changes to the Earth's climate. Thunberg also contributed writings to the book and is credited as its author. She donated her copyright and all royalties generated by the book to her foundation [ 139 ] [ 140 ] and will not personally profit from sales or other commercial uses. While on her 2022 midterm break from school, Thunberg embarked on a publicity campaign [ 141 ] for the book's initial release; it is published under Penguin 's Allen Lane Imprint books.

[ 142 ] An extract from The Climate Book and reviews are available.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] [ 146 ] In January 2023, Thunberg spoke during a protest in Lützerath , calling on the German authorities to stop the expansion of a nearby coal mine.

[ 147 ] She was detained along with other activists by German police while demonstrating at the opencast coal mine of Garzweiler 2 , around 9 kilometres (5.6 mi) from the village on 17 January, after police warned the group that they would be detained unless they moved away from the edge of the mine. The mine's owner RWE had earlier agreed with the government on demolishing Lützerath in exchange for a faster exit from coal and the saving of five villages originally slated for destruction. She was released the same day after an identity check.

[ 148 ] Post-high school graduation Thunberg graduated from high school in June 2023 and marked the day by attending what would be her last school strike for climate protest before receiving her diploma. She wore the Swedish traditional graduation white dress and white studentmössa (cap) to the protest, and vowed to continue, saying that her "fight has only just begun".

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] In Thunberg's subsequent protest pictures on social media, some of the group photos have featured "School Strike for Climate" signage. Later in the year, she began a bachelor's program at Stockholm University .

[ 151 ] In June 2023, Thunberg took part in a Reclaim the Future protest in Malmö , Sweden, and was charged with disobeying a police order.

[ 152 ] A trial was held at Malmö District Court where the prosecution presented its case against Thunberg for disobedience to authority after having disrupted traffic and refusing to follow police orders. While she acknowledged that the facts of the case against her were accurate, Thunberg said that due to the existential and global threat to the climate caused by the fossil fuel industry, her protest was a form of self-defence. She was sentenced by the court to pay fines totaling SEK 2,500 (equivalent to US$240).

[ 153 ] Within hours after the court convicted her, Thunberg attended a similar protest where Reclaim the Future again blocked oil tankers on a road in Malmö. She was again forcibly removed by police and later criminally charged. A second Swedish trial for disobedience (disobeying a police order to disperse) took place in October. She was found guilty for the earlier incident and ordered to pay fines totaling SEK 4,500 (equivalent to $414).

[ 154 ] Thunberg cancelled an appearance at the Edinburgh International Book Festival in August to promote her book: The Climate Book . She said that as a climate activist she could not attend an event sponsored by Baillie Gifford – an investment management firm – due to its connections with the fossil fuel industry.

[ 155 ] In making the announcement, the festival's Nick Barley said that he was disappointed but respected Thunberg's decision. "I share Greta's view that in all areas of society the rate of progress is not enough." He went on to say: "The book festival exists to give a platform for debate and discussion around key issues affecting humanity today – including the climate emergency [...] We strongly believe that Baillie Gifford are part of the solution to the climate emergency." [ 156 ] In its response, Baillie Gifford said that it was not a significant fossil fuel investor, with 2% of its clients' money being invested in companies with some business related to fossil fuels while the market average was 11%.

[ 157 ] Thunberg was arrested in London that October for her part in protesting against the Energy Intelligence Forum, described as the " Oscars of oil".

[ 158 ] She was charged with failure to comply with a lawful order to disperse, a "condition imposed under Section 14 of the Public Order Act ". She appeared at Westminster Magistrates' Court and entered a plea of "not guilty".

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Early the following year, the case was dismissed by the presiding judge after the prosecution rested. The judge agreed with the defence that "the crown had failed to present enough evidence to prove their case".

[ 161 ] In April 2024, Thunberg participated in an Extinction Rebellion –led protest in The Hague where law enforcement forcibly removed her from blocking a road. She then joined another group of Extinction Rebellion protesters who were blocking a different road and was again removed. The BBC and some other media outlets reported that Thunberg was arrested while some media outlets only mention that she was detained. It is unclear whether criminal charges were – or will be – filed.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Shorty afterwards, she was charged with civil disobedience for allegedly ignoring police orders to leave two climate demonstrations which law enforcement claim were blocking Sweden's parliament building in March. Her refusal to comply with police orders caused her to be forcibly removed. Thunberg entered a plea of not guilty.

[ 165 ] A Swedish court convicted her and she was fined kr 6,000 (equivalent to US$550). Thunberg was also ordered to pay an additional kr 1,000 (equivalent to US$92) in damages.

[ 166 ] In June 2025, Thunberg participated in the Budapest Pride [ 167 ] to protest its ban by the Hungarian parliament .

[ 168 ] On 26 July 2025, Thunberg joined the protests in North Macedonia against the construction of a hydroelectric power plant on the Došnica River on the Kožuf Mountain .

[ 169 ] On 31 July 2025, Thunberg joined the Serbian anti-corruption protests in Belgrade against Aleksandar Vučić 's regime.

[ 170 ] Pro-Palestinian activism Thunberg wearing a keffiyeh in solidarity with Palestine at an event in Amsterdam in 2023 In October 2023, Thunberg posted a photo during her usual Friday climate protests, showing her and three other protesters holding signs. One sign read "climate justice now" and the other three displayed support for Palestinians in the Gaza Strip amidst the Gaza war . Her post on X (formerly Twitter) and Instagram also included fourteen links to "Palestine solidarity" social media accounts where, she said, "you can find information on how you can help." [ 171 ] Thunberg was immediately criticized for not condemning the October 7 attacks .

[ 172 ] The following day Thunberg posted "It goes without saying – or so I thought – that I'm against the horrific attacks by Hamas. As I said, 'the world needs to speak up and call for an immediate ceasefire, justice and freedom for Palestinians and all civilians affected.

' " The Israeli Ministry of Education responded to Thunberg's initial "statements in support of Gaza without condemning Hamas" by removing "various references in the educational curriculum that present Thunberg as a role model and a source of inspiration for youth".

[ 173 ] In December 2023, Thunberg, along with three researchers and activists affiliated with Fridays for Future Sweden, published an opinion piece in The Guardian titled "We won't stop speaking out about Gaza's suffering – there is no climate justice without human rights." The piece set out her and FFF Sweden's support for Palestinian civilians in the Gaza Strip amidst the Gaza war . The article stated that "All Fridays for Future groups are autonomous, and this article represents the views of nobody but FFF Sweden." [ 14 ] They also addressed the criticism that Fridays for Future has been radicalized and is engaging in politics by stating that the organisation has always been political because it is a movement for justice. FFF Sweden believes that "means speaking up when people suffer, are forced to flee their homes or are killed – regardless of the cause".

[ 14 ] Fridays for Future International while not taking a side in conflicts, does take an anti-war stance - it issued an appeal claiming that stopping the ecological crisis requires peace and disarmament as it requires stopping overconsumption and GDP directly feeds military potential. 24 organizations including Scientist Rebellion as well as 61 scientists including Michael Meeropol and Don Trent Jacobs endorsed the appeal.

[ 174 ] Thunberg was detained by Swedish police for taking part in a pro-Palestinian protest outside Malmö Arena in May, which was hosting the Eurovision Song Contest 2024 , and subsequently released a statement opposing Israel's participation in the contest .

[ 175 ] In September, Danish police apprehended Thunberg during a pro-Palestinian protest in Copenhagen against the Gaza war. Thunberg, along with five others, was detained after blocking the entrance to a building at the University of Copenhagen .

[ 176 ] Less than a week later, she was "carried out" from the library of Stockholm University by Stockholm police after she participated in an encampment inside the library. She characterized the police response as a "repression".

[ 177 ] Following those incidents, she was labeled "antisemite of the week" by StopAntisemitism .

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] While speaking at a pro-Palestine rally in the German city of Mannheim in December, Thunberg said "Fuck Germany and fuck Israel." In response, local CDU politician Manuel Hagel accused Thunberg of "moving very consciously in close proximity to anti-Semitism".

[ 180 ] Reflecting on her pro-Palestine activism, Thunberg stated: [ 181 ] For me, it hasn't been solely about the climate at all. The media often wants to simplify things, like 'she's the one who works on climate.' They want to put a face to the issue. I mean, we're talking about climate justice. All forms of justice are included within climate justice. In the last year, when I started getting involved in Palestinian activism, that view has shifted.

Gaza Freedom Flotilla Further information: June 2025 Gaza Freedom Flotilla Thunberg was planning on boarding the Gaza Freedom Flotilla at a Maltese port in May 2025. The plans were cancelled when one of the vessels was attacked by drones in international waters off the coast of Malta. The mission of the flotilla was to deliver humanitarian aid to Gaza , the longstanding blockade of which Israel intensified during the Gaza war , causing famine and a humanitarian crisis , [ 4 ] [ 182 ] conditions that she has described as systemic starvation and genocide .

[ 183 ] In June 2025, the Freedom Flotilla Coalition launched a new aid mission to Gaza aboard the UK-flagged vessel Madleen , [ 184 ] aiming to challenge Israel's naval blockade and deliver humanitarian supplies. The flotilla followed a 15-year history of similar attempts, many of which have been intercepted or blocked by Israeli forces. The mission came amid renewed global scrutiny of Israel's blockade, alleged drone attacks on previous flotilla ships, and growing criticism from international organizations over restricted aid access. Also aboard were high-profile figures including activist Thiago Ávila and MEP Rima Hassan , the latter previously barred from Israel for her pro-Palestinian stance; initially, actor Liam Cunningham was also meant to embark.

[ 185 ] In the early morning on 9 June, Madleen was boarded by the Israel Defense Forces in international waters , [ 186 ] under the orders of Israel Defense Minister Israel Katz .

[ 184 ] This came after accusations from the crew on the board of harassment from Israeli ships and drones. At 3:34AM ( GMT+3 ), a video from Thunberg was posted to the Freedom Flotilla Coalition X (Twitter) account, recorded in advance in the case that the ship was seized before reaching Gaza. Shortly after, Israel's Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that the boat had been seized and was being taken to the Ashdod port.

[ 186 ] She was deported from Israel the day after.

[ 187 ] In an interview, Thunberg said it was "a bit unclear" why she was released while others remained detained. She said that she and some others had signed a document stating they wished to leave Israel as soon as possible, and that they had not entered the country illegally.

[ 188 ] Remarking on Thunberg's aid effort, Trump described her as "strange" and "angry". Upon arriving in Paris following her deportation from Israel, Thunberg responded, "I think the world needs a lot more young angry women, to be honest. Especially with everything going on right now." [ 189 ] Following the Israeli capture of yet another aid flotilla in July 2025, Thunberg joined the Global Sumud Flotilla , which is planned to be the largest civilian effort to break the siege of Gaza between August and September 2025.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] Boycott of COP29 Thunberg's protest in front of the UN office in Yerevan, Armenia, 16 November 2024 Thunberg boycotted COP29 , hosted in 2024 in Azerbaijan by the regime of autocratic leader Ilham Aliyev , due to human rights violations and ethnic cleansing of Armenians in the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh , and instead visited neighboring Georgia and Armenia.

[ 192 ] While in Georgia, she joined a political demonstration against Georgia's government in Tbilisi , stating: "I am here to express my support and solidarity to all activists and citizens who are coming forward to defend their fundamental rights such as freedom, justice and democracy." [ 3 ] In an interview, she said that "The only thing that will come out of [COP29] is loopholes, more negotiations, and symbolic decisions that look good on paper but are really just greenwashing." [ 181 ] She then visited Armenia, where she argued that "We need to stop hosting climate conferences in places like Azerbaijan, a country that is repressing its own population to an extreme degree." [ 193 ] At a demonstration in front of the United Nations delegation headquarters in Yerevan , she stated "We urge international media and those in power who are in Baku to go and visit Armenian hostages and demand an immediate release to all political prisoners, prisoners of war and hostages." [ 194 ] [ 192 ] [ 195 ] While in Armenia, she also visited Pink Armenia , which stated "We extend our gratitude to Greta Thunberg for raising Armenia's critical issues on international platforms and for showing her solidarity with the LGBT+ movement".

[ 196 ] Position on climate change A video of Thunberg speaking at the 2019 World Economic Forum in Davos Thunberg delivering a speech at a July 2019 school strike for climate change in Berlin Thunberg states that humanity is facing an existential crisis because of global warming [ 197 ] and holds the baby boomers , and each subsequent generation, responsible for creating and perpetuating detrimental changes to the Earth's climate.

[ 198 ] She uses graphic analogies (such as "our house is on fire") to highlight her concerns and often speaks bluntly to business and political leaders about their failure to take concerted action.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] Thunberg has said that climate change will have a disproportionate effect on young people, whose futures will be profoundly affected. She argues that her generation may not have a future any more because "that future was sold so that a small number of people could make unimaginable amounts of money." [ 201 ] She also has said that people in the Global South will suffer most from climate change, even though they have contributed least in terms of carbon dioxide emissions.

[ 202 ] Thunberg has voiced support for other young activists from developing countries who are already facing the damaging effects of climate change . Speaking in Madrid in December 2019, she said: "We talk about our future, they talk about their present." [ 203 ] Speaking at international forums, she berates world leaders because she believes that too little action is being taken to reduce global emissions.

[ 204 ] She says that lowering emissions is not enough, that emissions need to be reduced to zero if the world is to keep global warming to less than 1.5 °C. Speaking to the British Parliament in April 2019, she said: "The fact that we are speaking of 'lowering' instead of 'stopping' emissions is perhaps the greatest force behind the continuing business as usual." [ 205 ] [ 206 ] To take the necessary action, she added that politicians should not listen to her, they should listen to what the scientists are saying about how to address the crisis.

[ 207 ] [ 205 ] According to political scientists Mattia Zulianello and Diego Ceccobelli, Thunberg's ideas can be defined as technocratic ecocentrism, which is grounded on "the exaltation of the vox scientifica".

[ 208 ] More specifically, Thunberg has argued that commitments made at the Paris Agreement are insufficient to limit global warming to 1.5 °C, and that the greenhouse gas emissions curve needs to start declining steeply no later than 2020 – as detailed in the IPCC's Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 °C published in 2018.

[ 209 ] [ 201 ] In February 2019, at a conference of the European Economic and Social Committee , she said that the EU's current intention to cut emissions by 40% by 2030 is "not sufficient to protect the future for children growing up today" and that the EU must reduce their CO 2 emissions by 80%, double the 40% goal.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] Thunberg reiterated her views on political inaction in a November 2020 interview where she stated that "leaders are happy to set targets for decades ahead, but flinch when immediate action is needed." [ 212 ] She criticized the European Green Deal , which aims to make the European Union carbon neutral by 2050, [ 213 ] saying that it "sends a strong signal that real and sufficient action is being taken when in fact it's not. Nature doesn't bargain, and you cannot make deals with physics." [ 214 ] In July 2020, Thunberg, Luisa Neubauer , Anuna De Wever and Adélaïde Charlier wrote an open letter to all EU leaders and heads of state stating they must "advocate to make ecocide an international crime at the International Criminal Court." [ 215 ] [ 216 ] In June 2023, Thunberg called the destruction of the Kakhovka dam in Ukraine by Russia an ecocide and called for prosecution, stating "Russia needs to be held accountable for their action and for their crimes. The eyes of the world are on them now".

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] In an interview shortly before the 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, Thunberg, asked how optimistic she was that the conference could achieve anything, responded, "Nothing has changed from previous years, really. The leaders will say, 'we'll do this and we'll do this, and we will put our forces together and achieve this', and then they will do nothing. Maybe some symbolic things and creative accounting and things that don't really have a big impact. We can have as many COPs as we want, but nothing real will come out of it." [ 41 ] She called Chinese president Xi Jinping "a leader of a dictatorship" and said that "democracy is the only solution to the climate crisis, since the only thing that could get us out of this situation is ... massive public pressure." [ 219 ] On 30 October 2021, she arrived at Glasgow Central station for the COP26. She spoke at some protests during the COP and marched in a Fridays for Future Scotland climate strike on Friday 5 November; she said in an earlier interview that the public needed to "uproot the system".

[ 220 ] She delivered a speech to protesters in which she described COP26 as a failure, speaking of "blah blah blah" and greenwashing.

[ 221 ] Public response and impact Academics In February 2019, 224 academics signed an open letter of support stating they were inspired by Thunberg's actions and the striking school children in making their voices heard.

[ 222 ] This support from academics, including many scientists, is in sharp contrast with the opposition Thunberg usually receives from politicians.

[ 223 ] Politicians Thunberg has met with many politicians and world leaders but said she could not think of a single politician who has impressed her. Asked about New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern , who described the climate crisis as a matter of life or death, Thunberg commented, "It's funny that people believe Jacinda Ardern and people like that are climate leaders. That just tells you how little people know about the climate crisis." Thunberg says that she ignores words and sentiments: "Obviously the emissions haven't fallen. It goes without saying that these people are not doing anything." In fact, New Zealand's greenhouse-gas emissions had increased by 2% in 2019.

[ 29 ] United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres endorsed the school strikes initiated by Thunberg, admitting: "My generation has failed to respond properly to the dramatic challenge of climate change. This is deeply felt by young people. No wonder they are angry." [ 224 ] Speaking at an event in New Zealand in May 2019, Guterres said his generation was "not winning the battle against climate change" and that it was up to the youth to "rescue the planet".

[ 225 ] Thunberg urges MEPs to show climate leadership, receives standing ovation, 2020.

Democratic candidates for the 2020 United States presidential election , including Kamala Harris , Beto O'Rourke , and Bernie Sanders , expressed support after her speech at the September 2019 action summit in New York.

[ 226 ] German Chancellor Angela Merkel indicated that young activists such as Thunberg had driven her government to act faster on climate change.

[ 227 ] Thunberg and her campaign have been criticized by politicians as well, ranging from personal attacks to statements that she oversimplifies the complex issues involved. Among them are the Australian prime minister Scott Morrison , [ 228 ] German chancellor Angela Merkel , [ 229 ] French president Emmanuel Macron , [ 230 ] Russian president Vladimir Putin , [ 231 ] OPEC (Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries) and, repeatedly, U.S. president Donald Trump .

[ 232 ] In September 2019, Trump shared a video of Thunberg angrily addressing world leaders, along with her quote that "people are dying, entire ecosystems are collapsing. We are in the beginning of a mass extinction ." Trump wrote about Thunberg, tweeting: "She seems like a very happy young girl looking forward to a bright and wonderful future. So nice to see!" Thunberg reacted by changing her Twitter bio to match his description, and stating that she could not "understand why grown-ups would choose to mock children and teenagers for just communicating and acting on the science when they could do something good instead." [ 233 ] In December 2019, Trump again mocked Thunberg after she was named Person of the Year for 2019 by Time , tweeting: "So ridiculous. Greta must work on her Anger Management problem, then go to a good old fashioned movie with a friend! Chill Greta, Chill!" [ 234 ] Thunberg responded by changing her Twitter biography to: "A teenager working on her anger management problem. Currently chilling and watching a good old fashioned movie with a friend." [ 235 ] During the 2020 United States presidential election , Thunberg commented on Trump tweeting "Stop the count!" with the text: "So ridiculous. Donald must work on his Anger Management problem, then go to a good old fashioned movie with a friend! Chill Donald, Chill!" [ 236 ] [ 237 ] In October 2019, Putin described Thunberg as a "kind girl and very sincere", while suggesting she was being manipulated to serve others' interests. Putin criticized her as "poorly informed", adding, "No one has explained to Greta that the modern world is complex and different and people in Africa or in many Asian countries want to live at the same wealth level as in Sweden." Similar to her reaction to Trump, Thunberg updated her Twitter bio to reflect Putin's description of her.

[ 238 ] In December 2019, Thunberg tweeted: "Indigenous people are literally being murdered for trying to protect the forest from illegal deforestation . Over and over again. It is shameful that the world remains silent about this." When asked about this subject two days later, then Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro responded, "Greta said that the Indians were dying because they were trying to protect the Amazon . It is impressive how the press gives voice to such a brat." On the same day, Thunberg changed her Twitter description to pirralha , the Portuguese word for ' brat ' used by Bolsonaro.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] In a Time story published in May 2019, Thunberg addressed the criticism she has received online, saying, "It's quite hilarious when the only thing people can do is mock you, or talk about your appearance or personality, as it means they have no argument or nothing else to say." [ 241 ] Former U.S. Vice President and Trump's eventual successor Joe Biden responded to Trump's mockery of Thunberg after she was named the Time ' s Person of the Year 2019 by tweeting at Trump: "What kind of president bullies a teenager? @realDonaldTrump, you could learn a few things from Greta on what it means to be a leader." [ 242 ] On 30 March 2021, European Commissioner for Climate Action Frans Timmermans said in a tweet after talking to Thunberg that "The Commission remains committed" to making the Common Agricultural Policy "fulfill the objectives" of the European Green Deal .

[ 243 ] Press Thunberg swarmed by the press at the European Parliament, 2019 In August 2019, Scott Walsman wrote in Scientific American that Thunberg's detractors have "launched personal attacks", "bash [her] autism", and "increasingly rely on ad hominem attacks to blunt her influence".

[ 244 ] Writing in The Guardian , Aditya Chakrabortty said that columnists including Brendan O'Neill , Toby Young , the blog Guido Fawkes , as well as Helen Dale and Rod Liddle at The Spectator and The Sunday Times , had been making "ugly personal attacks" on Thunberg.

[ 245 ] British TV presenter Piers Morgan also mocked Thunberg.

[ 246 ] As part of its climate change denial , Germany's right-wing populist party Alternative for Germany (AfD) has attacked Thunberg "in fairly vicious ways", according to Jakob Guhl, a researcher for the Institute for Strategic Dialogue .

[ 247 ] Arron Banks ' Twitter post saying that "freak yachting accidents do happen in August" in reference to Thunberg, outraged a number of British MPs (Member of Parliament), celebrities, and academics.

Tanja Bueltmann , founder of EU Citizens' Champion, said Banks had "invoked the drowning of a child" for his own amusement and said that most of those attacking Thunberg "are white middle-aged men from the right of the political spectrum".

[ 248 ] Writing in The Guardian , Gaby Hinsliff said Thunberg has become "the new front in the Brexit culture war", arguing that the outrage generated by personal attacks on Thunberg by Brexiteers "gives them the welcome oxygen of publicity".

[ 249 ] In September 2019, Nick Gillespie wrote in Reason that "Greta Thunberg's histrionics are likely heartfelt but neither they nor the deplorable responses they conjure are a guide forward to good environmental policy in a world that is getting richer every day." [ 250 ] In August 2021, Yasmeen Serhan wrote in The Atlantic that Thunberg had become "the target of a barrage of disinformation and conspiracies" from the far-right and populist right , "including depictions of her as a spoiled child, a leftist pawn, and even a Nazi ".

[ 251 ] "The Greta effect" September 2019 climate strike in Geneva In summarizing Thunberg's global impact on the climate debate, the BBC encapsulated her influence: "she is credited with raising public awareness of climate change across the world, especially amongst young people. Many commentators call this 'the Greta effect'".

[ 252 ] In response to her outspoken stance, various politicians have also acknowledged the need to focus on climate change. Britain's secretary for the environment, Michael Gove , said, "When I listened to you, I felt great admiration, but also responsibility and guilt. I am of your parents' generation, and I recognise that we haven't done nearly enough to address climate change and the broader environmental crisis that we helped to create." Labour politician Ed Miliband , who was responsible for introducing the Climate Change Act 2008 , said, "You have woken us up. Thank you. All the young people who have gone on strike have held up a mirror to our society ... you have taught us all a really important lesson. You have stood out from the crowd." [ 19 ] Beginning in early 2019, roughly concurrent with growing public recognition of Thunberg's work, Google Trends data shows a growth in searches for the term climate emergency (shown in red), and for the term climate crisis (shown in blue). The surge in 2006 followed release of Al Gore 's film, An Inconvenient Truth .

In February 2019, Thunberg shared a stage with the President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker where he outlined: "In the next financial period from 2021 to 2027, every fourth euro spent within the EU budget will go towards action to mitigate climate change." [ 253 ] Climate issues also played a significant role in European Parliament election in May 2019, [ 254 ] as Green parties recorded their best ever results, [ 255 ] boosting their MEP seat numbers from 52 to 72.

[ 256 ] Many of the gains came from northern European countries where young people have taken to the streets inspired by Thunberg.

[ 255 ] In June 2019, a YouGov poll in Britain found that public concern about the environment had soared to record levels in the UK since Thunberg and Extinction Rebellion had "pierced the bubble of denial".

[ 257 ] In August 2019, publication and sales of children's books about the climate crisis reportedly doubled compared to the previous year. Publishers attribute this to the "Greta effect".

[ 258 ] In November 2019, Margaret Atwood called Thunberg "the Joan of Arc of the environment".

[ 259 ] Inspired by Thunberg, wealthy philanthropists and investors from the United States have donated about US$ 600,000 [ 260 ] to support Extinction Rebellion and school strike groups to establish the Climate Emergency Fund.

[ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] Trevor Neilson , one of the philanthropists, said the three founders would be contacting friends among the global mega-rich to donate "a hundred times" more in the weeks and months ahead.

[ 260 ] In December 2019, the New Scientist described the impact made by Thunberg and Extinction Rebellion with the headline: "The year the world woke up to climate change." [ 264 ] According to a 2021 study, "those who are more familiar with Greta Thunberg have higher intentions of taking collective actions to reduce global warming and that stronger collective efficacy beliefs mediate this relationship. This association between familiarity with Greta Thunberg, collective efficacy beliefs, and collective action intentions is present even after accounting for respondents' overall support for climate activism." [ 265 ] Flight shame Further information: Flight shame Thunberg has spearheaded the anti-flying movement, promoting rail travel over flying on environmental grounds.

[ 266 ] The buzzword associated with this movement is flygskam or "flight shame".

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] It is a phenomenon in which people feel social pressure not to fly because of the rising greenhouse gas emissions of the airline industry. It was originally championed by Swedish Olympic athlete Björn Ferry , but has gained significant momentum after Thunberg's refusal to fly on environmental grounds. Thunberg backed the campaign to fly less and made it part of her 2019 "awareness tour" in Europe.

[ 269 ] Sweden reported a 4% drop in domestic air travel for 2019 and an increase in rail use. The BBC says that the movement could halve the growth of global air travel, but Airbus and Boeing say that they still expect to grow at around 4% until 2035.

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] In June 2019, Swedish Railways (SJ) reported that the number of Swedes taking the train for domestic journeys had risen by 8% from the previous year, reflecting growing public concern about the impact of flying on CO 2 emissions.

[ 272 ] [ 267 ] X-Site sticker In February 2020, X-Site Energy Services of Alberta, Canada, distributed a sticker with the company's name and an image of a man grabbing the braids of a girl to rape her from behind. The girl in the image was labeled "Greta".

[ 273 ] Then 17-year-old Thunberg posted about it on Twitter: "They are starting to get more and more desperate. This shows that we're winning." Although the general manager of X-Site initially said that neither X-Site nor any X-Site employee was involved in making the sticker, [ 274 ] [ 275 ] X-Site Energy later apologized, admitting that they had distributed it and assumed full responsibility. The letter said that they were destroying known extant copies and making organizational changes to prevent future incidents.

[ 276 ] In popular culture and art A multi-story mural of Thunberg in Istanbul, Turkey Thunberg has been depicted in popular culture and art.

[ 277 ] Greta and the Giants , a book by Zoë Tucker and Zoe Persico, published by Frances Lincoln Children's Books , was inspired by the life of Thunberg.

[ 278 ] Argentinian artist Andrés Iglesias unveiled an 18-meter mural of Thunberg above Mason street, near Union Square in San Francisco.

[ 279 ] American painter Elizabeth Peyton chose her 2019 portrait Greta Thunberg as the leading image of one of her shows.

[ 277 ] She has been depicted in multiple murals . In Bristol , a 15-metre-high (49 ft) mural of Thunberg by artist Jody Thomas, portrays the bottom half of her face as if under rising sea water since May 2019.

[ 280 ] Thunberg was featured on the Time magazine cover in May 2019 issue, where she was described as a role model [ 241 ] and one of the " Next Generation Leaders ".

[ 281 ] She and fifteen others were featured on the cover of the fashion magazine British Vogue created by guest editor Meghan, Duchess of Sussex , in September 2019.

[ 282 ] Some of Thunberg's speeches have been incorporated into music. In 2019, Thunberg contributed a voiceover for a release of " The 1975 ", a song by the English band by the same name . Thunberg finishes the song by urging: "So, everyone out there, it is now time for civil disobedience. It is time to rebel." Proceeds will go to Extinction Rebellion at Thunberg's request.

[ 283 ] In September 2019, John Meredith set her UN Action Summit speech to death metal.

[ 284 ] The Australian musician Megan Washington and composer Robert Davidson used the same 'how dare you' speech, for a performance at an event exploring the future of music.

[ 285 ] DJ Fatboy Slim created a mashup of this speech with his dance hit " Right Here, Right Now ".

[ 286 ] Project Pressure , Voices for the Future , projected a quote by Thunberg onto the United Nations building in New York in the lead up to the UN Climate Action Summit , 2019.

In 2019, Thunberg collaborated with the climate charity Project Pressure on an art piece projected onto the United Nations Secretariat Building in New York in the lead up to that year's UN Climate Action Summit featuring the voices of six young activists, including Thunberg herself. Visualised by Joseph Michael, authored by Klaus Thymann and music by Brian Eno , their commentary was on the climate crisis and the urgent actions that need to be taken to minimize its consequences.

[ 287 ] In May 2020, Thunberg was featured in Pearl Jam 's music video " Retrograde ". She appears as a fortune teller, with images in her crystal ball depicting startling effects of climate change in numerous countries.

[ 288 ] On 3 September 2020, the Hulu cinéma vérité -esque documentary I Am Greta [ 289 ] had its world premiere at the Venice Film Festival . The film was directed by Nathan Grossman, who single-handedly operated the camera and sound equipment while memorializing Thunberg's climate activism "from the first solitary days of her school strike in August 2018, all the way through to her two-week sea voyage across the Atlantic Ocean from Europe to New York City to attend the United Nations Climate Summit in September 2019." [ 290 ] [ 291 ] Following its Venice premiere, the film had its North American premiere at the Toronto International Film Festival on 11 September 2020, [ 292 ] and opened in cinemas across Europe, North America and Australia in October.

[ 293 ] In March 2021, the University of Winchester installed a life-sized sculpture of Thunberg on its campus.

[ 294 ] BBC Studios made a three-part series Greta Thunberg: A Year to Change the World , [ 295 ] with planned visits to various countries omitted due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Honours and awards Thunberg has received honours and awards over the course of her activism. In May 2018, before the start of her school strike, she was one of the winners of a climate change essay competition by Svenska Dagbladet (The Swedish Daily News) for young people.

[ 50 ] Thunberg has refused to attend ceremonies or accept prizes if it requires her to fly, such as for the International Children's Peace Prize .

[ 296 ] She has received prizes from various non-governmental organisations but also from scientific institutions that lauded her success in raising awareness.

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] Time 's 25 most influential teens of 2018, December 2018, an annual list compiled by Time magazine of the most influential teenagers in the world that year.

[ 299 ] Fryshuset scholarship, 2018, for Young Role Model of the Year.

[ 300 ] Nobel Peace Prize nomination, 2019, by three deputies of the Norwegian parliament .

[ 301 ] [ 302 ] Again in 2020 by two Swedish lawmakers.

[ 303 ] Nominated in 2021, 2022 and 2023.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 303 ] Swedish Woman of the Year (Årets Svenska Kvinna), March 2019, awarded by the Swedish Women's Educational Association to "a Swedish woman who, through her accomplishments, has represented and brought attention to the Sweden of today in the greater world." [ 304 ] Rachel Carson Prize , March 2019, awarded to a woman who has distinguished herself in outstanding work for the environment in Norway or internationally.

[ 305 ] [ 306 ] Goldene Kamera film and television awards , March 2019, special Climate Action Award. Thunberg dedicated the prize to the activists protesting against the destruction of the Hambach Forest, which is threatened by lignite mining.

[ 307 ] Fritt Ord Award , April 2019, shared with Natur og Ungdom , which "celebrates freedom of speech". Thunberg donated her share of the prize money to a lawsuit seeking to halt Norwegian oil exploration in the Arctic.

[ 308 ] Time 100 , April 2019, by Time magazine, an annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world for that year.

[ 309 ] Laudato si' Prize , April 2019, awarded by the Milarepa Foundation of Chile and selected by the International Laudato Si' Group members under the second encyclical of Pope Francis, "on care for our common home".

[ 310 ] Honorary degree of Doctor honoris causa (dr.h.c.), May 2019, conferred by the Belgian University of Mons ( Mons, Belgium ) for "contribution ... to raising awareness on sustainable development".

[ 298 ] [ 311 ] Ambassador of Conscience Award , June 2019, Amnesty International 's most prestigious award, for her leadership in the climate movement, shared with Fridays for Future.

[ 312 ] [ 313 ] The Freedom Prize, July 2019, a prize from Normandy . She donated the prize money (25,000 euros) to four groups working for climate justice.

[ 314 ] The Geddes Environment Medal , July 2019, by the Royal Scottish Geographical Society , for "an outstanding practical, research or communications contribution to conservation and protection of the natural environment and the development of sustainability." [ 315 ] Honorary Fellowship of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society (FRSGS), July 2019, automatically conferred with the Geddes award.

[ 316 ] Right Livelihood Award , September 2019, from the Right Livelihood Foundation and known as Sweden's alternative Nobel Prize, one of four 2019 winners, "for inspiring and amplifying political demands for urgent climate action reflecting scientific facts." [ 317 ] Keys to the City of Montreal , September 2019, by Mayor Valérie Plante .

[ 318 ] International Children's Peace Prize , October 2019, shared with 14-year-old Divina Maloum from Cameroon, awarded by the KidsRights Foundation .

[ 319 ] Maphiyata echiyatan hin win ( lit.

' Woman Who Came from the Heavens ' ), Lakota tribal name conferred, October 2019, at Standing Rock Indian Reservation, following support for the Dakota Access pipeline opposition, after being invited by Tokata Iron Eyes, a 16-year-old Lakota climate activist.

[ 320 ] [ 321 ] Nordic Council Environment Prize , October 2019. Thunberg declined to accept the award or the prize money of DKK 350,000 (equivalent to € 47,000 as of October 2019) stating that Nordic countries were not doing enough to cut emissions.

[ 322 ] [ 323 ] Time Person of the Year , December 2019, by Time magazine, the first recipient born in the 21st century and the youngest ever.

[ 324 ] [ 325 ] For succeeding in "creating a global attitudinal shift, transforming millions of vague, middle-of-the-night anxieties into a worldwide movement calling for urgent change." [ 7 ] And: "For sounding the alarm about humanity's predatory relationship with the only home we have, for bringing to a fragmented world a voice that transcends backgrounds and borders, for showing us all what it might look like when a new generation leads." [ 326 ] Glamour Woman of the Year Award 2019, 12 November 2019, by Glamour magazine.

[ 327 ] Accepted by Jane Fonda, quoting Thunberg as saying "If a Swedish, teenage, science nerd who has shopstop, refuses to fly and has never worn makeup or been to a hairdresser can be chosen a Woman of the Year by one of the biggest fashion magazines in the world then I think almost nothing is impossible." [ 328 ] [ 329 ] She was recognized as one of the BBC's 100 women of 2019.

[ 330 ] Nature ' s 10 , December 2019, an annual list of ten "people who mattered" in science, produced by the scientific journal Nature , specifically, for being a "climate catalyst: A Swedish teenager [who] brought climate science to the fore as she channeled her generation's rage." [ 297 ] Forbes list of The World's 100 Most Powerful Women , 2019 Forbes 30 under 30 Europe 2020 – Social Entrepreneurs [ 331 ] Human Act Award, on Earth Day, 22 April 2020, by the Human Act Foundation, for "her fearless and determined efforts to mobilize millions of people around the world to fight climate change." The USD100,000 prize money was donated to UNICEF and doubled by the Foundation.

[ 332 ] Best in Activism (from Tech & Innovation category) at the 12th Shorty Awards , on 3 May 2020.

[ 333 ] Gulbenkian Prize for Humanity , in July 2020, the first recipient of this prize. Through her foundation, Thunberg donated the € 1,000,000 prize money "to charitable projects combatting the climate and ecological crisis and to support people facing the worst impacts, particularly in the Global South ." [ 334 ] Women in Youth Activism Award at the 2021 Women of Europe Awards on 2 December 2021, for "courageous leadership in support for climate justice , social change and youth community organising".

[ 335 ] Honorary Doctor of Laws (LLD), 31 May 2021, conferred by the University of British Columbia, Okanagan Campus , for "her international recognitions for challenging world leaders to take immediate action against climate change." [ 336 ] [ 337 ] [ 338 ] Honorary Doctor of Theology conferred by Helsinki University . The doctorate was scheduled to be granted in June 2023.

[ 339 ] Species named in Thunberg's honour The following species have been described and named after Thunberg: Nelloptodes gretae , by Michael Darby, Natural History Museum, UK, December 2019, a new species of beetle from Kenya in the family Ptiliidae .

[ 340 ] Its long antennae bear a passing resemblance to her braided pigtails .

[ 341 ] [ 342 ] Craspedotropis gretathunbergae , by Schilthuizen et al., 2020, a new species of land snail from Borneo in the family Cyclophoridae .

[ 343 ] Thunberga greta , in a new genus Thunberga gen nov , both by Peter Jäger , June 2020, a new species of east African huntsman spider in the family Sparassidae .

[ 344 ] As of April 2022 [update] the new Thunberga genus contained twenty-nine newly described spiders, [ 345 ] all from Madagascar and Mayotte, many in honour of other inspirational young people.

[ 346 ] Opacuincola gretathunbergae , by Verhaege & Haase, 2021, a new freshwater snail from New Zealand in the family Tateidae .

[ 347 ] Pristimantis gretathunbergae , by Mebert et al., 2022, a species of frog native to Panama.

[ 348 ] Works See also: Category:Works by Greta Thunberg For No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference , Thunberg was named author of the year by Waterstones .

[ 349 ] Scenes from the Heart (2018), with her sister, father and mother.

Thunberg, Greta (2019).

No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-241-51457-3 .

OCLC 1196840691 .

96 pages. A collection of Thunberg's climate action speeches, [ 350 ] with the earnings being donated to charity.

[ 351 ] "Greta Thunberg Speeches and Interviews" . What Would Greta Do?. Archived from the original on 6 April 2020.

An archived compilation of Thunberg's speeches and interviews, and IPCC Reports, up to March 2020 Thunberg, Greta (November 2019).

"The Disarming Case to Act Right Now on Climate Change" . Stockholm: TED (conference) .

Ernman, Malena; Thunberg, Greta; Ernman, Beata; Thunberg, Svante (2021).

Our House Is on Fire: Scenes of a Family and a Planet in Crisis . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-199288-4 .

OCLC 1179047026 .

288 pages Thunberg, Greta; Calderón, Adriana ; Jhumu, Farzana Faruk ; Njuguna, Eric (2021-08-19). " Opinion | This Is the World Being Left to Us by Adults ".

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362–4331. Retrieved 2022-05-16.

Thunberg, Greta (October 2022).

The Climate Book . London, United Kingdom: Allen Lane (Penguin Books).

ISBN 978-0-241-54747-2 .

Hardback.

[ 145 ] See also Severn Cullis-Suzuki – as a minor was also a notable environmental activist in 1992 Juliana v. United States , a lawsuit by 21 youths against the United States for significantly harming their right to life and liberty. It sought to force the government to adopt methods for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

Ridhima Pandey – Indian youth environmental activist List of most-liked tweets , which lists two tweets by Thunberg References ^ "It's an existential crisis. Listen to scientists" .

BBC . 23 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ a b c "Activist Thunberg protests against Ukraine invasion outside Russian embassy in Stockholm" .

Reuters . 25 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ a b Elena Giordano (4 November 2024).

"Greta Thunberg joins rally against Georgia's government" .

Politico . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ a b Carabott, Sarah (2 May 2025).

"Watch: Greta Thunberg among activists in Malta waiting to board Gaza aid vessel" .

Times of Malta . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ Gibson, Caitlin (16 March 2020).

"Before Greta Thunberg was a global icon, she was a tormented child who refused to eat or speak" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (11 March 2019).

"Greta Thunberg, schoolgirl climate change warrior: 'Some people can let things go. I can't' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ a b Alter, Charlotte; Haynes, Suyin; Worland, Justin (11 December 2019). Arbugaeva, Evgenia (ed.).

"Greta Thunberg: Time's Person of the Year 2019" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ Haynes, Suyin (24 May 2019).

"Students From 1,600 Cities Just Walked Out of School to Protest Climate Change. It Could Be Greta Thunberg's Biggest Strike Yet" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ a b Sengupta, Somini (12 November 2019).

"Greta Thunberg Sets Sail, Again, After Climate Talks Relocate" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

^ * "Video: 'How Dare You': Greta Thunberg at the United Nations" .

The New York Times . 23 September 2019.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

"Greta Thunberg to world leaders: 'How dare you – you have stolen my dreams and my childhood' – video" .

The Guardian . 23 September 2019.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

" 'How dare you': Greta Thunberg gives powerful, emotional speech to the UN – National" .

Global News .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "Climate activist Greta Thunberg graduates from 'school strikes' " .

BBC News . 9 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg To Face New Trial In Sweden Over Protest" .

barrons.com . AFP – Agence France Presse .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .

^ "U.K. Judge Acquits Climate Activist Greta Thunberg" .

Time . 2 February 2024.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ a b c Thunberg, Greta; Nilsson, Alde; Mater, Jamie; Frescia, Raquel (5 December 2023).

"We won't stop speaking out about Gaza's suffering – there is no climate justice without human rights" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 5 December 2023 .

^ "Activist Greta Thunberg urges release of Armenians in Azerbaijan" . France 24. 16 November 2024 . Retrieved 25 November 2024 .

^ "Algeria's Not-So-Invisible Hand Behind Greta Thunberg's Clueless Pro-Polisario Activism" .

Morocco World News . 11 January 2025 . Retrieved 12 January 2025 .

^ Wallace-Wells, David (17 September 2019).

"It's Greta's World" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2019 . Retrieved 27 September 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg Joins Climate March on Her Last Day in Davos" .

The New York Times . 24 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 19 May 2020 . Retrieved 1 February 2020 .

^ a b Watts, Jonathan (23 April 2019).

"The Greta Thunberg effect: at last, MPs focus on climate change" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ "World's Most Powerful Women" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2017 . Retrieved 19 February 2020 .

^ Solsvik, Terje (26 February 2020).

"Climate activist Thunberg heads growing field of Nobel Peace Prize candidates" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 24 March 2020 .

^ a b Read, Rupert (9 October 2021).

"Opinion: This year's Nobel Peace Prize should've gone to Greta Thunberg" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ a b "Nobel Peace Prize 2022 nominees include Myanmar's shadow government" .

South China Morning Post . 1 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022.

^ "The 2019 Makwan Prize is awarded to Greta Thunberg" .

everyonegroup.com . EveryOne Group. 19 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg ist eine schwedische Umweltaktivistin. Sie kämpft für den Klimaschutz und für eine bessere Zukunft" [Greta Thunberg is a Swedish environmental activist. She is fighting for climate protection and a better future.] (in German).

RTL .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2019 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's climate campaign" . Arctic Portal. 21 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 .

^ Lobbe, Anne-Marie (13 December 2018).

"À 15 ans, elle remet les dirigeants mondiaux à leur place!" [At 15, she's putting world leaders in their place!] (in French). Sympatico. Archived from the original on 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 20 September 2019 .

^ a b c d e Thunberg, Greta (11 December 2018).

"School Strike for Climate: Meet 15-Year-Old Activist Greta Thunberg, Who Inspired a Global Movement" .

Democracy Now!

(Interview). Interviewed by Amy Goodman .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ a b c d e Hattenstone, Simon (25 September 2021).

"Greta Thunberg: 'I really see the value of friendship. Apart from the climate, almost nothing else matters' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ Santiago, Ellyn (14 December 2018).

"Greta Thunberg: 5 Fast Facts You Need to Know" .

Heavy.com .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2019 . Retrieved 5 February 2019 .

^ "School Strike for Climate: Meet 15-Year-Old Activist Greta Thunberg, Who Inspired a Global Movement (relevant info at 34:45)" .

Democracy Now!

.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's grandfather, veteran Swedish actor Olof Thunberg, dies" .

Deutsche Welle . 25 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2020 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ "PROFILE: Greta Thunberg: five things you may not know about her" .

The Week . 2 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2023 .

.

^ a b c Thunberg, Greta (24 November 2018).

School strike for climate – save the world by changing the rules . TEDxStockholm.  Event occurs at 1:46.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 29 January 2019 – via YouTube.

I was diagnosed with Asperger's syndrome, OCD, and selective mutism. That basically means I only speak when I think it's necessary. Now is one of those moments ... I think that in many ways, we autistic are the normal ones, and the rest of the people are pretty strange, especially when it comes to the sustainability crisis, where everyone keeps saying that climate change is an existential threat and the most important issue of all and yet they just carry on like before.

^ Queally, Jon (19 December 2018).

"Depressed and Then Diagnosed With Autism, Greta Thunberg Explains Why Hope Cannot Save Planet But Bold Climate Action Still Can" .

Common Dreams . Archived from the original on 28 November 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's father: 'She is happy, but I worry' " .

BBC News . 30 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019.

^ a b c d Crouch, David (1 September 2018).

"The Swedish 15-year-old who's cutting class to fight the climate crisis" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ Brady, Jeff (28 August 2019).

"Teen Climate Activist Greta Thunberg Arrives in New York After Sailing The Atlantic" . NPR.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ Olsson, Christer (20 May 2015).

"Det har varit ett helvetiskt år" [It's been a hellish year].

Expressen (in Swedish). Stockholm.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2019.

^ Rourke, Alison (2 September 2019).

"Greta Thunberg responds to Asperger's critics: 'It's a superpower' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2 September 2019 . Retrieved 2 September 2019 .

^ a b c d e Hattenstone, Simon (25 September 2021).

"Interview: The transformation of Greta Thunberg" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2021 .

I really see the value of friendship. Apart from the climate, almost nothing else matters ^ "Climate crusading schoolgirl Greta Thunberg pleads next generation's case" .

The Straits Times . Agence France-Presse. 5 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (11 March 2019).

"Greta Thunberg, schoolgirl climate change warrior: 'Some people can let things go. I can't' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2019 . Retrieved 24 October 2019 .

Her parents were the guinea pigs. She discovered she had remarkable powers of persuasion, and her mother gave up flying, which had a severe impact on her career. Her father became a vegetarian.

^ Chiorando, Maria (29 April 2019).

"Environmentalist Greta Thunberg Made Her Parents Feel Guilty For Eating Meat And Dairy" .

Vegan News, Plant Based Living, Food, Health & more .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2019 . Retrieved 28 October 2019 .

^ McGrath, Dominic (31 December 2019).

" 'We thought it was a bad idea': Greta Thunberg's dad says he was worried about her climate activism" .

TheJournal.ie .

Archived from the original on 31 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2020 .

^ Lambeck, Petra (6 May 2019).

" 'Scenes From the Heart': Backstory of 16-Year-Old Climate Activist Greta Thunberg" .

The Wire .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ Thunberg, Greta (2019).

"Our house is on fire: Greta Thunberg, 16, urges Davos leaders to act on climate" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

Our house is on fire. I am here to say, our house is on fire. According to the IPCC we are less than twelve years away from not being able to undo our mistakes ^ Thunberg, Greta (23 December 2018).

"Teen activist on climate change: If we don't do anything right now, we're screwed" (Interview). Interviewed by Fareed Zakaria .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 10 February 2019 – via YouTube.

^ "The Guardian view on teenage activists: protesters not puppets" .

The Guardian . 7 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2019 . Retrieved 11 February 2019 .

^ a b Tait, Amelia (6 June 2019).

"Greta Thunberg: How one teenager became the voice of the planet" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2019 . Retrieved 24 August 2019 .

'I want to feel safe', she wrote. 'How can I feel safe when I know we are in the greatest crisis in human history?' ^ Lindeque, Brent (5 May 2019).

"Greta Thunberg: School strike for climate and to save the world!" .

Good Things Guy .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2019 .

^ Gessen, Masha (2 October 2018).

"The Fifteen-Year-Old Climate Activist Who Is Demanding a New Kind of Politics" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "Time Person Of The Year Is Greta Thunberg" .

Tech Warrant . 12 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2019 . Retrieved 15 December 2019 .

^ Tait, Amelia (6 June 2019).

"Greta Thunberg: How one teenager became the voice of the planet" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2019.

^ a b "Start-up used teen climate activist to raise millions: Swedish paper" .

The Local . 9 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Oroschakoff, Kalina (11 February 2019).

"Teen climate icon used for fundraising without her knowledge" .

Politico Europe .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Thunberg, Greta (2 February 2019).

"Recently I've seen many rumors..." Archived from the original on 12 February 2019 . Retrieved 15 February 2019 – via Facebook.

^ Carrington, Damian (4 December 2018).

" 'Our leaders are like children', school strike founder tells climate summit" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2 January 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "Deeply unfair to students: Now activist Greta Thunberg seeks postponement of JEE, NEET exams" .

India Today .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Thunberg, Greta.

"We stand in solidarity with the #FarmersProtest in India" .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 – via Twitter.

^ "Greta Thunberg effigies burned in Delhi after tweets on farmers' protests" .

The Guardian . 4 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg faces backlash after 'toolkit' tweet: Key things to know" .

Deccan Herald . 5 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ Thunberg, Greta.

"Here's an updated toolkit by people on the ground in India if you want to help" .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 – via Twitter.

^ "Farmers Protest In India" .

Cryptpad .

Archived from the original on 5 February 2021 . Retrieved 5 February 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg tweets, deletes and then updates farm protest 'toolkit' " .

The Times of India . 4 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 .

^ Bhasin, Swati (4 February 2021).

"Greta Thunberg Tweets Toolkit On Farmers' Protest, Deletes, Shares Update" . NDTV.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 .

^ Jain, Chandini Monnappa (15 February 2021).

"India's arrest of activist tied to Greta Thunberg's movement sparks outrage" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg: Are We Running Out Of Time To Save Our Planet?" .

NPR.org . 7 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2020 . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

^ Sutter, John; Davidson, Lawrence (16 December 2018).

"Teen tells climate negotiators they aren't mature enough" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

^ Baschuk, Bryce (14 January 2020).

"Trump to attend Davos as impeachment and Iran concerns loom" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2020 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ "French MPs boycott 'apocalypse guru' Thunberg" .

BBC News . 23 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg speaks at British parliament" .

Financial Times . 25 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2020 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ Die Alcolea, Rosa (17 April 2019).

"Pope Thanks and Encourages Greta Thunberg in Her Commitment to Defend the Environment" .

ZENIT – English .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2020 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (11 March 2019).

"Greta Thunberg, schoolgirl climate change warrior: 'Some people can let things go. I can't' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 .

^ Bershidsky, Leonid (18 June 2019).

"Greta Thunberg's Other Lesson Is About School" .

Bloomberg.com .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 3 February 2020 .

^ Haynes, Suyin (29 July 2019).

"Climate Activist Greta Thunberg to Set Sail for the Americas" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Climate Activist Greta Thunberg, 16, Arrives in New York After Sailing Across the Atlantic" .

Time . 28 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 September 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's yacht due in New York on Tuesday" . France 24. Agence France-Presse. 26 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 4 October 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's Atlantic crossing: 'Why I wanted to help' " .

BBC News . 4 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Thunberg, Greta (18 September 2019).

"Voices Leading the Next Generation on the Global Climate Crisis" .

United States House of Representatives .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2019 . Retrieved 19 September 2019 .

^ "Transcript: Greta Thunberg's Speech at the U.N. Climate Action Summit" . NPR. 23 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2019 . Retrieved 27 September 2019 .

^ Watts, Jonathan (14 August 2019).

"Greta Thunberg sets sail for New York on zero-carbon yacht" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2019 . Retrieved 1 September 2019 .

^ Picheta, Rob (29 August 2019).

"Greta Thunberg reaches New York after 15-day yacht journey" .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2019 . Retrieved 28 August 2019 .

^ Thompson, Georgina; Wylie, Helen.

"16 children, including Greta Thunberg, file landmark complaint to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child" .

unicef.org (Press release).

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Countries violate rights over climate change, argue youth activists in landmark UN complaint" .

UN News . 24 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Information Pack about the Optional Protocol to the Convention on theRights of the Child on a Communications Procedure (OP3 CRC)" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .

^ Kahn, Brian (23 September 2019).

"It's Kids vs. the World in a Landmark New Climate Lawsuit" .

Gizmodo .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2019 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

^ Lee, Stephen (23 September 2019).

"Greta Thunberg Leads Young People in Climate Complaint to UN" .

Bloomberg L.P.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2019 . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

^ Banerjee, Sidhartha (27 September 2019).

"Teen climate activist Greta Thunberg greeted as star at Montreal march" .

Canada's National Observer .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2022 . Retrieved 24 September 2023 .

^ Barclay, Eliza; Resnick, Brian (22 September 2019).

"How big was the global climate strike? 4 million people, activists estimate" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ Laframboise, Kalina (27 September 2019).

" 'We will not be bystanders': Greta Thunberg tells hundreds of thousands at Montreal climate march" .

Global News .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2019 .

^ Breaux, Aimee; Smith, Zachary Oren (26 November 2019).

"Greta Thunberg took a Tesla to Iowa. Here's what she had to say" .

Iowa City Press-Citizen .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ Georgiou, Aristos (12 October 2019).

"Greta Thunberg says Friday climate strike will go on for 'as long as it takes' to stir world leaders into action" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ "Chile cancels global climate summit amid unrest" .

BBC News . 30 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ Shine, Rhiannon; Carmody, James (13 November 2019).

"Australian sailing couple and their son come to Greta Thunberg's rescue" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

^ Holden, Emily (12 November 2019).

"Greta Thunberg leaves US with simple climate crisis message: vote" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 November 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg to sail into Lisbon on Tuesday" .

The Portugal News . 2 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2019 . Retrieved 2 December 2019 .

^ Corkery, Claire (3 December 2019).

"Greta Thunberg to arrive in Madrid in time for climate summit" .

The National (Abu Dhabi) .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 December 2019 .

^ Harvey, Fiona (6 December 2019).

"Greta Thunberg says school strikes have achieved nothing" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2019.

^ Kaminski, Isabella (7 December 2019).

" 'We have achieved nothing': Greta Thunberg urges 'concrete action' during Madrid climate conference" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2019.

^ Osborne, Samuel (28 December 2019).

"Greta Thunberg to interview David Attenborough in special 'Today' show edition" .

The Independent . ESI Media.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2019 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "BBC Radio 4 – Best of Today, Today guest edits: Greta Thunberg" .

BBC Radio 4 . 30 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 16 January 2020 .

^ "Bau Australien: Greta Thunberg fordert Siemens zur Aufgabe von Kohle-Projekt auf" .

Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung (in German).

ISSN 0174-4909 .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

^ Readfearn, Graham (13 January 2020).

"Adani coalmine: Siemens CEO has 'empathy' for environment but refuses to quit contract" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2020 . Retrieved 13 January 2020 .

^ Sengupta, Somini (21 January 2020).

"Greta Thunberg's Message at Davos Forum: 'Our House Is Still on Fire' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ Elliott, Larry (21 January 2020).

"Greta Thunberg tells leaders at Davos to heed global heating science" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ "Thunberg at Time Panel: 'Pretty Much Nothing Has Been Done' on Climate" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg meets Malala Yousafzai at Oxford University" .

BBC News . 25 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022.

^ "Greta Thunberg to MEPs: "we will not allow you to surrender our future" " .

European Parliament (Press release). 4 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 5 March 2020 . Retrieved 5 March 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg regresa a la escuela después de un año" [Greta Thunberg returns to school after more than a year].

Associated Press News (in Spanish). 25 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021.

^ "What Greta Thunberg did with her year off school" .

BBC News . 25 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2020 .

^ Bo, Yacong; Guo, Cui; Lin, Changqing; Zeng, Yiqian; Li, Hao Bi; Zhang, Yumiao; Hossain, Md Shakhaoat; Chan, Jimmy W.M.; Yeung, David W.; Kwok, Kin On; Wong, Samuel Y.S.; Lau, Alexis K.H.; Lao, Xiang Qian (January 2021) [28 October 2020].

"Effectiveness of non-pharmaceutical interventions on COVID-19 transmission in 190 countries from 23 January to 13 April 2020" .

International Journal of Infectious Diseases .

102 : 247– 253.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.10.066 .

PMC 7598763 .

PMID 33129965 .

^ Lawal, Shola (19 March 2020).

"Coronavirus Halts Street Protests, but Climate Activists Have a Plan" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ Chan, Emily (21 April 2020).

"Climate activists are holding virtual protests – here's how you can join in from home" .

Vogue Australia .

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ Tidey, Alice (20 August 2020).

"Watch: Greta Thunberg calls for climate leaders after Merkel meeting" .

Euronews .

Archived from the original on 21 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ "Thunberg, fellow activists press Merkel over climate action" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ The New Zealand Herald (14 December 2020).

" 'Nothing unique': Greta Thunberg hits out at NZ over climate emergency" .

Newstalk ZB .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ a b Gibson, Eloise (14 December 2020).

"Ardern and Thunberg in spat over climate emergency declaration" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ Moore, Heath (14 December 2020).

"James Shaw responds after Greta Thunberg calls out NZ over lack of climate change action" .

The New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ " 'We cannot make it without science': Greta Thunberg says climate experts are being ignored" .

The Guardian . 29 December 2020.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg sings Rick Astley hit at climate concert" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2022 . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ "Climate activist Greta Thunberg takes on food industry" .

Deutsche Welle . 23 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ Harding, Laura (27 July 2021).

"Greta Thunberg 'extremely grateful and privileged' to get Covid vaccine" .

PA Media .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 – via Yahoo! News.

^ a b Pattinson, Tom (8 August 2021).

"Read Greta Thunberg's Vogue Scandinavia cover interview: Greta on activism, Trump and becoming the voice of a generation" .

Vogue Scandinavia .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021.

^ "Greta Thunberg criticizes fast fashion in Vogue Scandinavia" .

Deutsche Welle . 9 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 10 August 2021 .

^ "Thunberg calls out climate impact of fashion brands in Vogue interview" .

BBC News . 9 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 10 August 2021 .

^ Dodhiya, Mohsina (18 August 2021).

"Greta Thunberg blasted for wearing wool in 'Vogue' cover article" .

Totally Vegan Buzz .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ " 'Build back better, blah blah blah': Greta Thunberg mocks Joe Biden and Boris Johnson in climate speech" .

The Independent . 28 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Swedish Climate Activist Greta Thunberg Criticizes World Leaders at Youth Climate Summit – September 29, 2021" .

Daily News Brief . 29 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 4 October 2021 .

^ a b c "Greta Thunberg: Activist calls on banks to stop funding climate 'destruction' " .

BBC News . 29 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 31 October 2021 .

^ Bryan, Anna (4 November 2021).

"COP26: Harry Potter actress Emma Watson hosts panel event, attended by Greta Thunberg, at Glasgow climate change summit" .

The Scotsman .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ Bryant, Miranda (10 November 2021).

"Youth activists petition UN to declare 'systemwide climate emergency' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2021 . Retrieved 12 November 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg hits out at Biden, says it's 'strange' he's considered a leader on climate" . MSN. 29 December 2021.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ " "Permanent Negative Impact": Activist Greta Thunberg Protests Sweden Mine" .

NDTV.com .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ "Ukraine's Zelenskyy meets Greta Thunberg and others to address the war's effect on ecology" .

AP News . 29 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ Stevis-Gridneff, Matina; Sengupta, Somini (6 July 2022).

"Europe Calls Gas and Nuclear Energy 'Green' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg, climate activists get court nod to sue Swedish state" .

Reuters . 21 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 12 September 2023 .

^ "The Climate Book by Greta Thunberg review – global warning" .

The Guardian . 26 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ "Greta Thunberg, climate and environment activist, joins World Health Organization's call for vaccine equity" . World Health Organization.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ McKeever, Vicky (21 February 2020).

"Greta Thunberg sets up non-profit with 'alternative Nobel Prize' money" . CNBC.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ The Russell Howard Hour | Full Episode | Series 6 Episode 8 , 4 November 2022, archived from the original on 6 November 2022 , retrieved 6 November 2022 ^ Thunberg, Greta (14 February 2023).

The Climate Book: The Facts and the Solutions . Penguin Press.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Vince, Gaia (26 October 2022).

"The climate book by Greta Thunberg review – Global warning" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2022 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ Brand, Christian (27 October 2022).

"UKERC experts contribute to Greta Thunberg's The climate book" .

UK Energy Research Centre . London, United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ a b Thunberg, Greta ; Brannen, Peter [at Wikidata] ; Shapiro, Beth ; Kolbert, Elizabeth ; Oppenheimer, Michael ; Oreskes, Naomi ; Rockström, Johan ; Hayhoe, Katharine ; Hausfather, Zeke; Samset, Bjørn H.

[in Norwegian] ; Ceppi, Paulo; Francis, Jennifer ; Otto, Friederike ; Marvel, Kate ; Winkelmann, Ricarda ; Rahmstorf, Stefan ; Pörtner, Hans-Otto [in German] ; Kvale, Karin; Gleick, Peter H.

; Gergis, Joëlle [at Wikidata] ; Nobre, Carlos ; Arieira, Julia; Nascimento, Nathália; Law, Beverly ; Purvis, Andy [at Wikidata] ; De Palma, Adriana; Goulson, Dave ; Larson, Keith W.; Soong, Jennifer L.; Gustafsson, Örjan [in Swedish] ; Edwards, Tamsin ; Adhanom Ghebreyesus, Tedros ; Vicedo-Cabrera, Ana M.; Shindell, Drew ; Colón-González, Felipe J.

[at Wikidata] ; Brownstein, John ; MacFadden, Derek; McGough, Sarah; Santillana, Mauricio [at Wikidata] ; Myers, Samuel S.; Huq, Saleemul ; Patterson, Jacqueline; Lustgarten, Abrahm ; Taylor, Michael; Oumarou Ibrahim, Hindou ; Labba, Elin Anna ; Guajajara, Sonia ; Hsiang, Solomon ; Oki, Taikan [in Japanese] ; Burke, Marshall; Linden, Eugene ; Anderson, Kevin ; Otto, Alexandra Urisman [in Swedish] ; McKibben, Bill ; Peters, Glen [in German] ; Erb, Karl-Heinz [at Wikidata] ; Gingrich, Simone; Hällström, Niclas; Stephens, Jennie C.

; Stoddard, Isak; Jackson, Rob [at Wikidata] ; Popp, Alexander; Clark, Michael; Vermeulen, Sonja; Barrett, John ; Garvey, Alice; Joshi, Ketan [at Wikidata] ; Larkin, Alice ; Anable, Jillian; Brand, Christian; Lowrey, Annie ; Berners-Lee, Mike ; Kaza, Silpa; Schrank, Nina; Stern, Nicholas ; Narain, Sunita ; Hickel, Jason ; Ghosh, Amitav ; Capstick, Stuart; Whitmarsh, Lorraine ; Raworth, Kate ; Stoknes, Per Espen ; Eshel, Gidon ; Elizabeth Johnson, Ayana ; Monbiot, George ; Wrigley, Rebecca; Atwood, Margaret ; Chenoweth, Erica ; Mann, Michael E.

; Klein, Seth [at Wikidata] ; Wallace-Wells, David ; Klein, Naomi ; Becker, Nicki ; Ravi, Disha Annappa ; Nakabuye, Hilda Flavia ; Muñoz, Laura Verónica; Shikongo, Ina Maria; Siddiqa, Ayisha ; Tan, Mitzi Jonelle ; Mathai, Wanjira ; Chancel, Lucas ; Piketty, Thomas ; Táíwò, Olúfẹ́mi O.

; Kimmerer, Robin Wall ; Hawkins, Ed (28 October 2022).

Thunberg, Greta (ed.).

The Climate Book (1 ed.). London, UK: allen lane / Penguin Books / Penguin Random House .

ISBN 978-0-241-54747-2 .

OCLC 1338161907 .

(2+18+446+2 pages) (NB. The cover features the Warming stripes by Ed Hawkins . For space reasons references are not included in the printed book, but can be found online at: https://theclimatebook.org Archived 21 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine .) ^ Thunberg, Greta (8 October 2022).

"Greta Thunberg on the climate delusion: 'we've been greenwashed out of our senses. It's time to stand our ground' " .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2022 . Retrieved 8 October 2022 .

Published extract.

^ Ferguson, Donna (14 January 2023).

"Greta Thunberg calls for protest against expansion of German coalmine" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 15 January 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg released after brief detention at German mine protest, police say" .

Reuters . 17 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 18 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 January 2023 .

^ Tumin, Remy (10 June 2023).

"Greta Thunberg Ends Her School Strikes After 251 Weeks" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Climate activist Greta Thunberg won't be school striking after graduation but vows to still protest" .

AP News . 9 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 9 October 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunbergs nya vägval – det pluggar hon" .

www.expressen.se (in Swedish). 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 12 December 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg charged with disobeying police order at climate protest" .

Reuters . 5 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg defiant after Swedish court fines her for disobeying police during climate protest" .

AP News . 24 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .

^ "Swedish court fines Greta Thunberg again for disobeying police orders" .

Reuters . 12 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Kennedy, Niamh (4 August 2023).

"Greta Thunberg pulls out of Edinburgh Book Festival appearance after accusing key sponsor of greenwashing" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ Brooks, Libby (4 August 2023).

"Greta Thunberg accuses Edinburgh book festival sponsor of 'greenwashing' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg pulls out of Edinburgh Book Festival over 'greenwashing' " .

BBC News . 4 August 2023.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 15 September 2023 .

^ Gayle, Damien (18 October 2023).

"Greta Thunberg charged with public order offence after London oil protest" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ Danaher, Caitlin (18 October 2023).

"Greta Thunberg charged with public order offense following arrest at protest in London" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ Horton, Helena; reporter, Helena Horton Environment (15 November 2023).

"Greta Thunberg pleads not guilty to breaching public order at UK protest" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2023 .

^ Gayle, Damien (2 February 2024).

"Judge throws out case against Greta Thunberg and other London protesters" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2024 . Retrieved 2 February 2024 .

^ Aikman, Ian (6 April 2024).

"Greta Thunberg: Activist arrested at Hague climate protest" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2024 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "Greta Thunberg detained at The Hague climate demonstration" .

The Guardian . 6 April 2024.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2024 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ "Climate activist Greta Thunberg arrested in the Netherlands" .

Deutsche Welle . 6 April 2024.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ "Greta Thunberg Charged For Ignoring Police Orders Over Climate Protests" .

NDTV.com .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2024 . Retrieved 23 April 2024 .

^ Savage, Maddy; Fatima, Zahra (8 May 2024).

"Greta Thunberg fined for disobeying police at Swedish protest" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2024 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ "Greta Thunberg is kint van a Pride-on" .

Hvg.hu (in Hungarian). 28 June 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ Cseke, Balázs; Horváth Kávai, Andrea (19 March 2025).

"Hungarian parliament adopts law banning Budapest Pride" .

Telex.hu .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2025 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "Švedska aktivistkinja Greta Thunberg na blokadi izgradnje male hidroelektrane u Sjevernoj Makedoniji" .

Radiosarajevo.ba (in Bosnian).

Radio Sarajevo . 27 July 2025 . Retrieved 2 August 2025 .

^ "Greta Tunberg na protestu u Beogradu: Borba za životnu sredinu neraskidivo povezana sa borbom protiv fašizma i nacionalizma" .

Danas (in Serbian). 31 July 2025 . Retrieved 2 August 2025 .

^ Mordowanec, Nick (20 October 2023).

"Greta Thunberg's pro-Palestine message turns heads" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ "Thunberg gets backlash for pro-Palestinian post – DW – 10/21/2023" . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 4 September 2024 .

^ Lewis, Kaitlin (23 October 2023).

"Israel removes Greta Thunberg from curriculum over Pro-Palestinian message" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2023 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 .

The Swedish climate activist told her more than 20 million social media followers that a ceasefire should occur in Gaza.

^ "Prominent climate scientists, activists: to stop the climate crisis, first stop wars and change the system" .

Extinction Rebellion Tunisia . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Vavra, Shannon (11 May 2024).

"Greta Thunberg detained at Eurovision protest" .

Yahoo News .

Archived from the original on 15 May 2024 . Retrieved 17 May 2024 .

^ "Greta Thunberg arrested at pro-Palestinian protest in Denmark" . France 24. 4 September 2024 . Retrieved 4 September 2024 .

^ Giordano, Elena (9 September 2024).

"Greta Thunberg carried away by police at pro-Palestine demonstration, again" .

Politico .

^ "Greta Thunberg labeled 'antisemite of the week' amid anti-Israel activity" .

The Jerusalem Post . 17 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

^ Thakur, Anjali (17 September 2024).

"Greta Thunberg Labelled 'Antisemite Of The Week' By Jewish Advocacy Group" . NDTV . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

^ Crisp, James (10 December 2024).

"Watch: Greta Thunberg declares 'f--- Israel' at German demonstration" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ a b Rasmus Canbäck (5 November 2024).

"Thunberg in Tbilisi: "Climate Activism and Human Rights Are United" " .

Blankspot . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ Nyheter, S. V. T. (2 May 2025).

"Hjälpfartyg till Gaza i lågor – Greta Thunberg skulle ha deltagit i aktionen" .

SVT Nyheter (in Swedish) . Retrieved 2 May 2025 .

^ "Greta Thunberg accuses Israel of 'kidnapping' after Gaza aid boat intercepted" . 10 June 2025 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 .

^ a b "Israeli military ordered to block aid flotilla carrying Greta Thunberg" .

POLITICO . 8 June 2025 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ "Freedom Flotilla aid mission bound for Gaza Strip sets sail with Greta Thunberg on board" .

ABC News . 2 June 2025 . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ a b Rowlands, Lyndal.

"Madleen Gaza flotilla live tracker: Israel intercepts ship, contact lost" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 9 June 2025 .

^ Scharf, Isaac (10 June 2025).

"Israel deports Greta Thunberg after Gaza-bound ship she was on was seized" .

AP News . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Lukiv, Jaroslav; Gritten, David (10 June 2025).

"Greta Thunberg deported, Israel says, after Gaza aid boat intercepted" .

BBC . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

^ Giordano, Elena (10 June 2025).

"Greta Thunberg hits back at Donald Trump over anger management jibe" .

Politico . Archived from the original on 11 June 2025 . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ "Greta Thunberg, activists plan new aid flotilla to Gaza" .

Khaleej Times . 11 August 2025 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Greta Thunberg and global activists to sail largest flotilla for Gaza to break Israeli blockade" .

The Online Citizen . 12 August 2025 . Retrieved 12 August 2025 .

^ a b Harutyunyan, Anna (18 November 2024).

"Greta Thunberg visits Armenia, denounces Azerbaijan's crimes" .

The Armenian Weekly . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ Emily Hanna (19 November 2024).

"Greta Thunberg in Armenia: The Intersection of Climate and Human Rights at COP29" .

CivilNet . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ "Activist Greta Thunberg urges release of Armenians in Azerbaijan" .

The New Arab . 16 November 2024 . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ "After boycotting COP-29 Baku, Greta Thunberg visits Armenia" .

Armenpress . 13 November 2024 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ "Recap | November 2024" . Pink Armenia. 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ Oroschakoff, Kalina (16 April 2019).

"Climate icon Greta Thunberg finds that political change is 'complicated' " .

Politico . Archived from the original on 6 August 2019.

^ Thunberg, Greta (13 December 2018).

"You Are Stealing Our Future: Greta Thunberg, 15, Condemns the World's Inaction on Climate Change" .

Democracy Now!

(Interview). Interviewed by Amy Goodman .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 13 December 2018 .

^ Hertsgaard, Mark (28 January 2019).

"The Climate Kids Are Coming" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ Germanos, Andrea (31 October 2018).

" 'This Is Our Darkest Hour': With Declaration of Rebellion, New Group Vows Mass Civil Disobedience to Save Planet" .

Common Dreams .

Archived from the original on 18 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ a b Thunberg, Greta (23 April 2019).

" 'You did not act in time': Greta Thunberg's full speech to MPs" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ Johnson, Jake (7 June 2019).

"For 'Challenging Us All to Confront the Realities of the Climate Crisis,' Greta Thunberg and Fridays for Future Movement Win Amnesty's Top Human Rights Award" .

Common Dreams .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2020 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 .

^ Jordans, Frank; Parra, Aritz (9 December 2019).

"Too much of a Greta thing? Activist urges focus on others" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on 9 February 2020 . Retrieved 9 February 2020 .

^ Thunberg, Greta (25 January 2019).

"I want you to panic: 16-year-old issues climate warning at Davos" . Guardian News.  Event occurs at 2:23.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 – via YouTube.

^ a b Thunberg, Greta (25 January 2019).

" 'Our house is on fire': Greta Thunberg, 16, urges leaders to act on climate" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 25 July 2019 . Retrieved 14 February 2019 .

^ Caldwell, Christopher (2 August 2019).

"Opinion | The Problem With Greta Thunberg's Climate Activism" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ " 'It's an existential crisis. Listen to scientists' " .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ Zulianello, Mattia; Ceccobelli, Diego (2020).

"Don't Call it Climate Populism: on Greta Thunberg's Technocratic Ecocentrism" .

The Political Quarterly .

91 (3): 623– 631.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.12858 .

S2CID 219919296 .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2021 . Retrieved 3 September 2021 .

^ Germanos, Andrea (29 July 2019).

"To Deliver 'Fundamental Message' for 'Survival of Future Generations,' Greta Thunberg to Sail Atlantic for Americas" .

Common Dreams .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ Carmichael, Lachlan (22 February 2019).

"Climate activist Thunberg urges EU to double carbon reduction targets" . Agence France-Presse.

Archived from the original on 21 February 2019 . Retrieved 22 February 2019 – via Yahoo! News.

^ Rankin, Jennifer (21 February 2019).

"Greta Thunberg tells EU: your climate targets need doubling" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2019 . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ Carrington, Damian (9 November 2020).

" 'Hypocrites and greenwash': Greta Thunberg blasts leaders over climate crisis" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg says EU recovery plan fails to tackle climate crisis" .

The Guardian . 21 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Thunberg dubs new EU climate law 'a surrender' " .

EUobserver i . 5 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ Yeo, Sophie (6 November 2020).

"Ecocide: Should killing nature be a crime?" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Supporters of Ecocide Law" .

Stop Ecocide International .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Thunberg criticises Russia over Ukraine dam 'ecocide' " .

Reuters . 9 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg joins rally in Bonn against Russian ecocide in Ukraine" .

Yahoo News . 15 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2023 . Retrieved 16 June 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg: I'm open to meeting Biden at Cop26 but don't expect much" .

The Guardian . 12 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg to march at Glasgow climate protest" .

BBC News . 26 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ " 'Cop26 is a failure': Greta Thunberg rallies climate activists in Glasgow" .

The Guardian . Reuters. 5 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2021 . Retrieved 5 November 2021 .

Link to video of Thunberg's speech ^ "School climate strike children's brave stand has our support" .

The Guardian . 13 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Briand F. 2012. Making research count in marine governance –
The communication challenge. CIESM Marine Policy Series no 3, 36 p. ISSN 2306-4897 https://www.ciesm.org/FBriand_comm&governance.pdf ^ Guterres, António (15 March 2019).

"The climate strikers should inspire us all to act at the next UN summit" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2019 . Retrieved 18 March 2019 .

^ Walls, Jason (13 May 2019).

"UN Secretary-General Antonio Guterres says his generation should have done more on climate change" .

The New Zealand Herald .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Bonn, Tess (24 September 2019).

"Climate change activist: Thunberg 'being the face of this issue terrifies so many people' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 .

^ "Merkel says Greta Thunberg 'drove us' to move on climate change" .

France 24 . 19 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2020 . Retrieved 28 January 2020 .

^ Crowe, David (25 September 2019).

"Morrison warns against 'needless anxiety' after Thunberg climate speech" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ Moody, Oliver (26 September 2019).

"World's leaders turn on Greta Thunberg after legal move over carbon emissions" .

The Times .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2019 . Retrieved 31 October 2019 .

^ "French President Emmanuel Macron says Greta Thunberg will 'antagonize societies' after she filed a lawsuit accusing France of inaction on global warming" .

Business Insider . 24 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Putin: I don't share excitement about Greta Thunberg's U.N. speech" .

Reuters . 2 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "Climate campaigners 'greatest threat' to oil sector: OPEC" . Agence France-Presse. 2 July 2019. Archived from the original on 4 July 2019.

^ Multiple sources: Stracqualursi, Veronica (25 September 2019).

"Trump mocks teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

Nichols, Michelle (25 September 2019).

"Teenage climate activist Thunberg takes on Trump's Twitter taunt" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

Gilles, Rob; Jordans, Frank (28 September 2019).

"Greta: Grown-ups mock children because world view threatened" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

"Trump slammed for trolling Greta Thunberg climate speech" .

Agence France-Presse . 25 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ Wamsley, Laurel (12 December 2019).

"After Greta Thunberg Wins 'Time' Honor, Trump Suggests She 'Chill' And Watch A Movie" . NPR.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2023 . Retrieved 21 January 2023 .

^ Taylor, Derrick Bryson (12 December 2019).

"Trump Mocks Greta Thunberg on Twitter, and She Jabs Back" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 14 December 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg mocks Trump over election fraud claims" .

Deutsche Welle .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 January 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg mocks Trump's election rage: 'Chill, Donald, chill!' " .

Global News .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 January 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Snuggs, Tania (3 October 2019).

"Putin: I'm not excited by 'poorly informed' Greta Thunberg" .

Sky News .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 4 October 2019 .

"Greta Thunberg mocks Putin's 'kind girl' jibes on Twitter" .

France 24 .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2019 . Retrieved 15 October 2019 .

"Putin implies teen climate activist is being manipulated" .

Associated Press News . 3 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

Soldatkin, Vladimir; Zhdannikov, Dmitry (2 October 2019).

"Putin: I don't share excitement about Greta Thunberg's U.N. speech" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ "Ativista Greta Thunberg muda descrição no Twitter para 'pirralha' após declaração de Bolsonaro" [Activist Greta Thunberg changes her Twitter's description to "brat" after Bolsonaro's declaration].

G1 (in Portuguese). 10 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Phillips, Tom (10 December 2019).

"Greta Thunberg labelled a 'brat' by Brazil's far-right leader Jair Bolsonaro" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ a b Haynes, Suyin (16 May 2019).

" 'Now I Am Speaking to the Whole World.' How Teen Climate Activist Greta Thunberg Got Everyone to Listen" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Stracqualursi, Veronica (13 December 2019).

"Trump again mocks teen climate activist Greta Thunberg" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 14 December 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg: Timmermans not doing enough to green EU farm policy" .

Politico . 30 March 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ Waldman, Scott (9 August 2019).

"Climate Deniers Launch Personal Attacks on Teen Activist" .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2019 . Retrieved 29 August 2019 .

^ Chakrabortty, Aditya (1 May 2019).

"The hounding of Greta Thunberg is proof that the right has run out of ideas" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Percival, Ash (8 October 2019).

"Piers Morgan Mocks Greta Thunberg As He Launches Attack On 'Shameless Extinction Rebellion Hypocrites' " .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 January 2020 .

^ Connolly, Kate (14 May 2019).

"Germany's AfD turns on Greta Thunberg as it embraces climate denial" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Busby, Mattha (15 August 2019).

"Arron Banks jokes about Greta Thunberg and 'freak yachting accidents' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ Hinsliff, Gaby (17 August 2019).

"How Greta Thunberg became the new front in the Brexit culture war" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ Gillespie, Nick (24 September 2019).

"Think Globally, Shame Constantly: The Rise of Greta Thunberg Environmentalism" .

Reason .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ Serhan, Yasmeen (14 August 2021).

"When the Far Right Picks Fights With a Teen" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 August 2021 .

^ "Greta Thunberg: Who is the climate activist and what has she achieved?" .

BBC News . 29 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2023 . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ Roth, Clare (21 February 2019).

"Swedish student leader wins EU pledge to spend billions on climate" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 25 June 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Huggler, Justin (19 May 2019).

"The Greta effect? Climate takes centre stage in European elections" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ a b Henley, Jon (27 May 2019).

"Five things we have learned from election results across Europe" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "2019 European election results Comparative tool" .

2019 European election results .

European Parliament .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 July 2019 .

^ Todd, Matthew (10 June 2019).

"Extinction Rebellion's tactics are working. It has pierced the bubble of denial" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Ferguson, Donna (11 August 2019).

" 'Greta effect' leads to boom in children's environmental books" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ Burgess, Sanya (6 November 2019).

"Margaret Atwood says Greta Thunberg is the 'Joan of Arc of the environment' " .

Sky News . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ a b Taylor, Matthew (12 July 2019).

"US philanthropists vow to raise millions for climate activists" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "ClimateEmergencyFund.org" .

Archived from the original on 23 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Roberts, David (8 October 2019).

" "Our bet is paying off": why philanthropists are raising money for climate activists" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2020 .

^ Firozi, Paulina (12 July 2019).

"The Energy 202: Cash, banners and bullhorns: Big philanthropists throw weight behind disruptive climate activists" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2020 .

^ Vaughan, Adam (18 December 2019).

"The Year the World Woke up to Climate Change" .

New Scientist . Vol. 244, no. 3261/62. pp.

20– 21.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ Sabherwal, Anandita; Ballew, Matthew T.; Linden, Sander van der; Gustafson, Abel; Goldberg, Matthew H.; Maibach, Edward W.; Kotcher, John E.; Swim, Janet K.; Rosenthal, Seth A.; Leiserowitz, Anthony (2021).

"The Greta Thunberg Effect: Familiarity with Greta Thunberg predicts intentions to engage in climate activism in the United States" .

Journal of Applied Social Psychology .

51 (4): 321– 333.

doi : 10.1111/jasp.12737 .

ISSN 1559-1816 .

^ "How Greta Thunberg and 'flygskam' are forcing aviation industry to act on climate change" .

The Local . 9 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 28 January 2020 .

^ a b Henley, Jon (4 June 2019).

"#stayontheground: Swedes turn to trains amid climate 'flight shame' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Orange, Richard (26 April 2019).

"Greta Thunberg's train journey through Europe highlights no-fly movement" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 4 July 2019 .

^ "What is flygskam? Greta speaks up about 'flight-shaming' – CBBC Newsround" .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 25 January 2020 .

^ Timperley, Jocelyn (10 September 2019).

"Why 'flight shame' is making people swap planes for trains" .

BBC Future .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2020 . Retrieved 13 January 2020 .

^ "Sweden Is Shaming People Into Not Travelling By Plane" .

10 Daily .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2020 . Retrieved 13 January 2020 .

^ "Klimatoro ger kraftig förändring av svenskars resvanor" [Climate change is causing a major change in Swedes' travel habits] (in Swedish).

SJ . 31 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 .

^ Morin, Brandi.

"Is resource extraction killing Indigenous women?" .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2022 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 .

"...the company's logo appeared to depict the rape of teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg." ^ Beattie, Samantha (1 March 2020).

"Greta Thunberg Responds To Graphic Sticker Linked To Canadian Oil Company" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2021 . Retrieved 25 September 2021 .

^ Spackman, Sheldon; Gillard, Troy (27 February 2020).

"Local oil and gas company denies responsibility for controversial 'Greta' decal" .

rdnewsNOW .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2021 . Retrieved 26 September 2021 .

Doug Sparrow tells rdnewsNOW the decal was not made or endorsed by either himself or any employee of his company. He alleges that an unknown third party has posted it to Facebook. Sparrow says he has sent multiple requests to Facebook to have images of the decal removed, but that so far they have not responded.

^ Antoneshyn, Alex (2 March 2020).

" 'We will do better': X-Site Energy apologizes for 'Greta' decal" .

CTV News .

Archived from the original on 3 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ a b Grozdanic, Sanja (16 December 2019).

"5 popular artistic depictions of Greta Thunberg" .

sleek-mag.com .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2020 . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

^ Tucker, Zoë (November 2019).

Greta and the Giants: inspired by Greta Thunberg's stand to save the world . Frances Lincoln Children's Books.

ISBN 978-0711253773 .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ McLean, Tessa (8 November 2019).

"Giant Greta Thunberg mural going up in Union Square" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 October 2022 .

^ Howick, Alex; Hesson, Dion (31 May 2019).

"Huge Greta Thunberg mural painted on Bristol wall" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 10 August 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Gilliver, Liam (16 May 2019).

"Greta Thunberg on the Cover of Time: 'Now I Am Speaking to the Whole World' " .

Plant Based News .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ "Meghan Markle puts Sinéad Burke on the cover of Vogue's September issue" .

The Irish Times . 29 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ Snapes, Laura (25 July 2019).

" 'Time to rebel': Greta Thunberg adds voice to new song by the 1975" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 25 July 2019 .

^ Chuck, Elizabeth (30 September 2019).

"Greta Thunberg's U.N. speech set to death metal music goes viral" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's 'how dare you' speech performed by Megan Washington and Robert Davidson – video" .

The Guardian . 9 December 2019.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ Eede, Christian (10 October 2019).

"Fatboy Slim plays Greta Thunberg 'Right Here, Right Now' mash-up: Watch" .

DJ Mag .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 February 2020 .

^ "Voices for the Future: climate activism lights up the UN – in pictures" .

The Guardian . 20 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 6 May 2022 .

^ Dinges, Gary (14 May 2020).

"Pearl Jam, Greta Thunberg paint grim picture of environment's future in 'Retrograde' video" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 1 June 2020 .

^ Bradshaw, Peter (16 September 2020).

"I Am Greta review – slick yet shallow Thunberg documentary" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ Ravindran, Manori (6 September 2020).

" 'I Am Greta' Director on Why Greta Thunberg Can Get Audiences Back to Cinemas" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2020 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 .

^ Ravindran, Manori (4 September 2020).

"Greta Thunberg Hulu Doc Gets European, North American Theatrical Release (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Powers, Thom (September 2020).

"I Am Greta" .

Toronto International Film Festival Inc .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ "I Am Greta movie times near Fairfax, VA" . 25 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 October 2020 .

^ "Greta Thunberg statue at Winchester university sparks anger" .

BBC News . 30 March 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2021 . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ Kanter, Jake (15 February 2021).

"BBC/PBS Board BBC Studios' Greta Thunberg Documentary Series" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on 25 October 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ "Climate activist Greta Thunberg wins children's award" .

CityNews Edmonton . 4 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .

^ a b Cyranoski, David; Gaind, Nisha; Gibney, Elizabeth; Masood, Ehsan; Maxmen, Amy; Reardon, Sara; Schiermeier, Quirin; Tollefson, Jeff; Witze, Alexandra (2019).

"Nature's 10: Ten people who mattered in science in 2019" .

Nature .

576 (7787): 361– 372.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.576..361C .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-03749-0 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 31848484 .

^ a b Schneider, Oscar (16 May 2019).

"Belgian university will honour young climate-activist Greta Thunberg" .

The Belgian Times .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2019 . Retrieved 25 August 2019 .

^ "Time's 25 Most Influential Teens of 2018" .

Time . 7 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 .

^ Rosengren, Lina (22 November 2018).

"Greta Thunberg blir Årets unga förebild" .

Aktuell Hållbarhet (in Swedish).

Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 22 December 2018 .

^ Vagianos, Alanna (14 March 2019).

"16-Year-Old Climate Activist Greta Thunberg Nominated For Nobel Peace Prize" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 28 March 2019 . Retrieved 22 March 2019 .

^ Hermes Auto (15 March 2019).

"Nobel Peace Prize nomination for student climate campaigner Greta Thunberg" .

The Straits Times .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2019 .

^ a b "Greta Thunberg has been nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize – Vogue Scandinavia" . 2 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Årets Svenska Kvinna 2019" [Swedish Woman of the Year 2019].

Swedish Women's Educational Association (in Swedish). 30 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 26 September 2019 . Retrieved 5 October 2019 .

^ Torgersen, Hilde (22 March 2019).

"Greta Thunberg is honored with an environmental award" .

NRK (TV/Radio/Internet) News Agency .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ "Rachel Carson prisen" .

rachelcarsonprisen.no .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ dpa, AFP (31 March 2019).

"Greta Thunberg wins German Golden Camera award" .

Deutsche Welle .

Archived from the original on 12 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2019 .

^ "Swedish Climate Activist Will Use Prize Money from Norway to Sue Norway" .

The Nordic Page . 24 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 August 2019 .

^ González, Emma .

"Greta Thunberg" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 18 April 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg Winner of the Laudato Si' Prize 2019!" . Fundacion Milarepa Chile. 19 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2019 . Retrieved 20 April 2019 .

^ Saintghislain, Valery (2 September 2019).

"La rentrée académique de l'UMONS du 10/10/2019 placée sous le signe du développement durable et des 10 ans de la fusion" [The start of the UMONS academic year on 10 October 2019 under the banner of sustainable development and 10 years of fusion].

Archived from the original on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .

^ "Climate activists Greta Thunberg and the Fridays for Future movement honoured with top Amnesty International award" .

Amnesty International . 7 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2019 . Retrieved 7 June 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg and Fridays for Future receive Amnesty International's top honour" . Amnesty International. 16 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ Rodrigo, Chris Mills (22 July 2019).

"Greta Thunberg receives Normandy's Freedom Prize, donates prize money to climate groups" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Greta wins prestigious Scottish award" .

The Herald . 12 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 13 July 2019 .

^ "Honorary Fellowship" .

RSGS.org .

Royal Scottish Geographical Society . 10 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

^ Ahlander, Johan (25 September 2019).

"Climate activist Greta Thunberg wins 'alternative Nobel Prize' " .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg 'incredibly honoured' to receive key to city of Montreal" .

Daily Hive . 28 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2019 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ "Desmond Tutu Announces the Winners of the International Children's Peace Prize 2019: Greta Thunberg (16) From Sweden and Divina Maloum (14) From Cameroon" (Press release). PR Newswire. 4 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 13 October 2019 .

^ Milman, Oliver (9 October 2019).

"Greta Thunberg, favourite to win Nobel peace prize, honoured at Standing Rock" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ Hurtado, Daniela (8 October 2019).

"Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg visits Standing Rock" .

KFYR-TV .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

^ Capron, Maddie; Zdanowicz, Christina (29 October 2019).

"Greta Thunberg declined a climate award because the world needs more action, fewer awards" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 October 2019 .

^ " 'The climate doesn't need awards': Greta Thunberg declines environmental prize" .

The Guardian . Agence France-Presse. 29 October 2019.

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 30 October 2019 .

^ Ali, Safia Samee (11 December 2019).

"Greta Thunberg is Time's 2019 Person of the Year" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ Knowles, Hannah (11 December 2019).

"Time 2019 Person of the Year is Greta Thunberg" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ Jordans, Frank (11 December 2019).

"Thunberg 'a bit surprised' to be Time Person of the Year" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2019 . Retrieved 13 December 2019 .

^ "Glamour Women of the Year Awards 2019: The Best Moments" .

Glamour . 12 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2020 . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

^ Tucker, Becca (10 October 2019).

"Greta Thunberg and 'Shop Stop' " .

Our Town .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2020 . Retrieved 28 February 2020 .

in her private life Greta practices what she calls "shop stop". It means you don't buy new things unless you absolutely have to. She wears what she already has, or borrows clothes ^ "Jane Fonda Accepts Award on Greta Thunberg's Behalf" .

Glamour Videos .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 February 2020 .

^ "BBC 100 Women 2019: Who is on the list this year?" .

BBC News . 15 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2021 . Retrieved 17 December 2022 .

^ "Greta Thunberg" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2023 . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ Gregersen, Jonas (29 April 2020).

"Human Act Award 2020" .

Human Act .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 May 2020 .

^ "BEST IN ACTIVISM" .

Shorty Awards . 3 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Greta Thunberg is the winner of the first Gulbenkian Prize for Humanity" .

Gulbenkian . 20 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2020 .

^ Euronews (2 December 2021).

"Greta Thunberg and Angela Merkel triumph at the Women of Europe Awards" .

Euronews .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2022 . Retrieved 13 July 2022 .

^ "Dr. Bonnie Henry, Greta Thunberg to receive respective honorary degrees from UBC, UBCO" .

Global News .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ Fletcher, Thandi (31 March 2021).

"Greta Thunberg, Dr. Bonnie Henry to receive honorary degrees from UBC" . UBC News.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ "2021 Honorary Degree Recipients" .

graduation.ok.ubc.ca .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ Bäckren, Noona (21 March 2023).

"Greta Thunberg saa arvokkaan kunnianosoituksen Helsingin yliopistolta" [Greta Thunberg given a prestigious distinction by Helsinki University].

Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish).

Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 23 March 2023 .

^ "Museum scientists described 412 new species this year" . Natural History Museum.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 31 December 2019 .

^ "Greta Thunberg: New beetle named after climate activist" .

BBC News . 25 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022.

^ Darby, Michael (2019). "Studies of Ptiliidae (Coleoptera) in the spirit collection of the Natural History Museum, London, 6: New species and records collected by W.C. Block in Kenya and Uganda, 1964–1965".

Entomologist's Monthly Magazine .

155 (4): 239– 257.

doi : 10.31184/M00138908.1554.3999 .

S2CID 208555554 .

^ Schilthuizen, M.; Lim, J.; van Peursen, A.; Alfano, M.; Jenging, A.B.; Cicuzza, D.; Escoubas, A.; Escoubas, P.; Grafe, U.; Ja, J.; Koomen, P.; Krotoski, A.; Lavezzari, D.; Lim, L.; Maarschall, R.; Slik, F.; Steele, D.; Ting, D.T.W.; van Zeeland, I.; Njunjić, I. (20 February 2020).

" Craspedotropis gretathunbergae , a new species of Cyclophoridae (Gastropoda: Caenogastropoda), discovered and described on a field course to Kuala Belalong rainforest, Brunei" .

Biodiversity Data Journal .

8 : e47484.

doi : 10.3897/BDJ.8.e47484 .

PMC 7046707 .

PMID 32132859 .

^ "New spider species named after Greta" .

France 24 . 12 June 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 June 2020 .

^ "Gen. Thunberga Jäger, 2020" .

World Spider Catalog Version 20.0 . Natural History Museum Bern. 2022.

doi : 10.24436/2 . Retrieved 1 April 2022 .

^ "Greta spiders".

BBC Wildlife . May 2021. p. 27.

^ Verhaegen, Gerlien; Haase, Martin (18 January 2021).

"All-inclusive descriptions of new freshwater snail taxa of the hyperdiverse family Tateidae (Gastropoda, Caenogastropoda) from the South Island of New Zealand" .

European Journal of Taxonomy (731): 71– 96.

Bibcode : 2021EJTax.731...71V .

doi : 10.5852/ejt.2021.731.1205 .

^ Janowitz, Nathaniel (19 January 2022).

"Greta Thunberg Just Had a Newly Discovered Frog Named After Her" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ "Greta Thunberg's 'urgent' book earns Waterstones author award" .

BBC News . 29 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2019 . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference . Penguin Books UK.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2019.

^ "Send us your questions for climate activist Greta Thunberg" .

The Guardian . 24 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

Further reading Nelson, Camilla; Vertigan, Meg (30 September 2019).

"Misogyny, male rage and the words men use to describe Greta Thunberg" .

The Conversation .

"Climate activist: No gray area for survival" (Interview). Interviewed by Christiane Amanpour . CNN. 1 February 2019.

D'Angelo, Bob (24 September 2019).

"Who is Greta Thunberg, the 16-year-old climate activist from Sweden?" .

KIRO .

Mini-documentary portraying Thunberg by Great Big Story (via YouTube) Make the World Greta Again Archived 25 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine – A Vice documentary that follows Thunberg and the organisers of the school strikes for climate as they are cementing a worldwide movement ahead of their first global protest that took place on 15 March 2019.

External links Greta Thunberg at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote The Greta Thunberg Foundation Greta Thunberg at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN v t e Greta Thunberg Initiatives School Strike for Climate (2018–present) List of speeches Participations 2018 UN Climate Change Conference 2019 UN Climate Action Summit 2019 UN Climate Change Conference Books Scenes from the Heart (2018) No One Is Too Small to Make a Difference (2019) Our House is on Fire (2021) The Climate Book (2022) Documentaries I Am Greta (2020) A Year to Change the World (2021) Other 2019 Transatlantic voyages " The 1975 " (2019) v t e School Strike for Climate Activities List of school climate strikes Earth Strike September 2019 climate strikes Related movements UK Student Climate Network Climate movement Sunrise Movement Initiator Greta Thunberg Other activists Isabelle Axelsson Vic Barrett Xiye Bastida Jakob Blasel Adélaïde Charlier Haven Coleman Anuna De Wever Katie Eder Aigagalefili Fepulea'i Tapua'i Jerome Foster II Holly Gillibrand Lucy Gray Helena Gualinga Isra Hirsi Sophia Kianni Dominika Lasota Noga Levy-Rapoport Catarina Lorenzo Arshak Makichyan Jamie Margolin Xiuhtezcatl Martinez Elijah McKenzie-Jackson Ayakha Melithafa Vanessa Nakate Luisa Neubauer Saoi O'Connor Adenike Oladosu Howey Ou Dominique Palmer Kevin Patel Autumn Peltier Aliénor Rougeot Mitzi Jonelle Tan Alexandria Villaseñor Taitoa Wihone Melati and Isabel Wijsen v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal Portals : Biography Environment Global warming Politics Society Sweden Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐58fkv
Cached time: 20250817051808
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.445 seconds
Real time usage: 3.750 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22983/1000000
Revision size: 272060/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 906249/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8177/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1412813/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.338/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22002599/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3268.924      1 -total
 66.85% 2185.170      1 Template:Reflist
 36.47% 1192.261    220 Template:Cite_news
 18.48%  604.149    118 Template:Cite_web
  5.08%  165.957      1 Template:Infobox_person
  4.70%  153.747      7 Template:Cite_book
  3.36%  109.887      1 Template:IPA
  2.49%   81.310      5 Template:Navbox
  2.46%   80.541      4 Template:Br_separated_entries
  2.43%   79.434      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59214935:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051808 and revision id 1305967244. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greta_Thunberg&oldid=1305967244 " Categories : Greta Thunberg 21st-century Swedish non-fiction writers 21st-century Swedish women writers Swedish women non-fiction writers Swedish women memoirists Swedish environmentalists Swedish women environmentalists Swedish climate activists Youth climate activists Swedish child activists Veganism activists Indigenous rights activists Activists for Palestinian solidarity People deported from Israel Political prisoners in Israel Swedish people taken hostage Swedish people with disabilities Activists with disabilities Autism activists Swedish autistic people People with Asperger syndrome People with obsessive–compulsive disorder Fellows of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society Peace award winners Time Person of the Year People associated with Stockholm University Activists from Stockholm 2003 births Living people Shorty Award winners Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 interproject-linked names CS1 interwiki-linked names Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) CS1 Bosnian-language sources (bs) CS1 Serbian-language sources (sr) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living people Use British English from January 2019 Use dmy dates from July 2025 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Swedish IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Lakota-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements People appearing on C-SPAN Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greta Thunberg 119 languages Add topic

