Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Acquiring elements 2 Practical issues 3 Notable collectors 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Element collecting 4 languages Español Simple English ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hobby of collecting samples of the chemical elements A set of periodic-table elements, lacking several highly radioactive elements which are impractical or impossible to collect.

An assortment of precious metals Hafnium samples for collectors Element collecting is the hobby of collecting the chemical elements . Many element collectors simply enjoy finding peculiar uses of chemical elements. Others enjoy studying the properties of the elements, possibly engaging in amateur chemistry , and some simply collect elements for no practical reason. Some element collectors invest in elements, while some amateur chemists have amassed a large collection of elements— Oliver Sacks , for example.

[ 1 ] In recent years, the hobby has gained popularity with media attention brought by element collectors like Theodore Gray . Sagar Jamane describes element collecting as “more a discipline than a hobby.” “It’s a reminder of the enormous effort of all the beautiful minds behind the periodic table and element discovery,” he says, adding that it's thrilling to see the elements that make up the universe at such close quarters.

[ 2 ] Acquiring elements [ edit ] Some collectors attempt to collect very high purity samples of each element. Others prefer to find the element in everyday use. Some are averse to collecting the element as a compound or alloy , while others find this acceptable. Collectors may isolate elements in their own homes.

Hydrogen , for example, can be easily isolated via the electrolysis of water.

[ 3 ] In addition to the element samples, some element collectors also collect items connected with the element, such as manufactured goods containing the element, rocks and minerals with the element as a constituent or compounds of the element.  Some manufacturers also sell coins made from pure elements, and density cubes made from the pure element can also be sourced on auction sites such as eBay .

Some commercial retailers now cater to the element collecting community, even selling large quantities in sets, [ 4 ] since purchasing elements from large chemical companies is frequently prohibited or uneconomical for individuals. There are a number of specialist element providers which retail to the public over the web, sell individual element samples in addition to full and partial element sets. Many also sell elements through auction sites, such as eBay. Established specialist providers include RGB Elements, Engineered Labs, [ 5 ] Nova Elements, [ 6 ] Smart Elements, [ 7 ] SMT Metalle Wimmer, [ 8 ] PEGUYS, [ 9 ] Metallium, [ 10 ] Collect the Periodic Table, Luciteria, [ 11 ] and Onyxmet.

[ 12 ] [ citation needed ] Practical issues [ edit ] Collecting macroscopic samples of all the elements is problematic: some elements, such as mercury , beryllium , thallium , plutonium , and arsenic are toxic and so are difficult to find or their sale is restricted. Others are rare in commerce, and thus hard to buy or expensive: scandium , lutetium , and thulium . Some, such as caesium , white phosphorus , and fluorine , are too reactive and have restrictions on their shipping; others, such as gallium , react corrosively and very fast with aluminium , so cannot be shipped by air.

[ 13 ] Some, such as phosphorus and iodine , are controlled due to use in clandestine chemistry .

[ 14 ] Others, like radon and astatine , are radioactive and have half-lives too short for practical collection in addition to their radioactive hazards. Usually only the stable elements from hydrogen to bismuth (except the radioactive technetium and promethium ) are collected, with the exceptions of the extremely long-lived thorium and uranium . It is possible to source other radioactive elements, such as radium (usually in the form of radium sulfate as part of luminescent paint on antique watch hands, [ 15 ] americium (in the form of radioactive buttons containing 0.29 micrograms of americium extracted from older smoke detectors ), promethium (often in the form of luminous paint), [ 15 ] polonium from devices meant to eliminate static electricity, [ 16 ] and technetium with a half-life of six hours plated on foil.

[ 17 ] In August 2023 an Australian collector was arrested because he bought a sample of plutonium for his element collection.

[ 18 ] In What If?

, Randall Munroe humorously explored the practicalities of building a periodic table consisting of bricks of each of the elements. He points out that many of the elements would immediately react with the air or with each other, sometimes with dramatic results. Astatine is so radioactive that it would quickly be "vaporized by its own heat". He concludes: [ 19 ] While collecting things is certainly fun, when it comes to chemical elements, you do not want to collect them all.

Notable collectors [ edit ] Several collectors have gained notoriety for their large element collections in addition to their other accomplishments, including: [ 5 ] Theodore Gray , scientist, author, and co-founder of Wolfram Research ; Oliver Sacks, British neurologist and writer; and James and Jenny Marshall, creators of the film Rediscovery of the Elements.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Periodic table Prices of chemical elements References [ edit ] ^ Sacks, Oliver (2001).

Uncle Tungsten: Memories of a Chemical Boyhood .

Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-0-375-40448-1 .

^ "It's Elementary! A Niche New Hobby Occupies India's Element Collectors" .

IndiaTimes . 2023-10-03 . Retrieved 2024-03-29 .

^ Gray, Theodore .

"The Wooden Periodic Table Table" . Retrieved 20 November 2010 .

^ Gray, Theodore.

"How to Get Your Own Element Collection" . Retrieved 8 March 2015 .

^ a b Halford, Bethany (June 29, 2019).

"Element collecting: A niche hobby that connects people to chemistry" .

Chemical & Engineering News . Retrieved May 20, 2024 .

^ "Buy Periodic Table Elements" .

NovaElements ® . Retrieved 2024-10-08 .

^ "Shop" .

www.smart-elements.com . Retrieved 2024-11-24 .

^ "SMT Metalle Wimmer" .

SMT Metalle Wimmer . Retrieved 2024-11-24 .

^ "The Periodic Element Guys" .

The Periodic Element Guys . Retrieved 2024-10-08 .

^ "Metallium - ElementSales.com - Rare, Exotic Metals and Elements" .

elementsales.com . Retrieved 2024-11-24 .

^ "Luciteria Science" .

Luciteria . Retrieved 2024-10-08 .

^ "Onyxmet" .

onyxmet.com . Retrieved 2024-10-08 .

^ "Publication 52, Hazardous, Restricted, and Perishable Mail" (PDF) .

USPS . January 2008.

^ "2007 - Changes in the Regulation of Iodine Crystals and Chemical Mixtures Containing Over 2.2 Percent Iodine" .

www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov . Archived from the original on 2022-03-08 . Retrieved 2022-03-08 .

^ a b "Radioluminescent Items" .

Museum of Radiation and Radioactivity . Retrieved 29 May 2024 .

^ "Backgrounder on Polonium-210" .

NRC Web . United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

^ "Technetium" .

Departement Materiaalkunde (in Dutch) . Retrieved 29 May 2024 .

^ "Sydney 'science nerd' may face jail for importing plutonium in bid to collect all elements of periodic table" .

The Guardian . Australian Associated Press. 2025-03-21.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-03-23 .

^ Munroe, Randall (2014).

What if? : serious scientific answers to absurd hypothetical questions .

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . pp.

35– 42.

ISBN 978-0-544-27299-6 .

^ Nikischer, Tony (November 30, 2021).

"Rediscovery of the Elements" .

Mindat.org .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Element_collecting&oldid=1301541592 " Categories : Chemical elements Collecting Hidden categories: CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 11:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Element collecting 4 languages Add topic

