Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Occurrence 2 Bonding 3 Subdivisions of inorganic chemistry Toggle Subdivisions of inorganic chemistry subsection 3.1 Industrial inorganic chemistry 4 Descriptive inorganic chemistry Toggle Descriptive inorganic chemistry subsection 4.1 Coordination compounds 4.2 Main group compounds 4.3 Organometallic compounds 4.4 Cluster compounds 4.5 Bioinorganic compounds 4.6 Solid state compounds 5 Spectroscopy and magnetism Toggle Spectroscopy and magnetism subsection 5.1 Qualitative theories 5.2 Molecular symmetry group theory 6 Thermodynamics and inorganic chemistry 7 Mechanistic inorganic chemistry Toggle Mechanistic inorganic chemistry subsection 7.1 Main group elements and lanthanides 7.2 Transition metal complexes 7.2.1 Redox reactions 7.2.2 Reactions at ligands 8 Characterization of inorganic compounds 9 Synthetic inorganic chemistry 10 See also 11 References Toggle the table of contents Inorganic chemistry 105 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of chemistry For the journal, see Inorganic Chemistry (journal) .

The structure of the ionic framework in potassium oxide , K 2 O Inorganic chemistry deals with synthesis and behavior of inorganic and organometallic compounds. This field covers chemical compounds that are not carbon-based, which are the subjects of organic chemistry . The distinction between the two disciplines is far from absolute, as there is much overlap in the subdiscipline of organometallic chemistry . It has applications in every aspect of the chemical industry, including catalysis , materials science , pigments , surfactants , coatings , medications , fuels , and agriculture .

[ 1 ] Occurrence [ edit ] Many inorganic compounds are found in nature as minerals .

[ 2 ] Soil may contain iron sulfide as pyrite or calcium sulfate as gypsum .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Inorganic compounds are also found multitasking as biomolecules : as electrolytes ( sodium chloride ), in energy storage ( ATP ) or in construction (the polyphosphate backbone in DNA ).

Bonding [ edit ] Inorganic compounds exhibit a range of bonding properties.  Some are ionic compounds , consisting of very simple cations and anions joined by ionic bonding . Examples of salts (which are ionic compounds) are magnesium chloride MgCl 2 , which consists of magnesium cations Mg 2+ and chloride anions Cl − ; or sodium hydroxide NaOH, which consists of sodium cations Na + and hydroxide anions OH − .  Some inorganic compounds are highly covalent, such as sulfur dioxide and iron pentacarbonyl .  Many inorganic compounds feature polar covalent bonding, which is a form of bonding intermediate between covalent and ionic bonding.  This description applies to many oxides , carbonates , and halides .  Many inorganic compounds are characterized by high melting points .  Some salts (e.g., NaCl ) are very soluble in water.

When one reactant contains hydrogen atoms , a reaction can take place by exchanging protons in acid-base chemistry . In a more general definition, any chemical species capable of binding to electron pairs is called a Lewis acid ; conversely any molecule that tends to donate an electron pair is referred to as a Lewis base .

[ 5 ] As a refinement of acid-base interactions, the HSAB theory takes into account polarizability and size of ions.

Subdivisions of inorganic chemistry [ edit ] Subdivisions of inorganic chemistry are numerous, but include: organometallic chemistry , compounds with metal-carbon bonds. This area touches on organic synthesis , which employs many organometallic catalysts and reagents.

cluster chemistry , compounds with several metals bound together with metal–metal bonds or bridging ligands .

bioinorganic chemistry , biomolecules that contain metals.  This area touches on medicinal chemistry .

materials chemistry and solid state chemistry , extended (i.e. polymeric) solids exhibiting properties not seen for simple molecules.  Many practical themes are associated with these areas, including ceramics .

Industrial inorganic chemistry [ edit ] Inorganic chemistry is a highly practical area of science.  Traditionally, the scale of a nation's economy could be evaluated by their productivity of sulfuric acid .

An important man-made inorganic compound is ammonium nitrate , used for fertilization.  The ammonia is produced through the Haber process .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Nitric acid is prepared from the ammonia by oxidation.  Another large-scale inorganic material is portland cement . Inorganic compounds are used as catalysts such as vanadium(V) oxide for the oxidation of sulfur dioxide and titanium(III) chloride for the polymerization of alkenes . Many inorganic compounds are used as reagents in organic chemistry such as lithium aluminium hydride .

[ citation needed ] Descriptive inorganic chemistry [ edit ] Descriptive inorganic chemistry focuses on the classification of compounds based on their properties.  Partly the classification focuses on the position in the periodic table of the heaviest element (the element with the highest atomic weight) in the compound, partly by grouping compounds by their structural similarities Coordination compounds [ edit ] EDTA chelates an octahedrally coordinated Co 3+ ion in [Co(EDTA)] − Main article: Coordination chemistry Classical coordination compounds feature metals bound to " lone pairs " of electrons residing on the main group atoms of ligands such as H 2 O, NH 3 , Cl − , and CN − .  In modern coordination compounds almost all organic and inorganic compounds can be used as ligands.  The "metal" usually is a metal from the groups 3–13, as well as the trans - lanthanides and trans - actinides , but from a certain perspective, all chemical compounds can be described as coordination complexes.

The stereochemistry of coordination complexes can be quite rich, as hinted at by Werner's separation of two enantiomers of [Co((OH) 2 Co(NH 3 ) 4 ) 3 ] 6+ , an early demonstration that chirality is not inherent to organic compounds.  A topical theme within this specialization is supramolecular coordination chemistry.

[ 9 ] Examples: [Co( EDTA )] − , [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3+ , TiCl 4 ( THF ) 2 .

Coordination compounds show a rich diversity of structures, varying from tetrahedral for titanium (e.g., TiCl 4 ) to square planar for some nickel complexes to octahedral for coordination complexes of cobalt.  A range of transition metals can be found in biologically important compounds, such as iron in hemoglobin.

Examples: iron pentacarbonyl , titanium tetrachloride , cisplatin Main group compounds [ edit ] Tetrasulfur tetranitride , S 4 N 4 , is a main group compound that continues to intrigue chemists These species feature elements from groups I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, 0 (excluding hydrogen) of the periodic table.  Due to their often similar reactivity, the elements in group 3 ( Sc , Y , and La ) and group 12 ( Zn , Cd , and Hg ) are also generally included, and the lanthanides and actinides are sometimes included as well.

[ 10 ] Main group compounds have been known since the beginnings of chemistry, e.g., elemental sulfur and the distillable white phosphorus .  Experiments on oxygen, O 2 , by Lavoisier and Priestley not only identified an important diatomic gas, but opened the way for describing compounds and reactions according to stoichiometric ratios.  The discovery of a practical synthesis of ammonia using iron catalysts by Carl Bosch and Fritz Haber in the early 1900s deeply impacted mankind, demonstrating the significance of inorganic chemical synthesis.
Typical main group compounds are SiO 2 , SnCl 4 , and N 2 O.  Many main group compounds can also be classed as "organometallic", as they contain organic groups, e.g., B( CH 3 ) 3 ).  Main group compounds also occur in nature, e.g., phosphate in DNA , and therefore may be classed as bioinorganic.  Conversely, organic compounds lacking (many) hydrogen ligands can be classed as "inorganic", such as the fullerenes, buckytubes and binary carbon oxides.

Examples: tetrasulfur tetranitride S 4 N 4 , diborane B 2 H 6 , silicones , buckminsterfullerene C 60 .

Noble gas compounds include several derivatives of xenon and krypton .

Examples: xenon hexafluoride XeF 6 , xenon trioxide XeO 3 , and krypton difluoride KrF 2 Organometallic compounds [ edit ] Organolithium reagents are most often found in polymeric form, such as n -butyllithium shown here Main article: Organometallic chemistry Usually, organometallic compounds are considered to contain the M-C-H group.

[ 11 ] The metal (M) in these species can either be a main group element or a transition metal.  Operationally, the definition of an organometallic compound is more relaxed to include also highly lipophilic complexes such as metal carbonyls and even metal alkoxides .

Organometallic compounds are mainly considered a special category because organic ligands are often sensitive to hydrolysis or oxidation, necessitating that organometallic chemistry employs more specialized preparative methods than was traditional in Werner-type complexes.  Synthetic methodology, especially the ability to manipulate complexes in solvents of low coordinating power, enabled the exploration of very weakly coordinating ligands such as hydrocarbons, H 2 , and N 2 .  Because the ligands are petrochemicals in some sense, the area of organometallic chemistry has greatly benefited from its relevance to industry.

Examples: Cyclopentadienyliron dicarbonyl dimer (C 5 H 5 )Fe(CO) 2 CH 3 , ferrocene Fe(C 5 H 5 ) 2 , molybdenum hexacarbonyl Mo(CO) 6 , triethylborane Et 3 B, Tris(dibenzylideneacetone)dipalladium(0) Pd 2 (dba) 3 ) Cluster compounds [ edit ] Decaborane is a powerfully toxic cluster compound of boron Iron–sulfur clusters are central components of iron–sulfur proteins , essential for human metabolism Main article: Cluster compound Clusters can be found in all classes of chemical compounds .  According to the commonly accepted definition, a cluster consists minimally of a triangular set of atoms that are directly bonded to each other.  But metal–metal bonded dimetallic complexes are highly relevant to the area.  Clusters occur in "pure" inorganic systems, organometallic chemistry, main group chemistry, and bioinorganic chemistry.  The distinction between very large clusters and bulk solids is increasingly blurred.  This interface is the chemical basis of nanoscience or nanotechnology and specifically arise from the study of quantum size effects in cadmium selenide clusters. Thus, large clusters can be described as an array of bound atoms intermediate in character between a molecule and a solid.

Examples: Fe 3 (CO) 12 , B 10 H 14 , [Mo 6 Cl 14 ] 2− , 4Fe-4S Bioinorganic compounds [ edit ] The octahedral cobalt centre of Vitamin B 12 Main article: Bioinorganic chemistry See also: Bioorganometallic chemistry By definition, these compounds occur in nature, but the subfield includes anthropogenic species, such as pollutants (e.g., methylmercury ) and drugs (e.g., Cisplatin ).

[ 12 ] The field, which incorporates many aspects of biochemistry, includes many kinds of compounds, e.g., the phosphates in DNA, and also metal complexes containing ligands that range from biological macromolecules, commonly peptides , to ill-defined species such as humic acid , and to water (e.g., coordinated to gadolinium complexes employed for MRI ).  Traditionally bioinorganic chemistry focuses on electron- and energy-transfer in proteins relevant to respiration.  Medicinal inorganic chemistry includes the study of both non-essential and essential elements with applications to diagnosis and therapies.

Examples: hemoglobin , methylmercury , carboxypeptidase Solid state compounds [ edit ] Main article: solid-state chemistry YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 , or YBCO, is a high temperature superconductor able to levitate above a magnet when colder than its critical temperature of about 90 K (−183 °C) This important area focuses on structure , [ 13 ] bonding, and the physical properties of materials.  In practice, solid state inorganic chemistry uses techniques such as crystallography to gain an understanding of the properties that result from collective interactions between the subunits of the solid.  Included in solid state chemistry are metals and their alloys or intermetallic derivatives.  Related fields are condensed matter physics , mineralogy , and materials science .

Examples: silicon chips , zeolites , YBa 2 Cu 3 O 7 Spectroscopy and magnetism [ edit ] In contrast to most organic compounds , many inorganic compounds are magnetic and/or colored. These properties provide information on the bonding and structure.  The magnetism of inorganic compounds can be comlex. For example, most copper(II) compounds are paramagnetic but Cu II 2 (OAc) 4 (H 2 O) 2 is almost diamagnetic below room temperature.  The explanation is due to magnetic coupling between pairs of Cu(II) sites in the acetate.

Qualitative theories [ edit ] Crystal field theory explains why [Fe III (CN) 6 ] 3− has only one unpaired electron Inorganic chemistry has greatly benefited from qualitative theories.  Such theories are easier to learn as they require little background in quantum theory.  Within main group compounds, VSEPR theory powerfully predicts, or at least rationalizes, the structures of main group compounds, such as an explanation for why NH 3 is pyramidal whereas ClF 3 is T-shaped.  For the transition metals, crystal field theory allows one to understand the magnetism of many simple complexes, such as why [Fe III (CN) 6 ] 3− has only one unpaired electron, whereas [Fe III (H 2 O) 6 ] 3+ has five.  A particularly powerful qualitative approach to assessing the structure and reactivity begins with classifying molecules according to electron counting , focusing on the numbers of valence electrons , usually at the central atom in a molecule.

[ citation needed ] Molecular symmetry group theory [ edit ] Nitrogen dioxide , NO 2 , exhibits C 2v symmetry A construct in chemistry is molecular symmetry , as embodied in Group theory . Inorganic compounds display a particularly diverse symmetries, so it is logical that Group Theory is intimately associated with inorganic chemistry.

[ 14 ] Group theory provides the language to describe the shapes of molecules according to their point group symmetry .  Group theory also enables factoring and simplification of theoretical calculations.

Spectroscopic features are analyzed and described with respect to the symmetry properties of the, inter alia , vibrational or electronic states. Knowledge of the symmetry properties of the ground and excited states allows one to predict the numbers and intensities of absorptions in vibrational and electronic spectra.  A classic application of group theory is the prediction of the number of C–O vibrations in substituted metal carbonyl complexes.  The most common applications of symmetry to spectroscopy involve vibrational and electronic spectra.

Group theory highlights commonalities and differences in the bonding of otherwise disparate species.  For example, the metal-based orbitals transform identically for WF 6 and W(CO) 6 , but the energies and populations of these orbitals differ significantly.  A similar relationship exists CO 2 and molecular beryllium difluoride .

Thermodynamics and inorganic chemistry [ edit ] An alternative quantitative approach to inorganic chemistry focuses on energies of reactions.  This approach is highly traditional and empirical , but it is also useful.  Broad concepts that are couched in thermodynamic terms include redox potential , acidity , phase changes. A classic concept in inorganic thermodynamics is the Born–Haber cycle , which is used for assessing the energies of elementary processes such as electron affinity , some of which cannot be observed directly.

Mechanistic inorganic chemistry [ edit ] An important aspect of inorganic chemistry focuses on reaction pathways, i.e.

reaction mechanisms .

Main group elements and lanthanides [ edit ] The mechanisms of main group compounds of groups 13–18 are usually discussed in the context of organic chemistry (organic compounds are main group compounds, after all).  Elements heavier than C, N, O, and F often form compounds with more electrons than predicted by the octet rule , as explained in the article on hypervalent molecules.  The mechanisms of their reactions differ from organic compounds for this reason.  Elements lighter than carbon ( B , Be , Li ) as well as Al and Mg often form electron-deficient structures that are electronically akin to carbocations .  Such electron-deficient species tend to react via associative pathways.  The chemistry of the lanthanides mirrors many aspects of chemistry seen for aluminium.

Transition metal complexes [ edit ] Transition metal and main group compounds often react differently.

[ 15 ] The important role of d-orbitals in bonding strongly influences the pathways and rates of ligand substitution and dissociation.  These themes are covered in articles on coordination chemistry and ligand .  Both associative and dissociative pathways are observed.

An overarching aspect of mechanistic transition metal chemistry is the kinetic lability of the complex illustrated by the exchange of free and bound water in the prototypical complexes [M(H 2 O) 6 ] n+ : [M(H 2 O) 6 ] n+ + 6 H 2 O*  →  [M(H 2 O*) 6 ] n+ +  6 H 2 O where H 2 O* denotes isotopically enriched water, e.g., H 2 17 O The rates of water exchange varies by 20 orders of magnitude across the periodic table, with lanthanide complexes at one extreme and Ir(III) species being the slowest.

Redox reactions [ edit ] Redox reactions are prevalent for the transition elements.  Two classes of redox reaction are considered: atom-transfer reactions, such as oxidative addition/reductive elimination, and electron-transfer .  A fundamental redox reaction is "self-exchange", which involves the degenerate reaction between an oxidant and a reductant.  For example, permanganate and its one-electron reduced relative manganate exchange one electron: [MnO 4 ] − +  [Mn*O 4 ] 2− →  [MnO 4 ] 2− +  [Mn*O 4 ] − Reactions at ligands [ edit ] Coordinated ligands display reactivity distinct from the free ligands.  For example, the acidity of the ammonia ligands in [Co(NH 3 ) 6 ] 3+ is elevated relative to NH 3 itself.  Alkenes bound to metal cations are reactive toward nucleophiles whereas alkenes normally are not.  The large and industrially important area of catalysis hinges on the ability of metals to modify the reactivity of organic ligands.

Homogeneous catalysis occurs in solution and heterogeneous catalysis occurs when gaseous or dissolved substrates interact with surfaces of solids.  Traditionally homogeneous catalysis is considered part of organometallic chemistry and heterogeneous catalysis is discussed in the context of surface science , a subfield of solid state chemistry.  But the basic inorganic chemical principles are the same.  Transition metals, almost uniquely, react with small molecules such as CO, H 2 , O 2 , and C 2 H 4 .  The industrial significance of these feedstocks drives the active area of catalysis.  Ligands can also undergo ligand transfer reactions such as transmetalation .

Characterization of inorganic compounds [ edit ] Because of the diverse range of elements and the correspondingly diverse properties of the resulting derivatives, inorganic chemistry is closely associated with many methods of analysis.  Older methods tended to examine bulk properties such as the electrical conductivity of solutions, melting points , solubility , and acidity .  With the advent of quantum theory and the corresponding expansion of electronic apparatus, new tools have been introduced to probe the electronic properties of inorganic molecules and solids.  Often these measurements provide insights relevant to theoretical models. Commonly encountered techniques are: X-ray crystallography : This technique allows for the 3D determination of molecular structures .

Various forms of spectroscopy : Ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy : Historically, this has been an important tool, since many inorganic compounds are strongly colored NMR spectroscopy : Besides 1 H and 13 C many other NMR-active nuclei (e.g., 11 B , 19 F , 31 P , and 195 Pt ) can give important information on compound properties and structure.  The NMR of paramagnetic species can provide important structural information. Proton ( 1 H ) NMR is also important because the light hydrogen nucleus is not easily detected by X-ray crystallography.

Infrared spectroscopy : Mostly for absorptions from carbonyl ligands Electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) spectroscopy Mössbauer spectroscopy Electron-spin resonance : ESR (or EPR) allows for the measurement of the environment of paramagnetic metal centres.

Electrochemistry : Cyclic voltammetry and related techniques probe the redox characteristics of compounds.

Synthetic inorganic chemistry [ edit ] Although some inorganic species can be obtained in pure form from nature, most are synthesized in chemical plants and in the laboratory.

Inorganic synthetic methods can be classified roughly according to the volatility or solubility of the component reactants.

[ 16 ] Soluble inorganic compounds are prepared using methods of organic synthesis .  For metal-containing compounds that are reactive toward air, Schlenk line and glove box techniques are followed. Volatile compounds and gases are manipulated in "vacuum manifolds" consisting of glass piping interconnected through valves, the entirety of which can be evacuated to 0.001 mm Hg or less. Compounds are condensed using liquid nitrogen (b.p. 78K) or other cryogens . Solids are typically prepared using tube furnaces, the reactants and products being sealed in containers, often made of fused silica (amorphous SiO 2 ) but sometimes more specialized materials such as welded Ta tubes or Pt "boats". Products and reactants are transported between temperature zones to drive reactions.

See also [ edit ] Important publications in inorganic chemistry References [ edit ] ^ "Careers in Chemistry: Inorganic Chemistry" . American Chemical Society. Archived from the original on 2012-10-29.

^ Burns, P. C. (2005-12-01).

"U6+ Minerals and Inorganic Compounds: Insights into an Expanded Structural Hierarchy of Crystal Structures" .

The Canadian Mineralogist .

43 (6): 1839– 1894.

Bibcode : 2005CaMin..43.1839B .

doi : 10.2113/gscanmin.43.6.1839 .

ISSN 0008-4476 .

^ Shainberg, I.; Sumner, M. E.; Miller, W. P.; Farina, M. P. W.; Pavan, M. A.; Fey, M. V. (1989), Lal, Rattan; Stewart, B. A. (eds.), "Use of Gypsum on Soils: A Review" , Soil Restoration , vol. 17, New York, NY: Springer New York, pp.

1– 111, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4612-3532-3_1 , ISBN 978-1-4612-7684-5 , retrieved 2022-08-21 ^ Haaijer, Suzanne C. M.; Lamers, Leon P. M.; Smolders, Alfons J. P.; Jetten, Mike S. M.; Op den Camp, Huub J. M. (2007-08-14).

"Iron Sulfide and Pyrite as Potential Electron Donors for Microbial Nitrate Reduction in Freshwater Wetlands" .

Geomicrobiology Journal .

24 (5): 391– 401.

Bibcode : 2007GmbJ...24..391H .

doi : 10.1080/01490450701436489 .

hdl : 2066/34570 .

ISSN 0149-0451 .

S2CID 97227345 .

^ Jensen, William B. (1978).

"The Lewis acid-base definitions: a status report" .

Chemical Reviews .

78 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1021/cr60311a002 .

ISSN 0009-2665 .

^ Guo, Jianping; Chen, Ping (2021).

"Ammonia history in the making" .

Nature Catalysis .

4 (9): 734– 735.

doi : 10.1038/s41929-021-00676-0 .

ISSN 2520-1158 .

S2CID 237588318 .

^ Leigh, G. J. (2004), Smith, Barry E.; Richards, Raymond L.; Newton, William E. (eds.), "Haber-Bosch and Other Industrial Processes" , Catalysts for Nitrogen Fixation , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

33– 54, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-3611-8_2 , ISBN 978-90-481-6675-6 , retrieved 2022-08-21 ^ Witschi, H. (2000-05-01).

"Fritz Haber: 1868-1934" .

Toxicological Sciences .

55 (1): 1– 2.

doi : 10.1093/toxsci/55.1.1 .

PMID 10788553 .

^ Lehn, J.M. (1995).

Supramolecular Chemistry: Concepts and Perspectives . Weinheim: VCH.

ISBN 978-3-527-29311-7 .

^ Greenwood, Norman  N.

; Earnshaw, Alan (1997).

Chemistry of the Elements (2nd ed.).

Butterworth-Heinemann .

doi : 10.1016/C2009-0-30414-6 .

ISBN 978-0-08-037941-8 .

^ Elschenbroich, C.; Salzer, A. (1992).

Organometallics: A Concise Introduction (2nd ed.). Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

ISBN 978-3-527-28164-0 .

^ S.J. Lippard; J.M. Berg (1994).

Principles of Bioinorganic Chemistry . Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books.

ISBN 978-0-935702-73-6 .

^ Wells, A.F. (1984).

Structural Inorganic Chemistry . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

^ Cotton, F.A. (1990).

Chemical Applications of Group Theory (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-51094-9 .

^ R.G. Wilkins (1991).

Kinetics and Mechanism of Reactions of Transition Metal Complexes (2nd ed.). Wiley-VCH.

ISBN 978-3-527-28389-7 .

^ Girolami, G.S.; Rauchfuss, T.B.; Angelici, R.J. (1999).

Synthesis and Technique in Inorganic Chemistry (3rd ed.). Mill Valley, CA: University Science Books.

ISBN 978-0-935702-48-4 .

At Wikiversity , you can learn more and teach others about Inorganic chemistry at the Department of Inorganic chemistry v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qbk72
Cached time: 20250811235158
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.536 seconds
Real time usage: 0.665 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2582/1000000
Revision size: 30237/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 74165/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2630/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78056/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.329/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6248012/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  524.969      1 -total
 40.31%  211.635      1 Template:Reflist
 15.82%   83.049      1 Template:Branches_of_chemistry
 15.37%   80.700      1 Template:Navbox
 14.80%   77.720      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.07%   73.873      1 Template:Short_description
  9.66%   50.704      8 Template:Cite_book
  9.06%   47.570      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.08%   42.399      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.74%   40.627      2 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14624:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235158 and revision id 1297107875. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inorganic_chemistry&oldid=1297107875 " Category : Inorganic chemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 05:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inorganic chemistry 105 languages Add topic

