Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Extent 2 Bodies of waters within Savu 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Savu Sea 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Basa Bali Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски მარგალური مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 9°45′S 122°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 9.750°S 122.000°E ﻿ / -9.750; 122.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Small sea within Indonesia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Savu Sea" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Savu Sea Sawu Sea Laut Sawu ( Indonesian ) Mar de Savu ( Portuguese ) Tasi Savu ( Tetum ) Satellite image of the Lesser Sunda Islands , with the Savu Sea in the centre Location of Savu Sea within Southeast Asia Location Southeast Asia Coordinates 9°45′S 122°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 9.750°S 122.000°E ﻿ / -9.750; 122.000 Type Sea Etymology Savu Island Part of Indian Ocean Basin countries Indonesia East Timor Max. length 360 km (220 mi) Max. width 290 km (180 mi) Surface area 105,000 km 2 (41,000 sq mi) Average depth 1,700 m (5,600 ft) Water volume 178,000 km 3 (43,000 cu mi) Settlements Ende Kupang Waingapu References [ 1 ] Location The Savu Sea (or the Sawu Sea ) ( Indonesian : Laut Sawu , Portuguese : Mar de Savu , Tetum : Tasi Savu ) is a small sea within Indonesia named for the island of Savu (Sawu) on its southern boundary.  It is bounded by Savu and Raijua to the south, the islands of Rote and Timor (split between East Timor and Indonesia ) to the east, Flores and the Alor archipelago to the north/northwest, and the island of Sumba to the west/northwest. Between these islands, it flows into the Indian Ocean to the south and west, the Flores Sea to the north, and the Banda Sea to the northeast.

The Savu Sea spans about 360 km (220 mi) from west to east, and 290 km (180 mi) from north to south. Its area is about 105,000 km 2 (41,000 sq mi).

[ 1 ] It reaches about 3,500 m (11,500 ft) in depth. The largest city on the sea is Kupang , the capital of East Nusa Tenggara province on the island of Timor , with about 450,000 inhabitants.

Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) defines the Savu Sea as being one of the waters of the East Indian Archipelago . The IHO defines its limits as follows: [ 2 ] On the North.

By the Southern limits of Flores Sea [The North coasts of Flores , Komodo , Banta and a line to Tanjong Naroe the Northeast point of Soembawa , thence along its North coast to Tanjong Sarokaja ( 8°22′S 117°10′E ﻿ / ﻿ 8.367°S 117.167°E ﻿ / -8.367; 117.167 )] and Banda Sea [ 125° East ... [on] Alor Island , thence round the East point and along the North coasts of the Alor, Pantar , Lomblen and Adoenara Islands and thence across the Northern end of Flores Stait to Tanjong Serbete the Eastern extreme of Flores].

On the East.

By the meridian of 125° East between Alor and Timor .

On the South.

By a line from the Southwest point of Timor to the Northeast point of Roti , through this island to its Southwest point, thence a line to Poeloe Dana ( 10°49′S 121°17′E ﻿ / ﻿ 10.817°S 121.283°E ﻿ / -10.817; 121.283 ) and to Tanjong Ngoendjoe, the Southern extreme of Soemba and through this island to Tanjong Karosso, its Western point.

On the West.

A line from Tanjong Karosso (Soemba) to Toro Doro ( 8°53′S 118°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 8.883°S 118.500°E ﻿ / -8.883; 118.500 ) on the South coast of Soembawa.

Bodies of waters within Savu [ edit ] Molo Strait – body of waters between Flores and Rinca connects with Savu Sea/Sumba Strait to the south and Flores Sea to the north References [ edit ] ^ a b Vivian Louis Forbes (2014).

Indonesia's Delimited Maritime Boundaries .

Springer . p. 5.

ISBN 978-3642543951 . Retrieved 16 August 2025 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953 . Retrieved 28 December 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Savu Sea at Wikimedia Commons v t e Indonesian seas East Indian Archipelago Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Sea Andaman Sea Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Celebes Sea Flores Sea Halmahera Sea Java Sea Molucca Sea Natuna Sea Philippine Sea Savu Sea Seram Sea South China Sea Timor Sea Strait Alas Strait Alor Strait Badung Strait Bali Strait Bangka Strait Berhala Strait Dampier Strait Gaspar Strait Karimata Strait Laut Strait Lombok Strait Madura Strait Makassar Strait Malacca Strait Mentawai Strait Ombai Strait Pitt Strait Riau Strait Rupat Strait Sape Strait Selayar Strait Singapore Strait Sumba Strait Sunda Strait Wetar Strait Gulf Ambon Bay Balikpapan Bay Berau Gulf Bintuni Bay Boni Gulf Cenderawasih Bay Jakarta Bay Lampung Bay Palabuhanratu Bay Saleh Bay Semangka Bay Tolo Gulf Tomini Gulf Yos Sudarso Bay Indonesia portal Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF Other Yale LUX This Timor-Leste location article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This East Nusa Tenggara location article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Savu_Sea&oldid=1306137287 " Categories : Seas of Indonesia Landforms of East Nusa Tenggara Western Indo-Pacific Timor-Leste geography stubs East Nusa Tenggara geography stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from March 2022 Use dmy dates from September 2021 Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Tetum-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Commons category link from Wikidata All stub articles Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 04:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Savu Sea 60 languages Add topic

