Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Prominent members 3 Fields of Research 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics 10 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Italiano Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 55°42′32″N 37°34′34″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.70889°N 37.57611°E ﻿ / 55.70889; 37.57611 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian research institution Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics Established 1964 Head Igor Valentinovich Kolokolov Members 62 Address Akademika Semenova av., 1A, 142432 Chernogolovka, Moscow region, Russia Location Chernogolovka , Russia Website http://www.itp.ac.ru/en/ The L. D. Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics (Russian: Институт теоретической физики имени Л. Д. Ландау (ИТФ) ) of the Russian Academy of Sciences is a research institution, located in the small town of Chernogolovka near Moscow (there is also a subdivision in Moscow, on the territory of the P. L. Kapitza Institute for Physical Problems ).

History [ edit ] The Landau Institute was formed in 1964 to keep the Landau school alive after the tragic car accident of Lev D. Landau . Since its foundation, the institute grew rapidly to about one hundred scientists, becoming one of the worldwide best-known and leading institutes for theoretical physics .

Unlike many other scientific centers in Russia, the Landau Institute had the strength to cope with the crisis of the nineties in the last century. Although about one half of the scientists accepted positions at leading scientific centers and universities abroad, most of them kept ties with their home institute , forming a scientific network in the tradition of the Landau school and supporting young theoretical physicists in the Landau Institute.

Prominent members [ edit ] Up to 1992, the institute was headed by Isaak Markovich Khalatnikov , who was then replaced by Vladimir E. Zakharov . Its numerous prominent scientists, mathematicians as well as physicists , include the Nobel laureate Alexei Alexeyevich Abrikosov as well as Igor Dzyaloshinsky , Lev Gor'kov , Vladimir Gribov , Arkady Migdal , Alexander Migdal , Anatoly Larkin , Sergei Novikov , Alexander Polyakov , Mark Azbel , Valery Pokrovsky , Emmanuel Rashba , Sergey Iordanskii, Ioshua Levinson, Alexei Starobinsky , Alexei Kitaev , Vadim Berezinskii (whose early death prevented him from sharing the Nobel Prize for the Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless transition theory), Serguei Brazovskii, Konstantin Efetov, David Khmel'nitsky, Vladimir Mineev , Grigory Volovik , Paul Wiegmann , Leonid Levitov, Alexander Finkel'stein, Alexander Zamolodchikov , Vadim Knizhnik , Konstantin Khanin , and Yakov G. Sinai .

[ 1 ] Fields of Research [ edit ] The main fields of research are: Mathematical physics Computational physics Nonlinear dynamics Condensed matter theory Nuclear and elementary particle physics Quantum field theory See also [ edit ] Institute for Theoretical Physics (disambiguation) Center for Theoretical Physics (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ Raussen, Martin; Skau, Christian (September 2014).

"Interview with Yakov Sinai – Abel Laureate 2014" (PDF) .

EMS Newsletter (93): 17 . Retrieved 19 July 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Khalatnikov, Isaak M.

; Mineev, Vladimir P., eds. (1996).

30 years of the Landau Institute : selected papers . World Scientific.

ISBN 981-02-2253-X .

External links [ edit ] Institute's web site (English version) Talk by Vinay Ambegaokar on the history of the Landau school 55°42′32″N 37°34′34″E ﻿ / ﻿ 55.70889°N 37.57611°E ﻿ / 55.70889; 37.57611 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Landau_Institute_for_Theoretical_Physics&oldid=1301999178 " Categories : 1965 establishments in the Soviet Union Institutes of the Russian Academy of Sciences Research institutes in the Soviet Union Physics research institutes Nuclear research institutes in Russia Theoretical physics institutes Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 21:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Landau Institute for Theoretical Physics 10 languages Add topic

