Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bark 2 Hair 3 String games 4 Grasses 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal fibrecraft 2 languages Deutsch 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fibrecraft used by Aboriginal Australians Australian Aboriginal fibrecraft refers to the various ways Aboriginal Australians create fibres traditionally. Materials used depend on where the people live in Australia.

Bark [ edit ] Baskets are often made from twisted bark fibres Bark is used by many people across the continent. This technology is still used today to produce baskets, which are particularly popular in the tourism industry.

Kurrajong bark is a popular bark, as is the bark of river wattles , Sandpaper figs , banyans , burney vines and peanut trees .

In the north, the more tightly woven styles are made, whereas in the south, a looser stringed bag, popularly known as a dilly bag are made.

Hair [ edit ] Hairstring is an important textile traditionally made by Aboriginal Australians .

People, particularly women, would cut their hair regularly using quartz or flint knives . This hair is never wasted. It can be spun into long threads of yarn on a spindle rolled on the thigh and then plaited to about the thickness of 8 ply wool .

Purposes for the string are manifold. These include making the head ring for resting the coolamon , headbands to keep the hair off the face, spear -making (securing the head to the shaft), and even balls for ball games.

A general-purpose belt is made of the string, from which things could be hung, such as small game like goannas in order to free the hands on long walks and hunts.

Aboriginal dancers wearing a more modern version of this covering, performing at Nambassa in New Zealand - 1981 Among some groups, including the Pitjantjajara , a small modesty apron was made of the string for young girls to wear when they reached puberty. People in Central Australia today may talk of a girl having her "string broken", [ 1 ] which can mean sexual abuse, or having sex when she is not ready.

Among some tribes , adults wore a loincloth -like pubic covering, which also hung from the waist belt. This was made either of the string itself, or of other material, including paperbark . In the Kimberley region of Western Australia , the men wore pearl shells as a pubic covering, which they call Riji , [ 2 ] and which are considered extremely sacred.

The string could  be dyed various shades using dyes such as ochre .

Some string was only worn for ceremony , such as skirts worn by the women.

String games [ edit ] Cat's cradle Many Aboriginal groups traditionally made many shapes out of the string (cat's cradle) . A researcher once watched and photographed a young Aboriginal woman from Yirrkala make over 200 separate string figures. Each one involved complicated movements of her fingers and thumbs. She was able to remember the correct sequence of finger movements for nearly every figure she made, with only an occasional mistake which she quickly corrected. As she made each figure she gave it a name. Some examples included dangurang — a lobster, bapa — lightning, matjur — an ibis flying into a tree and gapu — the ripples on a pool.

[ 3 ] The Bangarra Dance Theatre 's 2005 production of CLAN incorporated traditional desert string games into one of their performances, creating intricate patterns as they thread themselves through long, elastic strings., [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Grasses [ edit ] Christine Owney, a Jawoyn resident of the Manyallaluk/Eva Valley community, weaves a basket from pandanus Grasses are sometimes combined with hair to create a tougher fibre. Materials used differ depending on the area in Australia. In the arid areas, spinifex is common, whereas in the Top End , palms such as pandanus are often used.

Pandanus and sand-palm are used in areas such as the Daly River region and Arnhem Land to weave carry baskets, dilly string bags, wall hangings, fibre sculpture , floor mats and fish nets. The women of Peppimenarti and Gunbalanya are famous for such weaving: each community has their own distinct styles and techniques.

See also [ edit ] Indigenous Australian art Australian Aboriginal culture References [ edit ] ^ ABC Radio National Interview with anthropologist Diane Bell ^ Aboriginal Lonka Lonka Pearl Shell Pendant, Pubic Covers From Kimberly (Tribalmania.Com) Archived October 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Aboriginal Technology: Fibrecraft , Barlow, Alex, 1994, Macmillan Education Pty Ltd, p 6.

^ Bangarra Dance Theatre: Clan Archived June 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Graceful spin on a life's web - Arts - www.smh.com.au External links [ edit ] Australian Aboriginal Anthropology [ usurped ] Arrernte Dictionary Aboriginal Art Circular Alice Nampitjimpa artwork man making hairstring v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Textile arts Fundamentals Beadwork Braid Crochet Dyeing Embroidery Lace Macramé Needlework Fabric Felting Fiber Knitting Layering Appliqué Patchwork Quilting Nålebinding Plying Rope Rug making Sewing Passementerie Stitch Spinning Textile printing Weaving Yarn History of ...

Clothing and textiles Quilting Silk Byzantine Indian subcontinent Textile manufacture during the British Industrial Revolution Textile manufacturing by pre-industrial methods Timeline of clothing and textiles technology Regional and ethnic African Kongo Kuba Australian Aboriginal Burmese Acheik Hmong Indigenous peoples of the Americas Andean Mapuche Maya Mexican Navajo Oaxacan Indonesian Balinese Sumba Korean Māori Related Blocking Clothing Conservation and restoration Fiber art wearable fiber art Industry Manufacturing Mathematics and fiber arts Recycling Units of measurement Glossaries Dyeing terms Sewing terms Textile manufacturing terms Clothing portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_Aboriginal_fibrecraft&oldid=1305688066 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal clothing Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Textile arts of Australia Animal hair products History of Oceanian clothing Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 14:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian Aboriginal fibrecraft 2 languages Add topic

