Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 The Wheel 3 The Vision of Sir George Ripley 4 The "Ripley Scroll" 5 Canonical works 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents George Ripley (alchemist) 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English alchemist (c. 1415–1490) Not to be confused with George Ripley (transcendentalist) .

Sir George Ripley Ripley, as illustrated in a 16th-century edition of the Ripley Scroll [ 1 ] Born c.

1415 ( 1415 ) Kingdom of England Died 1490 (aged 74–75) Philosophical work Main interests Alchemy Notable works The Compound of Alchemy , Cantilena Riplaei , The Ripley Scroll (disputed) Sir George Ripley ( c.

1415 –1490) was an English Augustinian canon , author, and alchemist .

Biography [ edit ] Alchemists Revealing Secrets from the Book of Seven Seals, The Ripley Scroll, detail George Ripley was one of England's most famous alchemists. His alchemical writings attracted attention not only when they were published in the fifteenth century, but also later in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. His writings were studied by noted figures such as the alchemist John Dee , Robert Boyle (who is considered to be the first modern chemist), and even Isaac Newton .

[ 2 ] A great deal of myth has grown up around Ripley, such as that he studied in Italy for twenty years and became a favourite of Pope Innocent VIII . He did however spend a number of years on the continent, and after his return to England he wrote his work The Compound of Alchemy; or, the Twelve Gates leading to the Discovery of the Philosopher's Stone ( Liber Duodecim Portarum ) in 1471.

[ 3 ] The Cantilena Riplaei is one of the first poetic compositions on the subject of alchemy.

[ citation needed ] Most of Ripley's work is based on the work of pseudo- Ramon Lull , although The Compound of Alchemy is based largely on the work of a little-known alchemist of the fifteenth century, named Guido de Montanor .

[ 4 ] Another story about him is reported by Thomas Fuller in his Worthies of England , which describes a reputable English gentleman who reported having seen a record in the island of Malta which stated that Ripley gave the enormous sum of one hundred thousand pounds sterling annually to the Knights of that island and of Rhodes to support their war against the Turks .

Ripley is known as the "Canon of Bridlington ". He spent his later years as an anchorite near Boston (Yorkshire) .

The Wheel [ edit ] George Ripley's Wheel, by Elias Ashmole , 1652 Some scholars claim that the writings of The Compound of Alchemy were meant to be read in light of an alchemical drawing done by Ripley called the Wheel.

This drawing is in essence an analogy of the planets of the Solar System , of which at the time, Earth was considered to be the centre. Ripley encoded his alchemical recipes into this drawing, depicting them as the planets which revolved around the Earth, or, more specifically, the elements of his work. In alchemy, there is often an analogical connection made between heaven and Earth, and this connection is symbolised by the use of the seven planetary symbols: Sol (Sun), Luna (Moon), Mercurius (Mercury), Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. These planets correspond respectively to gold, silver, quicksilver, copper, iron, tin, and lead.

[ 5 ] The Vision of Sir George Ripley [ edit ] A commentary upon Ripley's works was written in a series of treatises by the English alchemist Eirenaeus Philalethes . Ripley's Vision , written in the Twelve Gates , became the subject of an exposition by Eirenaeus published in 1677 in London. The English form of the Vision gives a fair sample of the allusive style.

When busie at my Book I was upon a certain Night, This Vision here exprest appear'd unto my dimmed sight: A Toad full Ruddy I saw, did drink the juice of Grapes so fast, Till over-charged with the broth, his Bowels all to-brast: And after that, from poyson'd Bulk he cast his Venom fell, For Grief and Pain whereof his Members all began to swell; With drops of Poysoned sweat approaching thus his secret Den, His Cave with blasts of fumous Air he all bewhited then: And from the which in space a Golden Humour did ensue, Whose falling drops from high did stain the soil with ruddy hue.... (etc.) The "Ripley Scroll" [ edit ] An excerpt from a copy of the Ripley Scroll There are approximately 23 copies of the Ripley Scroll in existence.

[ 6 ] The scrolls range in size, colour, and detail but are all variations on a lost 15th-century original. Although they are named after George Ripley, there is no evidence that Ripley designed the scrolls himself. They are called Ripley scrolls because some of them include poetry associated with the alchemist. The scrolls' images are symbolic references to the philosopher's stone .

[ 7 ] London, British Library, Add MS 5025 (Alchemical scrolls), Four scrolls are drawn in Lubeck 1588.

London, Science Museum, A21950, 18th century.

London, Wellcome Institute, 692 & 693, two scrolls 16th century.

Cambridge, Fitzwilliam Museum, MS 276, 16th century.

ref. also a version of Ripley Scrowle by James Standysh, 16th century, British Library, Add MS 32621.

Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Bodl Rolls 1 | Alchemical Roll Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Ash. Rolls 40 | Alchemical Roll Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Ash. Rolls 52 | Alchemical Roll Oxford, Bodleian Library MS Ash. Rolls 53 | Alchemical Roll Canonical works [ edit ] George Ripley, Cantilena Riplaei George Ripley, Opera omnia chemica . Kassel, 1649.

George Ripley, Liber duodecim portarum , also contained in J.J. Mangetus , Bibliotheca Chemica Curiosa (Geneva 1702), Vol. II, pp 275–285.

Aeyrenaeus Philalethus, Ripley Reviv'd; or, An Exposition upon Sir George Ripley's Hermetico-Poetical Works (London 1678).

References [ edit ] ^ "What's On? - George Ripley and the Philosopher's Stone" .

www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk .

^ Rampling, Jennifer (2008). "Establishing the Canon: George Ripley and his alchemical sources".

Ambix .

55 (3): 189– 208.

^ Rampling, Jennifer (2012).

"Transmission and Transmutation: George Ripley and the place of English alchemy in early modern Europe" .

Early Science and Medicine .

17 (5): 477– 499.

^ Rampling, "Establishing the Canon." ^ Rampling, Jennifer M. (2013). "Depicting the Medieval Alchemical Cosmos".

Early Science and Medicine .

18 ( 1– 2): 45– 86.

^ "10/05/2012, Material World - BBC Radio 4" .

BBC .

^ "See and do - Science Museum" .

Science Museum .

Further reading [ edit ] Rola, Stanislas Klossowski de.

The Secret Art of Alchemy . Thames & Hudson: London, 1973.

Jung, Carl Gustav .

Psychologie u. Alchemie . Rascher Verlag: Zurich, 1944).

Mackay, Charles .

Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the Madness of Crowds .

Office of the National Illustrated Library: London, 1852.

The works of Sir George Ripley Full version of Yale Ripley Scroll at Wikimedia v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium Artists Scientific illustrators People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Ripley_(alchemist)&oldid=1295006254 " Categories : English alchemists 15th-century English people Augustinian canons 1490 deaths 15th-century alchemists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Use British English from April 2022 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2013 Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 03:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Ripley (alchemist) 9 languages Add topic

