Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aim and work areas 2 Activities 3 Logo symbolism 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Early history 1946–1956 4.2 IUS from 1956–1969 4.3 IUS from 1970–present 5 Members 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents International Union of Students 18 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Nederlands 日本語 Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia World non-partisan forum International Union of Students Abbreviation IUS Successor Global Student Forum Formation 1946 to around 2002 Purpose Association of World's Students' Organizations Headquarters Czechoslovakia Location Prague Region served Worldwide Membership 155 Students' Organizations from 112 Countries Official language English, French, Spanish Secretary General Frage Sherif Treasurer Liz Carlyle Advisory Council Chief Akhil Ennamsetty Key people Ingo Jaeger, Maria Lucia, Syed Mustaffa Ali Main organ Executive Secretariat Affiliations UNESCO , ECOSOC Remarks Ideologically influenced by Left-Wing , Communist , Socialist and Marxist views.

[ citation needed ] Formerly called International Students' Council The International Union of Students ( IUS ) was a worldwide nonpartisan association of university student organizations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The IUS was the umbrella organization for 155 such students' organizations across 112 countries and territories representing approximately 25 million students. This was recognised by the United Nations granting the IUS a consultative status in UNESCO . The primary aim of the IUS was to defend the rights and interests of students to promote improvement in their welfare and standard of education and to prepare them for their tasks as democratic citizens.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] It collapsed in the 2000s due to an unreliable membership system and a lack of grassroots engagement.

[ 5 ] Aim and work areas [ edit ] The aims of the IUS were spelled out in the 1946 preamble to the organization's Constitution: [ 6 ] The purpose of the International Union of Students, which is founded upon the representative student organizations of different countries, shall be to defend the rights and interests of students to promote improvement in their welfare and standard of education and to prepare them for their tasks as democratic citizens.

According to the IUS's entry in the UNESCO Non-Governmental Organization list, the priority work areas of the IUS were: "Exchange of information, defence of students' status, peace , environment, development, human rights ".

[ 2 ] Activities [ edit ] The IUS worked through: [ 2 ] [ 4 ] Issuing Student Statements Circular News Letters and Calls for Action to members Celebration of the International Students' Day on November 17 Organizing Student Conferences Logo symbolism [ edit ] The logo and flag of the IUS is a burning torch and an open book set against the red and blue outline of a stylized globe. It symbolizes youth's persistent quest for knowledge.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Stamp of the 25th anniversary of IUS in USSR Early history 1946–1956 [ edit ] The International Union of Students was founded in Prague on August 27, 1946.

[ 1 ] Student organizations from 62 countries participated in its founding envisioning a more inclusive successor to the short lived 1941-1944 International Council of Students (also known as the International Students' Council ) which was set up on the initiative of the British National Union of Students to maintain open lines of communication with student organizations in allied countries during World War II .

[ 8 ] From its earliest inception, the IUS was marked by a fundamental schism: "The spirit of [post-war] co-operation and the desire to prevent a resurgence of fascism in Europe brought together otherwise divergent groups. The main divisions, evident even at the founding congress, were between the Communist student organizations, which gained control of the executive bodies of the IUS from the beginning, and the student unions from western Europe , many of which were primarily interested in preserving the idea of a non-political international agency which would provide concrete services to the students of various countries" [ 9 ] In response to the increasingly partisan Communist course of the IUS and the broad powers of its secretariat and executive committee to initiate new policy programmes on behalf of the members, several non-Communist members withdrew their membership in the following years. Following which the IUS also referred itself as Independent Federation of Left-Wing and Alternative Student Unions .

[ 10 ] Consequently, 21 such break-away national students organizations met in Stockholm in 1950 to form the International Student Conference (ISC) as a nonpartisan rival organization to the pro-Communist IUS.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Notable among these founders was the United States National Student Association (USNSA or NSA) [ 12 ] though "Anglo-Saxons, Scandinavians and Dutch wielded the greatest influence [in the ISC]".

[ 13 ] At the time of the formation of the ISC, the dominant view in later analyses is that the IUS had become Communist controlled to such a degree that it is often referred to as a Soviet Union Communist front organization with the IUS and ISC aligned along the Cold War fronts toward the Soviet Union and the United States of America respectively.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] A dissenting view that the IUS was strongly influenced by socialism and communism but not de facto controlled by Soviet Communist interests, has also been expressed, however, by Trotskyist Lawrence Brammer: [ 18 ] "It is significant that several former IUS officers later became outspoken liberals in Czechoslovakia and in the French and Italian Communist Parties. The outward pro-Soviet orientation of the IUS often obscured real differences within the organization" [ 19 ] IUS activities in this period included Student Games held by the IUS Sports Council. The first such games were held in Paris in 1946 and were subsequently integrated into the World Youth Festivals (also known as World Festival of Youth and Students ) which the IUS co-sponsored with the equally Communist oriented World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY).

[ 20 ] Such festivals brought up to 30,000 youth and students together for a social, cultural and sporting event [ 21 ] (see World Federation of Democratic Youth ).

IUS from 1956–1969 [ edit ] From 1956 onwards, the IUS and ISC competed to attract student unions non-aligned in the Cold War sense. Focus was on Latin America , Asia and Africa and recruitment of member unions from here resulted in a broader political base for the IUS.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Activities in this period included among others regional student seminars, donation of duplication machines and cameras to help affiliates, the establishment of student Health Centres in India, [ 23 ] international student conferences as well as the publication in German, Russian and Czech of the World Student News journal of the IUS, the Democratic Education journal of the IUS, and topical pamphlets concerning education. More spectacularly, the IUS continued to co-sponsor World Youth Festivals with the World Federation of Democratic Youth (WFDY).

[ 21 ] It was well known from the outset that the IUS was funded by Soviet and Czech government contributions: [ 24 ] "The cost of international meetings, large-scale publications, and the other activities in which they engage, are beyond the financial resources of university students" [ 25 ] However, the IUS's inability to win leadership in left-wing student movements in Europe despite its many activities caused the Soviet Union to re-evaluate its support.

[ 26 ] The major challenge for the IUS in this period turned out to be its preoccupation with an ideological agenda rather than a focus on actual student concerns and affairs.

[ 17 ] [ 26 ] As a consequence of this stance, the organization became detached from its student base and was circumvented by grassroots movements in, e.g. the planning of international anti-war demonstrations in relation to the Vietnam War . The major achievements of the IUS in this period were therefore firstly helping create national student unions in developing countries and secondly aiding student union members with information and idea exchange.

[ 27 ] The dissolution of the IUS's rival organization the International Student Conference (ISC) owing to lack of funds became a reality in 1969.

[ 28 ] The demise of the ISC were hastened by the 1967 revelation that the CIA had indirectly funded the ISC and recruited student representatives from the United States National Student Association (USNSA) to actively oppose Communism in the IUS. This undermined both the financial and student political support of the ISC leaving, once again, the IUS as the only worldwide student organization.

[ 29 ] IUS from 1970–present [ edit ] This period in IUS history is marked by the chairmanship of the same chairman from 1977 to 1986 [ 30 ] under whom a flurry of international IUS activity took place in 1979.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The most significant event of the period for the IUS, however, was the turmoil the organization encountered after the 1989 - 1991 fall of Communism (see also World Federation of Democratic Youth ) during which the IUS lost most of its funding.

[ 38 ] Additionally, in August 1991, the Czechoslovak Minister of the Interior decided to expel the IUS and other Communist front organizations from Czechoslovakia .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The reasons given for the expulsion were close ties with the old Communist regime and abuse of tax privileges granted during the old Communist regime.

[ 38 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Despite the hardships caused by the changing power dynamics of the 1990s, [ 43 ] the organization elected a new leadership at its 1992 Cyprus Congress [ 42 ] and initiated structural changes of its Constitution to renew itself and evolve beyond its Communist past: "At the 16th Congress of the International Union of Students (IUS), which took place in January 1992 in Larnaca, Cyprus , the organisation underwent major changes, including the development of a new constitution. These initiatives were adopted to establish the basis for a more democratic , representative, and independent international student organisation" [ 44 ] The new leadership and its successors continued to make press appearances in, e.g., relation to International Students' Day celebration in Dublin in 1994 [ 45 ] and the 1998 UNESCO World Conference on Higher Education.

[ 46 ] In August 2003, the International Union of Students marked a comeback by calling for a worldwide day of protest against the inclusion of Higher Education in the WTO 's General Agreement on Trade in Services .

[ 38 ] [ 47 ] The IUS is still, however, struggling with its expulsion from its Prague headquarters as of October 2006: "Most cold war institutions shriveled in the 1990s, along with their superpower backing. The big communist front outfits that fought propaganda wars, awash with cash and stuffed with spies, have fizzled away in a mixture of apathy and swindles. This week's court-enforced auction of a hulking concrete pile in the heart of Prague belonging to one of them, the International Union of Students, was halted amid squabbles among its dozens of creditors" [ 48 ] Members [ edit ] The IUS had the following members: [ 49 ] Country Member Membership Afghanistan Union of Afghan Youth Consultative Algeria Union Nationale des Étudiants Algériens Full Argentina Argentine University Federation Full Bahrain National Union of Bahrain Students Full Bangladesh Students Unity of Bangladesh Shared Bangladesh Chatra Federation Shared Bangladesh Students' Union Shared Bangladesh Chatra League Shared Bangladesh Chathro Somite Shared Bangladesh Student League Shared National Student League Frozen Barbados Guild of Undergraduates Full Belgium Flemish Union of Students Associate Benin Fédération Nationale des Étudiants du Bénin Full Bolivia Confederacion Universitaria Boliviana Full Botswana Botswana Student Council Frozen Brazil National Union of Students Full União Brasileira dos Estudantes Secundaristas [ pt ] Consultative Bulgaria National Student Coordinating Center of Bulgaria Full Burkina Faso Alliance Démocratique des Étudiants Pour le Développement du Burkina Full Burma All Burma Federation of Student Unions Full Burundi Jeunesse Révolutionnaire Rwagasore (Commission Estudiantine) Frozen Cambodia Youth Association of Cambodia Frozen Cameroon Union Nationale des Étudiants Socialistes du Kamerun Full Canada Canadian Federation of Students Full Cape Verde Juventude Africana Amilcar Cabral-Cabo Verde Frozen Chad Union Générale des Étudiants et Stagiaires du Tchad Full Chile Consejo Nacional de Federaciones de Estudiantes Chilenos Frozen Commonwealth of Independent States Student Council of Associations and Unions of Higher Educational Institutions of the CIS Consultative Colombia Union Nacional de Estudiantes Colombianos Frozen Comoros Union Nationale de la Jeunesse et des Étudiants des Comores Consultative Congo, Rep.

Union Nationale des Étudiants Congolais Full Congo, Dem. Rep.

Étudiants Congolais Progressistes Consultative Costa Rica Federación de Estudiantes de la Universidad de Costa Rica [ es ] Shared Federación de Estudiantes de la Universidad Nacional Shared Cuba Federación Estudiantil Universitaria [ es ] Full Cyprus Pancyprian Federation of Students and Young Scientists Full Turkish-Cypriot Student Association Consultative Czechoslovakia Czechoslovak Central Students' Council of the Socialist Youth Union Full Dominican Republic Federación de Estudiantes Dominicanos Full Ecuador Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios del Ecuador Frozen Federación de Estudiantes Politécnicos del Ecuador Shared Egypt General Union of Students of the Arab Republic of Egypt Frozen Union of Democratic Egyptian Youth (Student Section) Shared El Salvador General de Estudiantes Universitarios Salvadoreños Full Eritrea National Union of Eritrean Youth Full Fiji University of the South Pacific Students Association Full France Union Nationale des Étudiants de France Shared Union Nationale des Étudiants de France - Indépendante et Démocratique [ fr ] Shared Gambia National Union of Gambian Students Full Germany Freier Zusammenschluss von StudentInnenschaften [ de ] Full Ghana National Union of Ghana Students Full Guatemala Asociación de Estudiantes Universitarios Full Guinea Bissau African Youth Amílcar Cabral Frozen Guyana Student Council of the Progressive Youth Organization Frozen Haiti Fédération Nationale des Étudiants Haïtiens Full Honduras Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios de Honduras Frozen India All India Students Federation Shared Students' Federation of India Shared All-India Students Bloc Shared Radical Students Forum (RSF) Shared Chatra Janata Dal Shared Iran Organization of Democratic Youth and Students of Iran Frozen Iraq General Union of Students in Iraqi Republic Shared National Union of Iraqi Students Frozen Jamaica Jamaica Union of Tertiary Students Full Japan All-Japan Federation of Student Unions Full Jordan National Union of Jordan Students Frozen Kenya Student Organization of Nairobi University Frozen Kiribati Kiribati Students' Association Consultative North Korea Korean Students Committee Full Kurdistan Kurdish Students Society in Europe Full Kuwait National Union of Kuwait Students Frozen Laos Lao People's Revolutionary Youth Union Consultative Lebanon Union Nationale des Étudiants de l'Université Libanaise Frozen Lesotho Students' Representative Council Full Liberia Liberia National Students Union Full Libyan Arab Jamahiriya General Union of Great Jamahiriya Students Full Madagascar Comité Démocratique des Jeunes et des Étudiants de Madagascar Full Organisation de la Jeunesse Révolutionnaire du Parti d'Avantgarde de la Révolution Malgache-Arema Consultative Malawi Malawi Students Union of Lesoma Full Malta Young Students' Movement [ 50 ] Consultative Mauritius Mauritius Union of Student Councils Consultative Council of Students & Youth Movements Consultative Mexico Coordinadora Nacional de Estudiantes Mexicanos Full Federación de Estudiantes de Guadalajara [ de ] Consultative Mongolia Union of Mongolian Students Full Morocco Union Nationale des Étudiants du Maroc [ fr ] Frozen Union Générale des Étudiants du Maroc Consultative Mozambique Associaçao dos Estudantes Universitarios de Moçambique Full Mozambican Youth Organisation Frozen Namibia Namibian National Student Organization Full Nepal Nepal National Federation of Students Shared All Nepal National Free Student Union Shared Nepal Progressive Student Union Frozen Netherlands Dutch Student Union Full Nicaragua Unión Nacional de Estudiantes de Nicaragua Full Niger Union des Scolaires Nigériens Full Nigeria National Association of Nigerian Students Full Oman National Union of Oman Students Full Pakistan Democratic Students Federation Frozen Jeay Sindh Taraqui Pasand Student Federation Consultative Sindhi Shagird Tehreek Consultative Baloch Students Organization Consultative Palestine General Union of Palestine Students Full Panama Federación de Estudiantes de Panamá Full Papua New Guinea National Union of Students Full Paraguay Unión Estudiantil de Paraguay Full Peru Federación de Estudiantes del Perú Full Philippines National Union of Students of the Philippines Full Poland Polish Students' Association Full Puerto Rico Puerto Rico Pro-Independence University Federation Full Quebec Mouvement des Étudiants et Étudiantes du Québec Full Romania National Union of Independent Students Full Rwanda Association Générale des Étudiants de l'Université Nationale du Ruanda Full Saint Lucia Student Bureau ( National Youth Council ) Full Saint Vincent and the Grenadines National Student Council Full Samoa University of South Pacific-Alafuna Campus Students Association Full Sao Tome and Principe Jeunesse du Mouvement de Libération de Sao Tomé et Principe Full Saudi Arabia National Union of Students of Saudi Arabia Consultative Senegal Union Démocratique des Étudiants de Dakar Full Seychelles Seychelles People's Progressive Front (Youth League) Frozen Sierra Leone National Union of Sierra Leone Students Full South Africa South African Students Congress Full Congress of South African Students Consultative Somalia National Union of Somali Students Full Spain Estudiantes Progresistas Full Unión de Estudiantes Consultative Coordinadora d'Estudiants d'Ensenyament Mitjà de Catalunya Consultative Sri Lanka Sri Lanka National Union of Students Shared United National Party (Youth League) Shared Sudan Democratic Front of Sudanese Students Full Suriname Surinaamse Studenten Unie Frozen Switzerland VSS-UNES-USU Full Syria National Union of Syrian Students Full Tanzania National Union of Tanzanian Students Frozen Dar Es Salaam University Student Union Consultative Togo Mouvement National des Étudiants et Stagiaires du Togo Full Trinidad and Tobago Guild of Undergraduates Full Tunisia Union Générale des Étudiants de Tunisie [ fr ] Shared Union Générale Tunisienne des Étudiants [ fr ] Frozen Uganda Makerere Students Guild Shared Uganda National Students Association Shared Uruguay Asociación Social y Cultural de Estudiantes de la Enseñanza Pública ( Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios del Uruguay [ es ] ) Full United States United States Student Association Full Vanuatu Vanuatu National Union of Students Consultative Venezuela Federación de Estudiantes Universitarios de Venezuela Consultative Federación de Centros Universitarios Consultative Vietnam Union Nationale des Étudiants du Vietnam Full Western Sahara Sahrawi Youth Union (Sección Estudiantil) Full Yemen Supreme Student Committee Shared Central Council of Yemeni Students Shared Zambia University of Zambia Student Union Full Zimbabwe Zimbabwe National Students Union Full See also [ edit ] Student activism World Federation of Democratic Youth World Peace Council International Association of Democratic Lawyers Women's International Democratic Federation World Federation of Trade Unions Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "The IUS Constitution - Preamble" . International Union of Students. 2002-07-18. Archived from the original on 2007-06-07 . Retrieved 2007-05-03 .

^ a b c d "UNESCO List of Non-Governmental Organizations" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 2002-08-26 . Retrieved 2007-05-03 .

^ "Collection International Union of Students" . International Institute of Social History. 2005-08-12 . Retrieved 2007-05-03 .

^ a b "IUS Website" . International Union of Students. 2002-11-18. Archived from the original on 2007-04-30 . Retrieved 2007-05-03 .

^ "Global Student Government" .

Global Student Government . 2022. Archived from the original on March 19, 2022 . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "About Us" .

isicworld.org . 22 October 2013. Archived from the original on 22 October 2013.

^ Rzhevsky, Valery (1988): 'International Day of Students Marked Today'; Prague, November 17; The Russian Information Agency ITAR-TASS ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 161-162 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 161 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 162-164 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 163 ^ a b Kehr, Marguerite (1958): 'The International Program of the USNSA'; The Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 29, No. 6. (June, 1958), p. 317 ^ Pinner, Frank A. : 'Student Trade-Unionism in France, Belgium and Holland: Anticipatory Socialization and Role-Seeking'; Sociology of Education, Vol. 37, No. 3. (Spring, 1964), p. 182 ^ Masani, M. R. (1951): 'The Communist Party in India'; Pacific Affairs, Vol. 24, No. 1. (March, 1951), p. 26 ^ Kroef, Justus M. Van Der (1955): 'Higher Education in Indonesia'; The Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 26, No. 7. (October, 1955), p. 370 ^ Morris, Bernard S. (1956): 'Communist International Front Organizations: Their Nature and Function'; World Politics, Vol. 9, No. 1. (October, 1956), p. 78 ^ a b Lyonette, Kevin (1966): 'Student Organisations in Latin America'; International Affairs" (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944-), Vol. 42, No. 4. (October, 1966), p. 660 ^ Brammer, Lawrence M. (1967): 'The Student Rebel in the University: A World-wide View'; The Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 38, No. 5. (May 1967), pp. 259 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 162 ^ Riordan, James (1974): 'Soviet Sport and Soviet Foreign Policy'; Soviet Studies , Vol. 26, No. 3. (July, 1974), p. 328 ^ a b c Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, pp. 171-172 ^ Ibingira, Grace (1965): 'Political Movements and Their Role in Promoting Unity in East Africa'; Transition, No. 20. (1965), p. 42 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 164 ^ Rudner, Martin (1996): 'East European Aid to Asian Developing Countries: The Legacy of the Communist Era'; Modern Asian Studies, Vol. 30, No. 1. (February, 1996), p. 23 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 167 ^ a b Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 173 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 171 ^ Altbach, Philip G. (1970): 'The International Student Movement'; Journal of Contemporary History, Vol. 5, No. 1, p. 174 ^ McDonald, Robert (1967): 'NSA/CIA: The Kiddies and Their Playmates'; Transition, No. 31 (June - Jul, 1967), pp. 14-19 ^ United Press International (1990): 'Former Communist Party boss goes on trial in Prague'; June 25, 1990, SECTION: International ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979a): 'Indochina. IUS delegation in Cambodia'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts; November 7, 1979, Part 3 The Far East; A.  International Affairs; 2.  The USSR and East-ern Europe; FE/6265/A2/3 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979b): 'Indochina; IUS delegation in Vietnam'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, October 5, 1979, Part 3 The Far East; A.  International Affairs; 2.  The USSR and East-ern Europe; FE/6237/A2/2 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979c): 'IUS delegation leaves for Indochina'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, September 26, 1979, Part 2 Eastern Europe; A.  International Affairs; 3.  The Far East; EE/6229/A3/1 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979d): 'Afghan Youth Organization delegation in Prague'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, September 18, 1979, Part 2 Eastern Europe; A.  International Affairs; 3. The Far East; EE/6222/A3/3 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979e): 'Panamanian student leader in Czechoslovakia'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, September 6, 1979, Part 2 Eastern Europe; A.  International Affairs; 1.  General and Western Affairs; EE/6212/A1/4 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979f): 'Latin American student official in Czechoslovakia'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, August 29, 1979, PART 2 EASTERN EUROPE; A.  INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS; 1. GENERAL AND WESTERN AFFAIRS; EE/6205/A1/5 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1979g): 'International students' forum in Helsinki'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, August 21, 1979, PART 2 EASTERN EUROPE; A.  INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS; 1.  GENERAL AND WESTERN AFFAIRS; EE/6199/A1/3 ^ a b c Fine, Philip (2003): 'International Union of Students Marks Its Comeback With Call For Worldwide Day of Protest'; The Times Higher Education Supplement, TSL Education Limited, August 8, 2003, No.1601; Pg.2 ^ The British Broadcasting Corporation (1992): 'International organisations protest expulsion from Czechoslovakia'; BBC Summary of World Broadcasts, January 15, 1992, Part 2 Eastern Europe; A. INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS; 1. GENERAL AND WESTERN AFFAIRS; EE/1278/A1/ 1 ^ The Russian Information Agency ITAR-TASS (1990): 'STUDENTS' SEMINAR DEALS WITH EMPLOYMENT, SEAT OF IUS HQ'; TASS, December 19, 1990, BY TASS CORRESPONDENT NIKOLAI PASKA, HAVANA, DECEMBER 19 ^ The Russian Information Agency ITAR-TASS (1990): 'CZECHO-SLOVAKIA DECIDES TO EXPEL IOJ AND IUS FROM COUNTRY'; TASS, November 22, 1990 ^ a b CTK National News Wire (1992): 'INTERNATIONAL UNION OF STUDENTS ANNOUNCES NEW LEADERSHIP'; CTK National News Wire, April 23, 1992, NEWS ^ Fine, Philip (2003): 'International Union Of Students Marks Its Comeback With Call For Worldwide Day of Protest'; The Times Higher Education Supplement, TSL Education Limited, August 8, 2003, No.1601; Pg.2 ^ International Union of Students (2000): Report of the Executive Secretariat to The Council and 17th Congress of The International Union of Students. For the Period from February 1992 to March 2000 ; dated March 19, 2000, p. 2 ^ The Irish Times (1994): "Students' Day marked by Dublin march"; The Irish Times, November 18, 1994, CITY EDITION, HOME NEWS; Pg. 4 ^ FT Asia Intelligence Wire (1998): 'Free access to education demanded'; The Hindu ^ Jobbins, David (2003): 'Qatar's Iraq Gesture Challenges Us Grip'; The Times Higher Education Supplement, TSL Education Limited, June 27, 2003, No.1595; Pg.11 ^ The Economist Newspapers Ltd. (2006): 'Let each stand in his place: Cold war survivors'; The Economist October 28, 2006, U.S. Edition, SECTION: INTERNATIONAL, Dateline: Prague ^ "List of IUS Member Organizations" .

stud.uni-hannover.de . IUS. Archived from the original on 22 July 2016.

^ "Karmenu Mifsud Bonnici: Back in my student days, 1984 was indeed the year in which I started being active in the voluntary and political spheres" . Max Ellul. Archived from the original on 2022-11-05.

Further reading [ edit ] Cornell, Richard (1965): Youth And Communism: An Historical Analysis of International Communist Youth Movements; Walker & Co.: New York Clews, John (1952): Students Unite: The International Union of Students and Its Work; foreword by S. Spender, Congress for Cultural Freedom; British Society for Cultural Freedom: Paris (ASIN: B0000CIEJO) Maanen, Gert Van (1966): The International Student Movement. History and Background; International Documentation and Information Centre: The Hague External links [ edit ] Official website Old (2002) website ESU - The European Students' Union: The International Student Movement during the Cold War (1946 - 1969) Communist international front organizations: An analysis of the international union of students by John Jay Barr Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Catalonia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Union_of_Students&oldid=1303921297 " Categories : Groups of students' unions International organizations based in the Czech Republic Students' unions International student organizations Organizations based in Prague Communist front organizations Student wings of communist parties Student organizations established in 1946 Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 21:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Union of Students 18 languages Add topic

