Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Bark 3 Barque rig 4 Barques and barque shrines in Ancient Egypt 5 Barque of St. Peter 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Barque 39 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of sailing vessel Three-masted barque ( US Revenue Cutter Salmon P. Chase , 1878–1907) Three-masted barque sail plan A barque , barc , or bark is a type of sailing vessel with three or more masts of which the fore mast, mainmast, and any additional masts are rigged square , and only the aftmost mast (mizzen in three-masted barques) is rigged fore and aft . Sometimes, the mizzen is only partly fore-and-aft rigged, bearing a square-rigged sail above.

Etymology [ edit ] The tall ship Elissa is a three-masted barque in Galveston.

Russian Sedov at the Kantasatama Harbour in Kotka , Finland , during the Tall Ships’ Races 2017 The word "barque" entered English via the French term, which in turn came from the Latin barca by way of Occitan , Catalan , Spanish, or Italian.

The Latin barca may stem from Celtic barc (per Thurneysen ) [ dubious – discuss ] or Greek baris (per Diez ), a term for an Egyptian boat. The Oxford English Dictionary , however, considers the latter improbable.

[ 1 ] The word barc appears to have come from Celtic languages. The form adopted by English, perhaps from Irish , was "bark", while that adopted by Latin as barca very early, which gave rise to the French barge and barque .

In Latin, Spanish, and Italian, the term barca refers to a small boat , not a full-sized ship. French influence in England led to the use in English of both words, although their meanings now are not the same.

Well before the 19th century, a barge had become interpreted as a small vessel of coastal or inland waters, or a fast rowing boat carried by warships and normally reserved for the commanding officer. Somewhat later, a bark became a sailing vessel of a distinctive rig as detailed below. In Britain, by the mid-19th century, the spelling had taken on the French form of barque . Although Francis Bacon used the spelling with a "q" as early as 1592, [ 2 ] Shakespeare still used the spelling "barke" in Sonnet 116 in 1609. Throughout the period of sail, the word was used also as a shortening of the barca-longa of the Mediterranean Sea .

[ citation needed ] The usual modern spelling convention is that, to distinguish between homophones , when spelled as barque it refers to a ship, and when spelled as bark it refers to either a sound or to a tree hide .

[ 3 ] " Barcarole " in music shares the same etymology, being originally a folk song sung by Venetian gondoliers and derived from barca —"boat" in Italian, [ 4 ] or in Late Latin.

[ 5 ] Bark [ edit ] A 1993 replica of HM Bark Endeavour In the 18th century, the Royal Navy used the term bark for a nondescript vessel that did not fit any of its usual categories. Thus, when the British admiralty purchased a collier for use by James Cook in his journey of exploration, she was registered as HM Bark Endeavour to distinguish her from another Endeavour , a sloop already in service at the time.

Endeavour happened to be a full-rigged ship with a plain bluff bow and a full stern with windows.

William Falconer 's Dictionary of the Marine defined "bark", as "a general name given to small ships: it is however peculiarly appropriated by seamen to those which carry three masts without a mizzen topsail . Our Northern Mariners, who are trained in the coal-trade, apply this distinction to a broad-sterned ship, which carries no ornamental figure on the stem or prow." [ 6 ] A 16th-century paper document in the Cheshire and Chester Archives and Local Studies Service notes the names of Robert Ratclyfe, owner of the bark Sunday and 10 mariners appointed to serve under the Earl of Sussex , Lord Deputy of Ireland .

[ 7 ] Barque rig [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rigging of a three-masted barque By the end of the 18th century, [ citation needed ] the term barque (sometimes, particularly in the US, spelled bark) came to refer to any vessel with a particular type of sail plan . This comprises three (or more) masts , fore-and-aft sails on the aftermost mast and square sails on all other masts. Barques were the workhorse of the golden age of sail in the mid-19th century as they attained passages that nearly matched full-rigged ships, but could operate with smaller crews.

The advantage of these rigs was that they needed smaller (therefore cheaper) crews than a comparable full-rigged ship or brig -rigged vessel, as fewer of the labour-intensive square sails were used, and the rig itself is cheaper.

[ citation needed ] Conversely, the ship rig tended to be retained for training vessels where the larger the crew, the more seamen were trained.

Another advantage is that, downwind, a barque can outperform a schooner or barkentine , and is both easier to handle and better at going to windward than a full-rigged ship. While a full-rigged ship is the best runner available, and while fore-and-aft rigged vessels are the best at going to windward, the barque and the barquentine, are compromises, [ citation needed ] which combine, in different proportions, the best elements of these two.

Whether square-rig, barque, barquentine or schooner is optimal depends on the degree to which the sailing-route and season can be chosen to achieve following-wind. Square-riggers predominated for intercontinental sailing on routes chosen for following-winds.

Most ocean-going windjammers were four-masted barques, due to the above-described considerations and compromises. Usually the main mast was the tallest; that of Moshulu extends to 58 m off the deck. The four-masted barque can be handled with a surprisingly small crew—at minimum, 10—and while the usual crew was around 30, almost half of them could be apprentices.

Five-masted barque Potosi ( c.

1895–1920 ) Today many sailing- school ships are barques.

[ citation needed ] A well-preserved example of a commercial barque is the Pommern , the only windjammer in original condition. Its home is in Mariehamn outside the Åland maritime museum. The wooden barque Sigyn , built in Gothenburg 1887, is now a museum ship in Turku . The wooden whaling barque Charles W. Morgan , launched 1841, taken out of service 1921, [ 8 ] is now a museum ship at Mystic Seaport [ 9 ] in Connecticut . The Charles W. Morgan has recently been refit and is (as of summer, 2014) sailing the New England coast. The United States Coast Guard still has an operational barque, built in Germany in 1936 and captured as a war prize , the USCGC Eagle , which the United States Coast Guard Academy in New London uses as a training vessel. The Sydney Heritage Fleet restored an iron-hulled three-masted barque, the James Craig , originally constructed as Clan Macleod in 1874 and sailing at sea fortnightly. The oldest active sailing vessel in the world, the Star of India , was built in 1863 as a full-rigged ship, then converted into a barque in 1901.

This type of ship inspired the French composer Maurice Ravel to write his famous piece, Une Barque sur l'ocean , originally composed for piano, in 1905, then orchestrated in 1906.

Statsraad Lehmkuhl is in active operation in its barque form, stripped down without most of its winches and later improvements more aligned to the upbringing of future sailors both as a schoolship, training operations for the Norwegian Navy and generally available for interested volunteers. During the summer of 2021, it hosted "NRK Sommarskuta" with live TV everyday sailing all of the Norwegian coast from north to south and crossing the North Sea to Shetland. After this it will perform its first full sailing trip around world, estimated to take 19 months with many promotional events along the way. Scientific equipment has been installed in support of ongoing university studies [ which?

] to monitor and log environmental data.

Barques and barque shrines in Ancient Egypt [ edit ] In Ancient Egypt , barques, referred to using the French word as Egyptian hieroglyphs were first translated by the Frenchman Jean-François Champollion , were a type of boat used from Egypt's earliest recorded times and are depicted in many drawings, paintings, and reliefs that document the culture. Transportation to the afterlife was believed to be accomplished by way of barques, as well, and the image is used in many of the religious murals and carvings in temples and tombs.

The most important Egyptian barque carried the dead pharaoh to become a deity. Great care was taken to provide a beautiful barque to the pharaoh for this journey, and models of the boats were placed in their tombs. Many models of these boats, that range from tiny to huge in size, have been found. Wealthy and royal members of the culture also provided barques for their final journey. The type of vessel depicted in Egyptian images remains quite similar throughout the thousands of years the culture persisted.

Barques were important religious artifacts , and since the deities were thought to travel in this fashion in the sky, the Milky Way was seen as a great waterway that was as important as the Nile on Earth; cult statues of the deities traveled by boats on water and ritual boats were carried about by the priests during festival ceremonies.

Temples included barque shrines, sometimes more than one in a temple, in which the sacred barques rested when a procession was not in progress.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In these stations, the boats would be watched over and cared for by the priests.

Barque of St. Peter [ edit ] A stained glass window depicting the Barque of Saint Peter in Holy Trinity Catholic Church (Trinity, Indiana) The Barque of St. Peter , or the Barque of Peter, is a reference to the Roman Catholic Church . The term refers to Peter , the first Pope , who was a fisherman before becoming an apostle of Jesus. The Pope is often said to be steering the Barque of St. Peter.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Barquentine or barkentine (three masts, fore mast square-rigged) Brigantine (two masts, fore mast square-rigged) Jackass-barque (three masts, fore mast and upper part of mizzen mast square-rigged) Schooner Windjammer List of large sailing vessels References [ edit ] ^ "barque" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ The Works of Francis Bacon , Volume 8, Cambridge University Press, 2011 ^ "Bark" .

Merriam-Webster .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2020 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Barca" .

Word Reference .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "Barca" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 September 2020 .

^ "William Falconer's Dictionary of the Marine" .

National Library of Australia . 2004-02-03.

Archived from the original on 2013-06-06 . Retrieved 2013-02-11 .

^ "DDX 43/34(a)" . Cheshire Archives . Retrieved 18 November 2024 .

^ "Sailing Ships" . Sailing-ships.oktett.net. Archived from the original on 2012-02-19 . Retrieved 2013-02-11 .

^ "Mystic Seaport homepage" . MysticSeaport.org. Archived from the original on 2013-02-04 . Retrieved 2013-02-11 .

^ "Egyptian Temples" . Odyssey Adventures in Archaeology.

Archived from the original on 2013-02-22 . Retrieved 2013-02-11 .

^ Ancient Egypt 2675–332 BCE: Religion: Temple Architecture and Symbolism .

BookRags .

Archived from the original on 2007-10-20 . Retrieved 2007-06-28 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "Ship as a Symbol of the Church (Bark of St. Peter)" . Jesus Walk.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2013 . Retrieved 19 February 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wilhelmsen, Frederick D. (1956).

Omega: Last of the barques . Westminster, Maryland: Newman Press.

LCCN 56011411 .

OCLC 3439968 .

External links [ edit ] Look up barque in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Barques .

Description of the four-masted barque Kaiwo Maru v t e Types of sailing vessels and rigs Overviews Age of Sail Maritime history Age of Discovery Sailing rigs Bermuda rig Crab claw Fore-and-aft rig Gaff rig Gunter rig Junk rig Lateen rig Ljungström rig Lug rig Mast aft rig Pinisi rig Square rig Tanja rig By sailing rigs Barque Barquentine Brig Brigantine Catboat Cutter Full-rigged ship Jackass-barque Ketch Mistico Schooner Sloop Snow Yawl Multihull vessels ʻalia Amatasi Baurua Bigiw Camakau Catamaran Drua Guilalo Jukung Kaep Kalia Karakoa Kora kora Lakatoi Lanong Outrigger canoe Pahi Paraw Pentamaran Proa Quadrimaran Takia Tepukei Tipairua Tongiaki Trimaran Ungalawa Va'a-tele Vaka katea Vinta Wa Naval and merchant sailing ships and other vessels (by origin date) Ancient Balangay Boita Borobudur ship Dhow Fire ship Galley Penteconter Bireme Trireme Quadriremes Tessarakonteres Dromon Junk K'un-lun po Lepa Mtepe Uru Post-classical Balinger Benawa Birlinn Bomb vessel Cog Hulk Jong Knarr Koch Kondura Longship Malangbang Shitik Tongkang Zabra 15th c.

Carrack Chinese treasure ship Caravel Ghurab Lancaran Hoy Trabaccolo 16th c.

Crommesteven Galiot Galleon Galleass Ghali Flyboat Fluyt Full-rigged pinnace Lorcha Man-of-war Manchua Panokseon Patache Speronara Square-rigged caravel ( round or de armada ) Xebec 17th c.

Bermuda sloop Corvette Frigate Galeas Koff Pink Polacca Ship of the line 18th c.

Bilander Chialoup Chinaman Baltimore Clipper East Indiaman Gallivat Garay Grab Gundalow Lanong Padewakang Post ship 74-gun Ship of the line Sloop-of-war Toop Trincadour Slave ship West Indiaman 19th c.

Blackwall frigate Clipper Down Easter Golekan Iron-hulled sailing ship Warship Janggolan Lambo Leti leti Palari Tamar West Country Windjammer 20th c.

Montagu whaler Nordic Folkboat Fishing vessels Bagan Bago Barca-longa Falkuša Felucca Fifie Gableboat Herring buss Jangada Jukung Lugger Masula Mayang Patorani Nordland Sixareen Sgoth Smack Tartane Well smack Yoal Recreational vessels Dinghy Ljungström sailboat Mast aft rig Pocket cruiser Sailing hydrofoil Sailing yacht Sportsboat Trailer sailer Wharrams Windsurfer Yacht Special terms Inflatable Lashed lug Razee Sewn Tall ship Treenailed ULDB Other types Bristol Channel pilot cutter Floating restaurant Fusta Mersey flat Norfolk punt Norfolk wherry Pausik Pinnace (ship's boat) Pram Scow Sneakbox Thames sailing barge Wherry Related Nautical operations v t e Sails , spars and rigging including limited use * , outdated † Rigs Textile Bermuda B&R Cat Fore-and-aft Gaff Gunter Junk * Ljungström Mast-aft Pinisi Square Other Rotorsail * Turbosail * Wingsail Sails ( sailing rigs ) Three-sided Asymmetrical spinnaker Crab claw * Gennaker Genoa Jib Lateen Mainsail (Bermuda rig) Raffee Ringtail * Screecher * Spinnaker Staysail Trysail * Four-sided Course Fisherman † Foresail Junk sail * Lug sail Mainsail (square rig) Moonraker * Ringtail * Royal Skysail * Spanker Spritsail (square-rigged) † Spritsail * ( Optimist ) Studding * Tanja sail Topgallant Topsail Watersail * Components Batten Bolt rope Cringle Emblems Draft Jackline Reefing points Roach Sailcloth Spreader patch Tell-tale Spars On bow Bowsprit sprit topmast Dolphin striker Jackstaff Jibboom Pelican striker On mast Boom Boomkin Gaff Truck Crosstrees Spinnaker pole Spreader Sprit Yard Rigging Standing Bobstay Lazy jack Running backstay Shroud ratlines Stay mouse † Stays backstay forestay Running Boomkicker * Boom vang Braces Buntlines Cunningham Clewlines Downhaul Guy Halyard peak throat Outhaul Preventer Sheet Tack Topping lift Components Baggywrinkle Belaying pin * Block Cleat bitts Clevis pin Deadeye Earing Fairlead Footrope Gasket Parrel beads Ring bolt Roller furling Shackle Swivel gooseneck Trapeze Traveller Turnbuckle Winch v t e Parts of a sailing ship Aftercastle Afterdeck Anchor Anchor windlass Apparent wind indicator Beakhead Bilge Bilgeboard Bitts Bollard Boom brake Bow or prow Bowsprit Cable Capstan Cathead Carpenter's walk Centreboard Chains Cockpit Companionway Crow's nest Daggerboard Deck Figurehead Floor timber Forecastle Frame Gangway Gunwale Head Hold Hull Jackline Jibboom Keel Canting Kelson Leeboard Mast Orlop deck Outrigger Poop deck Port Porthole Quarter gallery Quarterdeck Rib Rudder Ship's wheel Skeg Stem Starboard Stern or poop Sternpost Strake Taffrail Tiller Top Transom Whipstaff Winch Authority control databases National Germany Artists KulturNav Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kb957
Cached time: 20250814222818
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.599 seconds
Real time usage: 0.783 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3140/1000000
Revision size: 16173/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 130900/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5501/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75649/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.384/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15806387/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  636.548      1 -total
 24.28%  154.544      1 Template:Reflist
 16.45%  104.690      8 Template:Navbox
 14.60%   92.933      1 Template:OED
 14.34%   91.279      4 Template:Lang
 12.56%   79.936      1 Template:Sailing_Vessels_and_Rigs
 11.06%   70.414      7 Template:Fix
 10.25%   65.264      1 Template:Short_description
  7.30%   46.449      2 Template:Sister_project
  6.98%   44.431      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:183609:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222818 and revision id 1275627307. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barque&oldid=1275627307 " Categories : Barques Sailing rigs and rigging Tall ships Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2021 Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles needing additional references from February 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from February 2013 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 03:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Barque 39 languages Add topic

