Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Weber and Einstein 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Friedrich Weber 13 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Deutsch فارسی Français مصرى 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German physicist (1843–1912) Not to be confused with Heinrich Martin Weber .

Heinrich Friedrich Weber Born 7 November 1843 Magdala , Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach , German Confederation Died 24 May 1912 ( 1912-05-25 ) (aged 68) Zurich , Switzerland Alma mater University of Jena Known for Work on specific heats Weber function Weber's equations Scientific career Fields Physicist Institutions ETH Zurich Thesis Neue Probleme der Diffraktionstheorie des Lichtes (1865) Doctoral advisor Ernst Abbe Other academic advisors Hermann von Helmholtz Heinrich Friedrich Weber ( / ˈ v eɪ b ər / ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈveːbɐ] ; 7 November 1843 – 24 May 1912) was a physicist born in the town of Magdala , near Weimar .

Biography [ edit ] Around 1861 he entered the University of Jena , where Ernst Abbe became the first of two physicists who decisively influenced his career (Weiss 1912, pp. 44–45). Weber soon discovered, however, that he lacked sufficient mathematical talent, and so he abandoned mathematics entirely (Weiss 1912, p. 44).

Returning to physics, Abbe found in Weber a young and dynamic scientist, one who successfully focused much of his research efforts on re-thinking optical theory. Abbe not only instructed Weber in the lecture hall and laboratory, he also served as a role model for him in several other ways: through his emphasis on the importance of laboratory work in general and precision instrumentation in particular; through his view that science should be closely related to practical life; and through his embodiment of the idea that a single individual could accomplish much in life. This last point, according to Pierre Weiss , Weber's obituarist and successor at the Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule , as the Zurich Polytechnic came to be called after 1911, was “the mainspring of his [Weber's] life, the source of his most beautiful successes” (Weiss 1912, p. 44).

Weber received his doctorate under Abbe in 1865 with a dissertation on the theory of light diffraction . He spent the second half of the 1860s as a private tutor in Pforzheim , publishing only one article during this period. Pforzheim was close to both the University of Heidelberg , where Weber came into contact with Gustav Kirchhoff , one of the leading theoretical physicists of the day, and to the Polytechnische Schule in Karlsruhe , where in 1870 he became Gustav Heinrich Wiedemann ’s assistant (Weiss 1912, p. 45). At the same time, Weber also managed to meet the professor of physiology at Heidelberg, Hermann von Helmholtz , perhaps through Kirchhoff or Wiedemann, since both of them were close friends of Helmholtz's. When Helmholtz left Heidelberg in 1871 to accept the call as professor of physics at the University of Berlin , he took Weber along as his first assistant. Helmholtz now became the second formative, and decidedly primary, influence on Weber's career.

During his three years as Helmholtz's assistant in Berlin (1871–1874), Weber helped Helmholtz set up and equip the Berlin laboratory and also helped him direct the student laboratories.

In 1872 and 1874, Weber published two noteworthy papers in the Annalen der Physik on determining the specific heats of carbon , boron , and silicon at various temperatures (Weber 1872, 1874).

[ 2 ] Working in Helmholtz's refurbished Berlin laboratory, Weber measured the specific heats of these three elements and showed them to be noticeably smaller at low temperatures than predicted by the Dulong–Petit law ; moreover, he found that, with an increase in temperature, their specific heats increased extraordinarily rapidly. Only when he increased the temperature beyond 1,000 degrees Celsius did the specific heats again follow the predictions of Dulong and Petit. For nearly thirty years Weber's empirical findings remained an anomaly until one of his students presented a new explanation (Weiss 1912, pp. 49–50; Pais 1982, pp. 391–392).

Weber married Anna Hochstetter in 1875. The couple had three daughters and five sons, all of which became academics: Oskar: chemist; Friedrich: geologist; Ernst: civil engineer and astronomer; Helmut and Richard: physicians.

Weber and Einstein [ edit ] Albert Einstein considered Weber a doctoral advisor. Following a bitter disagreement with Weber, Einstein switched to Alfred Kleiner .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Heinrich Weber was both Einstein's and Mileva Marić 's thesis advisor, and he gave their respective papers the two lowest essay grades in the class, with 4.5 and 4.0, respectively, on a scale of 1 to 6.

[ 5 ] Einstein also famously once commented that Weber's lectures were 50 years out of date and did not contain Maxwell's equations [ citation needed ] .

References [ edit ] ^ "Weber" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Weber, H.F., "Die spezifische Wärme der Elemente Kohlenstoff, Bor und Silicium", Pogg. Ann., 154, 1874 ^ Alice Calaprice, Daniel Kennefick, Robert Schulmann; "An Einstein Encyclopedia" Princeton University Press, 27 Oct 2015 ^ Weinstein, G.; "Albert Einstein at the Zürich Polytechnic" arXiv : 1205.4335 ^ Asmodelle, Estelle (2015). "(PDF) The Collaboration of Mileva Maric and Albert Einstein".

arXiv : 1503.08020 [ physics.hist-ph ].

Sources [ edit ] Pierre Weiss "Prof. Dr. Heinrich Friedr. Weber. 1843–1912," Schweizerische Naturforschende Gesellschaft. Verhandlungen, 95 pp. 44–53, (1912). online at: www.e-periodica.ch Heinrich Friedrich Weber at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Italy Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heinrich_Friedrich_Weber&oldid=1288287104 " Categories : 1843 births 1912 deaths 19th-century German physicists 20th-century German physicists Scientists from Thuringia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 17:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heinrich Friedrich Weber 13 languages Add topic

