Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Goddess of creation 3 In the Kojiki 4 Death and the underworld 5 In the Nihonshoki 6 In Tenrikyo 7 In popular culture 8 Genealogy 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Izanami 33 languages العربية Bikol Central Bosanski Català Dansk Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Goddess of Shinto religion For the asteroid, see 10227 Izanami . For the genus of crabs, see Izanami (crab) .

Izanami-no-Mikoto Primordial goddess of creation and death Searching the Seas with the Tenkei ( 天瓊を以て滄海を探るの図 , Tenkei o motte sōkai o saguru no zu ) . Painting by Kobayashi Eitaku, 1880-90 (MFA, Boston).

Izanagi with the spear Amenonuhoko to the right, Izanami to the left.

Other names Izanami-no-Kami (伊弉冉神) Izanami-no-Mikoto (伊邪那美命) Yomotsu Okami (黄泉津大神) Chishiki no Okami (道敷大神) Japanese 伊邪那美 Major cult center Taga Taisha Texts Kojiki , Nihon Shoki , Sendai Kuji Hongi Gender Female Region Japan Genealogy Parents None ( Kojiki , Nihon Shoki ) Aokashikine-no-Mikoto ( Shoki ) Awanagi-no-Mikoto ( Shoki ) Omodaru and Ayakashikone.

[ 1 ] Siblings Izanagi Consort Izanagi Children Amaterasu Tsukuyomi Susanoo Hiruko Kagu-tsuchi (and others ) Part of a series on Shinto Beliefs Animism / Animatism Kami List of deities Mythology Polytheism Sacred objects Sects and schools Major kami Amaterasu Ame-no-Uzume Inari Izanagi Izanami Susanoo Tsukuyomi Important literature Kojiki ( c.

711 CE ) Nihon Shoki (720 CE) Fudoki (713–723 CE) Shoku Nihongi (797 CE) Kogo Shūi (807 CE) Kujiki (807–936 CE) Engishiki (927 CE) Shinto shrines Association of Shinto Shrines Ichinomiya List of Shinto shrines Modern system of ranked Shinto shrines Shinto architecture Twenty-Two Shrines Practices Festivals Kannushi Miko Music Ritual dance Ritual incantations Ritual purification See also Edo neo-Confucianism Glossary of Shinto History Kokugaku Ko-Shintō Mythical creatures Nippon Kaigi Religion in Japan Secular Shrine Theory State Shinto Syncretism of Shinto and Buddhism Religion portal v t e Izanami ( イザナミ ) , formally referred to with the honorific Izanami-no-Mikoto ( 伊弉冉尊/伊邪那美命 ; meaning "She-who-invites" or the "Female-who-invites") , is the creator of both creation and death in Japanese mythology , as well as the Shinto mother goddess . She and her brother-husband Izanagi are the last of the seven generations of primordial deities that manifested after the formation of heaven and earth. Izanami and Izanagi are held to be the creators of the Japanese archipelago and the progenitors of many deities, which include the sun goddess Amaterasu , the moon deity Tsukuyomi and the storm god Susanoo . In mythology, she is the direct ancestor of the Japanese imperial family. In Shinto and Japanese mythology, Izanami gave humans death, so she is sometimes seen as a shinigami .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Name [ edit ] Her name is given in the Kojiki ( c.

712 AD ) both as Izanami-no-Kami (伊弉冉神) and Izanami-no-Mikoto (伊邪那美命), while the Nihon Shoki (720 AD) refers to her as Izanami-no-Mikoto , with the name written in different characters (伊弉冉尊).

The names Izanagi ( Izanaki ) and Izanami are often interpreted as being derived from the verb izanau ( historical orthography izanafu ) or iⁿzanap - from Western Old Japanese 'to invite', with -ki / -gi and -mi being taken as masculine and feminine suffixes, respectively.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The literal translation of Iⁿzanaŋgî and Iⁿzanamî are 'Male-who-invites' and 'Female-who-invites'.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Shiratori Kurakichi proposed an alternative theory which instead sees the root iza- (or rather isa- ) to be derived from isao (historical orthography: isawo ) meaning 'achievement' or 'merit'.

[ 9 ] Goddess of creation [ edit ] The 'Eight Great Islands' (大八洲 Ōyashima ) of Japan begotten by Izanami and Izanagi Main article: Japanese mythology The first gods Amenominakanushi and Kunitokotachi summoned two divine beings into existence, the male Izanagi and the female Izanami, and charged them with creating the first land. To help them do this, Izanagi and Izanami were given a spear decorated with jewels, named Amenonuhoko (heavenly spear). The two deities then went to the bridge between heaven and earth, Ame-no-ukihashi ("floating bridge of heaven"), and churned the sea below with the spear. When drops of salty water fell from the spear, Onogoroshima was created. They descended from the bridge of heaven and made their home on the island.

[ 10 ] Eventually, they wished to copulate , so they built a pillar called Ame-no-mihashira (天の御柱,"pillar of heaven"; the mi- is an honorific prefix) and around it they built a palace called Yahiro-dono (八尋殿, one hiro is approximately 1.82 m, so the "eight- hiro -palace" would have been 14.56 m. In reality, "ya, was a sacred number to the Japanese, and may often be translated as 'myriad'" [ 11 ] ). Izanagi and Izanami circled the pillar in opposite directions and, when they met on the other side, Izanami spoke first in greeting. Izanagi did not think that it was proper for the wife to speak first, but they copulated anyways. They had two children: Hiruko ("leech-child"), who later came to be known in Shinto as the god Ebisu , [ 12 ] and Awashima ("island of foam"). However, they were born deformed and were not recognized as the pair's legitimate children.

[ 13 ] They put the children into a boat and set them out to sea, then petitioned the other gods for an answer as to what they did wrong. They were told that the male deity should have spoken first in greeting during the marriage ceremony. So Izanagi and Izanami went around the pillar again, this time Izanagi speaking first when they met, and their marriage was finally successful.

From their union were born the Ōyashima , or the "great eight islands" of the Japanese chain: Awaji Iyo (later Shikoku ) Oki Tsukushi (later Kyūshū ) Iki Tsushima Sado Yamato (later Honshū ) Note that Hokkaidō , Chishima and Okinawa were not part of Japan in ancient times.

They bore six more islands and many deities. Izanami died giving birth to the child Kagu-tsuchi ("incarnation of fire") or Ho-Musubi ("causer of fire").

[ 12 ] She was then buried on Mt. Hiba , at the border of the old provinces of Izumo and Hōki , near modern-day Yasugi of Shimane Prefecture . Izanagi was so angry at the death of his wife that he killed the newborn child, thereby creating dozens of deities.

In the Kojiki [ edit ] The Kojiki talks of the death of Izanami and her tomb, which was located at the boundary between country Izumo and Hōki. It implies that Izanami transferred her soul to an animal and a human before her death, but does not state whether or not Izanami had incarnations.

[ 14 ] Death and the underworld [ edit ] Izanagi and Izanami in Yomi .

Izanagi-no-Mikoto lamented the death of Izanami-no-Mikoto and undertook a journey to Yomi ("the shadowy land of the dead"). He searched for Izanami-no-Mikoto and found her. At first, Izanagi-no-Mikoto could not see her for the shadows hid her appearance. He asked her to return with him. Izanami-no-Mikoto informed Izanagi-no-Mikoto that he was too late. She had already eaten the food of the underworld and was now one with the land of the dead. She could no longer return to the living but would try to ask for permission to leave.

[ 15 ] The news shocked Izanagi-no-Mikoto, but he refused to leave her in Yomi. While Izanami-no-Mikoto was sleeping, he took the comb that bound his long hair and set it alight as a torch. Under the sudden burst of light, he saw the horrid form of the once beautiful and graceful Izanami-no-Mikoto. She was now a rotting form of flesh with maggots and foul creatures running over her ravaged body.

Crying out loud, Izanagi-no-Mikoto could no longer control his fear and started to run, intending to return to the living and abandon his death-ridden wife. Izanami-no-Mikoto woke up, shrieking and indignant, and chased after him. She also sent Yakusa-no-ikazuchi-no-kami (demons who are like Raijin ) and shikome (foul women) to hunt for Izanagi-no-Mikoto and bring him back to Yomi.

At this time, Izanagi throws a peach to drive away the gods. This narrative feature is of Chinese influence: in China, the peach is treated as a sacred amulet fruit.

[ citation needed ] Izanagi-no-Mikoto burst out of the entrance and pushed a boulder in the mouth of the Yomotsuhirasaka ( 黄泉津平坂 ; cavern that was the entrance of Yomi) to create a separation between the world of the living and the world of the dead, as well as separating Izanagi from Izanami.

[ 15 ] Izanami-no-Mikoto screamed from behind this impenetrable barricade and told Izanagi-no-Mikoto that if he left her she would destroy 1,000 residents of the living every day. He furiously replied he would give life to 1,500 residents.

Izanagi is said to have performed ritualistic cleansing, harai , after witnessing the decomposing body of his wife. This is the traditional explanation for the purification rituals often performed at Shinto shrines in Japanese religion, where shrine-goers wash themselves with water before entering the sacred space.

[ 16 ] While he bathed, Izanagi gave birth to the sun goddess, Amaterasu , from his left eye, the moon god, Tsukuyomi , from his right eye, and the storm god, Susanoo , from his nose.

[ 12 ] In the Nihonshoki [ edit ] While similar in many aspects, the version of the tale of Izanagi and Izanami in the Nihonshoki differs from the Kojiki version in that Izanagi does not descend into the Underworld ( Yomi ), instead residing permanently on the island of Awaji in a temple. Additionally, in the Nihonshoki , the three deities Amaterasu , Tsukiyomi , and Susanoo were said to have been created by both Izanagi and Izanami, instead of Izanagi alone.

[ 17 ] In Tenrikyo [ edit ] In Tenrikyo , Izanami-no-Mikoto is one of the Ten Aspects of God's Providence ( 十全の守護 , jūzen no shugo ) .

[ 18 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Izanami appears as a playable god in the video game Smite .

[ 19 ] She also, alongside Amaterasu and Susanoo, appears in the video game DKO ( Divine Knockout ). Izanami is a recurring important character in the Megami Tensei video game series; such as being the true primary antagonist in Persona 4 .

Genealogy [ edit ] The first group of primordial deities, the kotoamatsukami , and the seven generations of kami ( kamiyonanayo ) that emerged after them Kuni-no-Tokotachi Toyokumo [ ja ] Uhibi [ ja ] Suhiji [ ja ] Tsunugi [ ja ] Ikugu [ ja ] Ihodonoji [ ja ] Otonobe [ ja ] Omodaru [ ja ] Ayakashikone [ ja ] Izanagi Izanami See also [ edit ] Atago Gongen Baba Yaga God in Tenrikyo (with Izanami-no-Mikoto being one of the 10 aspects of God's providence) Ishana Mount Hiba Orpheus and Eurydice Persephone Shinto in popular culture Twins in mythology References [ edit ] ^ "Encyclopedia of Shinto - Home : Kami in Classic Texts : Omodaru, Ayakashikone" .

eos.kokugakuin.ac.jp . Retrieved 2021-01-17 .

^ 七会 2009 , pp. 168–193 ^ 河野信子編 (1995).

女と男の時空 . Vol. 1. 藤原書店. p. 115.

ISBN 978-4-89434-022-0 .

^ Kadoya, Atsushi; Yumiyama, Tatsuya.

"Izanami" .

Encyclopedia of Shinto . Kokugakuin University . Retrieved 2024-03-23 .

^ Phillipi, Donald L. (1969).

Kojiki . Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press. p. 482.

^ Chamberlain (1882).

Section II.—The Seven Divine Generations.

^ Philippi, Donald L. (1968).

Kojiki . p. 480.

^ Chamberlain, Basil Hall (1919).

The Kojiki . p. 19.

^ Matsumura, Takeo (1955).

日本神話の研究, 第2巻 (Nihon shinwa no kenkyu, vol. 2) . Baifūkan. p. 56.

^ Takeshi, Matsumae (2005).

"Izanagi and Izanami" .

Encyclopedia of Religion .

7 : 4754 – via Gale Virtual Reference Library.

^ Kojiki, Translated with an Introduction and Notes by Donald L. Philippi . Princeton University Press, University of Tokyo Press. 1969. p. 63.

^ a b c "Izanagi and Izanami".

Britannica Encyclopedia of World Religions : 578. 2006.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Chamberlain 2008 , p. 74 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFChamberlain2008 ( help ) ^ "Izanagi and Izanami" .

JapanKnowledge Lib . NetAdvance Inc.

^ a b Kobayashi, Fumihiko (2015).

"Japanese Animal-Wife Tales: Narrating Gender Reality in Japanese Folktale Tradition" .

International Folkloristics .

9 – via ProQuest Ebook Central.

^ "Izanagi and Izanami" .

Britannica Encyclopedia of World Religions : 439. 2006 – via ProQuest Ebook Central.

^ Takeshi, Matsumae (2005). Jones, Lindsay (ed.). "Izanagi and Izanami".

Encyclopedia of Religion .

7 . Detroit, MI: Macmillan Reference, USA: 4754– 4755.

^ Tenrikyo Church Headquarters (1993).

The Doctrine of Tenrikyo . Tenrikyo Church Headquarters.

^ "Izanami – Matron of the Dead" .

www.smitegame.com . Retrieved 2022-11-04 .

Bibliography [ edit ] 七会静 (2009).

よくわかる「世界の死神」事典 . 廣済堂文庫. 廣済堂.

ISBN 978-4-331-65459-0 .

Reader, Ian (2008).

Simple Guides: Shinto . Kuperard. pp.

53– 55.

ISBN 978-1-85733-433-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Izanami at Wikimedia Commons Izanami on the Japanese History Database .

v t e Japanese mythology Mythic texts Kojiki Nihon Shoki Fudoki Kujiki Kogo Shūi Hotsuma Tsutae Nihon Ryōiki Konjaku Monogatarishū Shintōshū Butsuzōzui Japanese creation myth Kotoamatsukami ( Hitorigami ) Ame-no-Minakanushi Kamiyo ( Kamiyonanayo ) Kuniumi Kamiumi Izanami Izanagi Takamagahara mythology Amaterasu Susanoo Tsukuyomi Ame-no-Uzume Izumo mythology Yamata no Orochi Hare of Inaba Ōkuninushi Kuni-yuzuri Takeminakata Hyūga mythology Tenson kōrin Ninigi Konohanasakuya-hime Toyotama-hime Human age Emperor Jimmu Tagishimimi Kesshi Hachidai Mythological locations Ashihara no Nakatsukuni Ama-no-Iwato Onogoro Island Ne-no-kuni Ryūgū-jō Sanzu River Takamagahara Tokoyo no kuni Yomi Mythological weapons Amenonuhoko Kusanagi no Tsurugi Totsuka-no-Tsurugi Ame-no-ohabari Futsu-no-mitama [ ja ] Major Buddhist figures Amida Nyorai Daruma Five Tathagatas Seven Lucky Gods Benzaiten Bishamonten Daikokuten Ebisu Fukurokuju Hotei Jurōjin Kisshōten Legendary creatures Dragon Kappa Kitsune Oni Shinshi Tengu Yōkai Yūrei Other Shinigami Ryukyuan religion Amamikyu Tenson dynasty Ainu mythology Kamuy Kamuy-huci Hasinaw-uk-kamuy Shinto deities Japanese deities Sacred objects Japanese religions Glossary of Shinto v t e Shirayama Hime Faith Main Deities Shirayamahime-no-Okami ( 白山比咩大神 ) , also known as Kukurihime , the deified Hakusan volcano Izanagi-no-Mikoto ( 伊邪那岐尊 ) , the creator god Izanami-no-Mikoto ( 伊弉冉尊 ) , the creator goddess Head Shrines Shirayama Hime Shrine Branch shrines Hakusan Shrine [ ja ] v t e Izanami and Izanagi in shinto Main Deities Izanagi Izanami Shrines Taga-taisha Izanagi Shrine Branch shrines Eda Shrine Kumano Hayatama Taisha Mitsumine Shrine [ ja ] NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9jjrk
Cached time: 20250817044133
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.653 seconds
Real time usage: 0.812 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5148/1000000
Revision size: 15900/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145583/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6026/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 91778/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.407/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18473420/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  689.289      1 -total
 25.38%  174.936      1 Template:Reflist
 23.69%  163.271      1 Template:Infobox_deity
 19.60%  135.103      1 Template:Infobox
 14.69%  101.239      7 Template:Nihongo
 12.44%   85.764      1 Template:Shinto
 12.23%   84.270      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.24%   77.494      4 Template:Cite_web
  8.08%   55.690      1 Template:Short_description
  7.56%   52.099      1 Template:Seven_Generations_of_Kami Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:670153:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044133 and revision id 1300985764. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Izanami&oldid=1300985764 " Categories : Creator goddesses Death goddesses Japanese goddesses Shinto kami Underworld goddesses Psychopomps Divine twins Creator deities Mother goddesses War goddesses Sea and river goddesses Smithing goddesses Killed deities Legendary progenitors Shinigami Amatsukami Tenrikyo Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 13:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Izanami 33 languages Add topic

