Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Lives of the Physicians Toggle Lives of the Physicians subsection 2.1 Editions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Abi Usaybi'a 19 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 پنجابی Русский Simple English سنڌي کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 13th-century Arab physician Ibn Abi Usaybi'a Born 1203 Damascus , Ayyubid Sultanate Died January 1270 (age 66) Salkhad , Ayyubid Sultanate (in modern Syria) Resting place Salkhad Occupation physician Language Classical Arabic Genre Biography Literary movement Islamic Golden Age Notable works Lives of the Physicians Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿa Muʾaffaq al-Dīn Abū al-ʿAbbās Aḥmad Ibn Al-Qāsim Ibn Khalīfa al-Khazrajī ( Arabic : ابن أبي أصيبعة ‎; 1203–1270), commonly referred to as Ibn Abi Usaibia (also Usaibi'ah, Usaybea, Usaibi`a, Usaybiʿah , etc.), was a physician from Syria in the 13th century CE. He compiled a biographical encyclopedia of notable physicians, from  the Greeks , Romans and Indians up to the year 650AH/1252AD in the Islamic era.

Biography [ edit ] Ibn Abi-Usaibi'a was born in Damascus , a member of the Arab Banu Khazraj tribe. The son of a physician, he studied medicine in Damascus and Cairo and In 1236, was appointed physician to a new hospital in Cairo, but the following year he took up an offer by ruler of Damascus, of a post in Salkhad , near Damascus, where he lived until his death.

[ 1 ] His only surviving work is Lives of the Physicians . In that work, he mentions another of his works, but it has not survived.

[ 2 ] Lives of the Physicians [ edit ] The title in Arabic, Uyūn ul-Anbāʾ fī Ṭabaqāt al-Aṭibbā ( Arabic : عيون الأنباء في طبقات الأطباء ), is translatable loosely and expansively as "Sources of News on Classes of Physicians", commonly translated into English as History of Physicians , Lives of the Physicians , Classes of Physicians , or Biographical Encyclopedia of Physicians .

[ 2 ] The book opens with a summary of the physicians from ancient Greece, Syria, India and Rome  but the main focus of the book's 700 pages is physicians of medieval Islam. A first version appeared in 1245–1246 and was dedicated to the Ayyubid physician and vizier Amīn al-Dawlah. A second and enlarged recension of the work was produced in the last years of the life of the author, and circulated in at least two different versions, as shown by the extant manuscripts.

Editions [ edit ] The text has been published five times in all. When the first edition by August Müller (Cairo, 1882), published under the pseudonym "Imrū l-Qays", [ 3 ] was found to be marred by typos and errors and a corrected version was subsequently issued (Königsberg, 1884).

[ 4 ] Relying on Müller's work, Niẓār Riḍā published a non-critical edition of the text in Beirut in 1965, which was subsequently reworked by Qāsim Wahhāb for yet another edition issued in Beirut in 1997. ʿĀmir al-Najjār published his own critical edition (not based on Müller) in Cairo in 1996.

A team of scholars from the universities of Oxford and Warwick has published a new critical edition and a full annotated English translation of the Uyūn al-Anbā .

[ 5 ] Their work is available in Open Access at Brill Scholarly Editions .

[ 6 ] In 2020, a new translation was published by Oxford World's Classics under the name Anecdotes and Antidotes: A Medieval Arabic History of Physicians .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Ibn Wahshiyya References [ edit ] ^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Thatcher, Griffithes Wheeler (1911). " Ibn Usaibi'a ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 223.

^ a b Roger Pearse (2011), Preface to the Online Edition -- the online edition of the Arabic-to-English translation of Ibn Abi Usaibia's History of Physicians , translated by Lothar Kopf.

^ "Lives of the Physicians" .

Library of Congress .

^ Uṣaybiʻah, Aḥmad ibn al-Qāsim Ibn Abī (December 12, 1884).

"Ibn Abi Useibia" . Selbstverlag – via Google Books.

^ "A Literary History of Medicine - Ibn Abi Usaybiah- The Best Accounts of the Classes of Physicians - Home" .

krc2.orient.ox.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 2015-08-05.

^ "Ibn Abī Uṣaybiʿah | Scholarly Editions" .

scholarlyeditions.brill.com .

^ https://www.waterstones.com/book/anecdotes-and-antidotes/ibn-abi-usaybiah/henrietta-sharp-cockrell/9780198827924 [ bare URL ] ^ Usaybi'ah, Ibn Abi; Gelder, Geert Jan van (June 25, 2020).

Anecdotes and Antidotes: A Medieval Arabic History of Physicians . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-882792-4 – via Google Books.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ibn Abi Usaybea .

AlWaraq.net English translation of the Lives of the Physicians , translated by L. Kopf, 1954.

Notes and comments on Ibn Abi Usaibia's work A Literary History of Medicine Archived 2015-08-05 at the Wayback Machine on the Oxford/Warwick Project and the new manuscripts of the work Brill Scholarly Editions Archived 2020-01-25 at the Wayback Machine containing a critical text edition, English translation, and essays on Ibn Abi Usaibia's Lives of the Physicians .

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Israel People DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Abi_Usaybi%27a&oldid=1267217512 " Categories : 1203 births 1270 deaths Historians from the Ayyubid Sultanate 13th-century Syrian historians People from Damascus 13th-century physicians 13th-century Arabic-language writers Physicians from the Ayyubid Sultanate Medieval Syrian physicians Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 03:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Abi Usaybi'a 19 languages Add topic

