Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Terms and etymology 3 Use 4 Historical accounts 5 Modern cultural references 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Message stick 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indigenous Australian communication device This article is about a means of communication by Aboriginal Australians. For the Australian television series, see Message Stick . For the film festival, see Message Sticks Festival .

"A native carrying a message stick" image from The Euahlayi Tribe by K. Langloh Parker (1905) An Australian Indigenous message stick held in the National Museum of Australia Message stick inscribed with notches and strokes and their codified meaning (Howitt, 1889) A message stick is a public communication device traditionally used by Indigenous Australians . Although styles vary, they are generally oblong lengths of wood with motifs engraved on all sides. Message sticks were carried by designated messengers across political borders to coordinate movements of people, request resources, issue demands, and negotiate alliances. Message sticks are non-restricted since they were intended to be seen by others, often from a distance. They are nonetheless frequently mistaken for tjurungas .

[ 1 ] The term 'message stick' is also sometimes applied to similar objects made by Indigenous people of North America, housed in the Peabody Museum Harvard and the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology, Berkeley. The term is also used to refer to a similar system of communication used by the Punan people of Borneo.

Description [ edit ] Message sticks are usually a solid piece of carved wood, with a median length of 17 centimetres (6.7 in), marked with patterns and sequences of signs. Styles vary, but they are often cylindrical or flattened with tapered ends.

[ 2 ] Message sticks are occasionally finished with red or white ochre. In the Top End of Australia, the signs and patterns on message sticks may be painted as opposed to engraved. Other kinds of materials incorporated into message sticks include feathers, twine, resin and human hair.

Terms and etymology [ edit ] Indigenous terms for 'message stick' are recorded in approximately 57 languages of Australia, often co-lexifying with the term for 'wood'. The English term 'message stick' is a likely calque of the Norwegian budstikke , a marked rod used up until the 19th century to summon meeting participants in Norway and elsewhere in Scandinavia.

[ 3 ] Use [ edit ] Traditionally, message sticks were passed between different peoples, language groups and even within clans [ 4 ] to make alliances and to manage the movements of people and goods. They were often used to summon neighbouring groups to ceremonies, including mortuary or initiation ceremonies. Signature marks engraved on the stick could be used to identify senders and recipients, their totems or clan affiliations.

[ 2 ] A standard interaction was triadic involving, minimally a sender, a messenger and a recipient. In a prototypical case, an event or circumstance would prompt a sender to prepare a message stick. This individual would appoint a messenger and begin carving the message stick in their presence while explaining the meanings of individual marks and their relationship to elements of the message. The messenger subsequently travelled overland, or over water, with the message stick displayed in a prominent way such as hanging on the tip of a spear, in a net bag, or tucked into a headband or waist girdle. The visibility of the message stick served to identify the messenger as an envoy with ambassadorial status with the right to enter foreign territory without asking permission. Arriving at the destination the messenger delivered the stick to its recipient and reproduced the content of the message in spoken form while referring to the marks on the object. The recipient could then entrust the same messenger with a reply messenger to send back to the original community, or the same messenger might continue onwards to deliver the same message to a more distant community.

Historical accounts [ edit ] Anthropologist Alfred Howitt wrote of the Wurundjeri people of the Melbourne area in 1889: The oldest man (Headman) having made such a message stick hands it to the old man nearest to him, who inspects it and, if necessary, adds further marks and gives corresponding instructions. Finally, the stick having passed from one to the other of the old men present is handed to the messenger, who has received his verbal message in connection with it. If any duration of time is connected with the message, or if an enumeration of stages or camps is made, a method is used (see Australian Aboriginal enumeration ) [to explain this].

[ 5 ] Jeannie Gunn wrote about life at a station near the site of the  town of Mataranka in the Northern Territory in 1902: Then he ['Goggle-Eye'] showed me a little bit of stick with notches on it, and said it was a blackfellow's letter-stick, or, as he called it, a "yabber-stick." It was round, not flat like most other letters, and was an invitation to a corroboree; and there were notches on it explaining what sort of corroboree it was, and saying that it was to be held at Duck Creek. There was some other news marked on it...

[ 6 ] Donald Thomson , recounting his journey to Arnhem Land after the Caledon Bay Crisis in 1935, writes of Wonggu sending a message stick to his sons, at that time in prison, to indicate a calling of a truce. In etched angles, it showed people sitting down together, with Wonggu at the centre, keeping the peace.

[ 7 ] The sticks acquired a function as a tool of diplomacy , especially in Northern Australia.

[ 2 ] Museum Collections Australian Museum Aboriginal Message Sticks from the Australian Museum collection The Australian Museum holds 230 message sticks in its collection.

[ 8 ] South Australian Museum The South Australian Museum holds 283 message sticks in its collection.

[ 8 ] British Museum The British Museum holds 74 message sticks in its collection.

[ 8 ] National Museum of Australia The National Museum of Australia holds 53 message sticks in its collection.

[ 8 ] Pitt Rivers Museum The Pitt Rivers Museum holds a message stick from the 19th century made of Acacia homalophylla which originates from Queensland. Originally sent by a Yagalingu man to a Wadjalang man, it is an invitation to hunt emu and wallaby . Zig-zagged symbols carved into the wood represent ‘emu’ and the cross-hatching represent ‘wallaby’. The British Museum holds a Kalkatungu message stick, collected by Charles Handley in 1900, created to communicate the death of three children through a combination of diamond-shaped engravings.

[ 8 ] Modern cultural references [ edit ] Message Stick was an Australian TV series.

The student newspaper of the University of New South Wales goes by the name Tharunka , which means message stick in a Central Australian dialect.

Message Stick is a business owned by Aboriginal Australians, started in 2003. It works closely with the Federal Government to influence Government policy to support economic development, including business ownership and entrepreneurialism .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Australia portal Australian Aboriginal enumeration Australian Aboriginal artefacts Devil's Pool, Australia Koori Mail National Indigenous Times Australia's largest circulating Indigenous affairs newspaper References [ edit ] ^ "How to identify a message stick" .

Brave New Words . 2021 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ a b c Kelly, Piers (4 July 2019). "Australian message sticks: Old questions, new directions".

Journal of Material Culture .

25 (2). SAGE Publications: 133– 152.

doi : 10.1177/1359183519858375 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0003-FDF8-9 .

ISSN 1359-1835 .

^ Kelly, Piers (7 October 2024).

"Comparing Australian message sticks and sequentially marked objects (SMOs) of the Upper Palaeolithic: Problems and opportunities" .

Topics in Cognitive Science .

0 . Cognitive Science Society LLC: 1– 20.

doi : 10.1177/1359183519858375 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0003-FDF8-9 .

ISSN 1756-8765 .

^ qmnadmin (6 November 2012).

"Message Sticks: rich ways of weaving Aboriginal cultures into the Australian Curriculum" .

The Queensland Museum Network Blog . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ "Notes on Australian Message Sticks and Messengers", AW Howitt, FGS, Journal of the Anthropological Institute , pp 317-8, London, 1889, reprinted by Ngarak Press, 1998, ISBN 1-875254-25-0 ^ "The Little Black Princess", Mrs Aeneas Gunn, p 54, George Robertson: Melbourne, 1909?

^ *Peterson, Nicholas, Donald Thomson in Arnhem Land , Melbourne University Press ISBN 0-522-85063-4 , pp 80-81.

^ a b c d e Kelly, Piers (2019).

"Australian message sticks: Old questions, new directions" .

Journal of Material Culture .

25 (2): 133– 152.

doi : 10.1177/1359183519858375 .

hdl : 21.11116/0000-0003-FDF8-9 .

S2CID 198687425 . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ "Our Story – Message Stick" .

Message Stick – Indigenous Business . 6 March 2020 . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen L (2015) Message sticks and Indigenous diplomacy. In: K. Darian-Smith, P. Edmonds  (eds).

Conciliation on Colonial Frontiers: Conflict, Performance and Commemoration in Australia and the Pacific Rim.

New York: Taylor & Francis, 113–131.

Bastian, A. (1880) Message-sticks der Australie.

Verhandlungen der Berliner Anthropologischer Gesellschaft 240–242.

Bastian, A. (1881) Australische Schriftsubstitute.

Zeitschrift für Ethnologie Transactions 13:192–193.

Edye, I.G. (1903) Aboriginal message sticks.

Science of Man 5(12): 197–198.

Hamlyn, Harris R. (1918) On messages and ‘message sticks’ employed among the Queensland Aborigines.

Memoirs of the Queensland Museum 6: 13–36.

Howitt, A.W. (1889). Notes on Australian message sticks and messengers.

Journal of the Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland 18: 314–332.

Kelly, Piers. 2019. Australian message sticks: Old questions, new directions.

Journal of Material Culture 1-20.

Online First Mountford, C.P. (1938). Aboriginal message sticks from the Nullabor Plains.

Transactions of the Royal Society of South Australia 62(1): 122–126.

Thorpe, W.W. (1926). Aboriginal message sticks.

Australian Museum Magazine 2(12): 423–425.

External links [ edit ] Australian Message Sticks Database v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Message_stick&oldid=1302914793 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal culture Human communication Nonverbal communication Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from May 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from May 2020 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 03:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Message stick 1 language Add topic

