Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Prusik sling 1.2 Gibbs-style type 1 ascender 1.3 Floating cam ascender 1.4 Inertial drum brake ascender 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Self-locking device Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of climbing equipment Self-locking devices are pieces of rock-climbing equipment intended to arrest the fall of solo climbers who climb without partners. This device is used for rope solo climbing , for "ground-up climbing", and for " top rope solo climbing ". To date, several types of self-locking devices have evolved.

Types [ edit ] Prusik sling [ edit ] The earliest type of self-belay device used was the ubiquitous prusik knotted sling used by climbers. The method requires the solo climber to feed out an estimated length of belay rope so that they can reach their next stance and repeat the process as the rope is difficult to feed through the prusik knot while climbing.

Gibbs-style type 1 ascender [ edit ] A Gibbs-style ascender The next level of device development improved on the locking limitations of the prusik sling by utilizing a cam that is activated by the climber's body moving down to rotate the simple grab cam inside a rigid frame. The climber's harness is directly attached to the cam and the frame encapsulates the rope.

Early versions of the cam systems used a Gibbs-style type 1 ascender placed in an inverted position attached to a soloer's sit harness opposite to the manufacturer's intended use. The combination of a climber's body position in a fall and friction between the ascender frame and the rope provides the activating leverage for the cam to grab the rope. Fall forces generated using this device and the cam profile can be enough to damage a rope due to the high clamp loads induced by the cam lever arm. The main drawback to this system is that it is like the prussik knot system where the soloer also has to feed out an estimated amount of rope in order to reach a stance point.

Floating cam ascender [ edit ] The Wren Industries 'Soloist' A big improvement over the Gibbs-style type 1 ascender was the design of the Wren Industries "Soloist" – the device incorporates a floating cam that is activated by the relative position of the rope to the device frame, with the frame secured between a user's sit harness and a chest harness. The Soloist allows the rope to feed without the need for the soloer to manually feed out between stances – so it allows a 'true' hands-free climb.

Knowledge of the correct device position relative to the rope anchor is critical for the correct operation of the cam devices in a fall as they are mono-directional in operation, and the soloer must be aware that he needs to put in a runner as soon as he sets off above the belay point on a multi-pitch climb, otherwise he can slide to the bottom of the rope in the event of a fall. The Soloist cam profile design allows the belay rope to be "grasped" rather than crushed as in the early cam devices.

Inertial drum brake ascender [ edit ] The Wren Industries 'Silent Partner' To overcome these limitations, the Wren Industries 'Silent Partner' device was developed. This system has four mechanical moving parts inside a frame that is attached to a climber's sit harness and is basically an inertial drum brake with the belay rope connected to the device by tying a clove hitch around the device's drum. The Silent Partner is unique in the sense that it operates in both directions of drum rotation so it can be attached to a climber's sit harness in either position, eliminating the danger of stepping off a multi-pitch anchor point before the first runner can be placed.

Illustration of a clove hitch over the 'Silent Partner' As long as the clove hitch can feed over the drum, the rope will feed through the device. In a fall, the drum is back driven by the rope as the device slides down the rope; when the drum rotation exceeds a certain angular velocity , it locks off to the frame and the increase in friction induced between the stationary drum and the rope causes the clove hitch to rapidly tighten around the locked drum to arrest the fall.

The method used to lock the drum against the device frame is by the use of two straight knurl edge discs that are thrown outwards by centrifugal force as they ride on parallel ramps milled into the drum's enclosed outer periphery. Two light return springs act as centrifugal force trips and as return springs to reset the discs when the fall load is released and the device is unlocked. A simple nylon guide is used to ensure both discs activate simultaneously to jam the discs between each drum ramp and the frame's lock ring.

While the device works quite well, it suffers from rope drag that can prematurely tighten the clove hitch, so allowance must be made to reduce the hanging weight of the rope below the device. The rope diameter and elasticity is critical for operation, as higher than normal fall forces can be generated due to the rapid locking rate, in the order of 13 kN at runners and anchor points.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Self-locking devices .

Rock-climbing equipment Rope solo climbing References [ edit ] Mountaineering : the freedom of the hills . Cox, Steven M., 1951-, Fulsaas, Kris. (7th ed.). Seattle, WA: Mountaineers Books. 2003.

ISBN 0898868289 .

OCLC 50982399 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) v t e Climbing Types Rock climbing Disciplines Aid Big wall Multi-pitch Bouldering Highball Competition Speed Free Sport Traditional Solo Free solo Deep-water solo Rope solo Top roping Route types Artificial Crack Face Overhang / Roof Slab Mountaineering Alpine Glacier travel Via ferrata Himalayan Alpine style Expedition style Ice Mixed Dry-tooling Scrambling Hillwalking Other Buildering Canyoning Crane Grass Commercial Parkour Pole Ropes course Rooftopping Roof and tunnel hacking Slide Tree Lists Alpine clubs Climbers Piolet d'Or winners IFSC World Cup winners IFSC World Championships winners IFSC victories Deaths Eight-thousanders Everest Equipment Brands Knots Historical events Grade milestones First ascents Technique Terminology Terminology Equipment Rock Aider Daisy chain Anchor Ascender Croll Belay device Auto belay Assisted braking device Grigri Glasses Gloves Bolt Boulder mat Carabiner Maillon Climbing rope Cord Dynamic Static Chalk Descenders Figure-8 Harness Hooks Fifi Skyhook Hammer Hex Lanyard PAC Nut Copperhead Piton Portaledge Quickdraw SLDs Revo Sling SLCDs Camalot Shoes Tricam Ice and snow Alpenstock Abalakov thread Bottled oxygen Crampons Ice axe Ice tool Ice screw Mountaineering boot Rescue Avalanche cord RECCO Transeiver Snow anchor Snowshoe Action Abseiling Australian Dülfersitz Belaying Front pointing Glissading Jumaring Leading Flashing Onsighting Redpointing Rescue Crevasse Self Self-arrest Simul-climbing Rope team Spotting Traversing Tyrolean Other Ape index Approach shoe Clean Climbing route Beta Guidebook Chipping First ascent Pitch Topo Exposure Fall factor Grades Guides Training Bachar ladder Campus board Hangboard MoonBoard Media Magazines and journals Alpine Journal Alpinist American Alpine Journal Canadian Alpine Journal Climbing Desnivel Himalayan Journal Planinski Vestnik Rock & Ice Summit Non-fiction films The Alpinist El Capitan The Dawn Wall Free Solo Hard Grit Companies Black Diamond CAMP Cascade Designs Deuter Early Winters Eastern Mountain Sports Five Ten Frostline Kits GERRY Mountain Sports Grivel Holubar Mountaineering JanSport Sierra Designs Kelty La Sportiva Lowe Alpine Mammut Marmot Mountain Works Millet Mountain Equipment Co-op Mountain Safety Research Outdoor Research Patagonia Petzl Rab REI The North Face Therm-a-Rest Wild Country Organizations National Access Fund Alpine Club Alpine Club of Canada American Alpine Club Appalachian Mountain Club Austrian Alpine Club British Mountaineering Council Club Alpin Français Club Alpino Italiano Federación Española de Deportes de Montaña y Escalada Fédération française de la montagne et de l'escalade German Alpine Club Pilipinas Climbing South African Climbing Federation South Tyrol Alpine Club Swiss Alpine Club USA Climbing International International Federation of Sport Climbing (IFSC) International Climbing and Mountaineering Federation (UIAA) Union Internationale des Associations de Guides de Montagnes (UIAGM) Union of International Mountain Leader Associations (UIMLA) Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Self-locking_device&oldid=1272886768 " Categories : Climbing equipment Mountaineering equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 maint: others This page was last edited on 30 January 2025, at 17:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Self-locking device Add languages Add topic

