Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Short biography 2 Selected bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Stuart Clark (author) 3 languages العربية Italiano مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English astronomer Stuart Clark Stuart Clark, 2013 Occupation Writer Nationality English Genre Novels, Astronomy Website www .stuartclark .com Stuart Clark is a contemporary English writer and widely read astronomy journalist. His career is devoted to presenting the dynamic and complex world of astronomy to the general public, both as semi-fictional novels of past scientists and as popularised astronomy articles.

[ 1 ] Short biography [ edit ] Clark holds a first class honours degree and a PhD in astrophysics . He is a Fellow of the Royal Astronomical Society and a former Vice Chair of the Association of British Science Writers . On 9 August 2000, UK daily newspaper The Independent placed him alongside Stephen Hawking and the Astronomer Royal , Professor Sir Martin Rees , as one of the 'stars' of British astrophysics teaching.

[ 2 ] Currently he divides his time between writing books and, in his capacity of cosmology consultant, writing articles for New Scientist . He writes for the European Space Agency where he was Senior Editor for Space Science for some time. Over the years Clark has written for amongst others: BBC Sky at Night , BBC Focus , The Times , The Guardian , The Economist , The Times Higher Education Supplement , Daily Express , Astronomy Now and Sky and Telescope .

[ 1 ] Until 2001, Stuart was the Director of Public Astronomy Education at the University of Hertfordshire . There he taught undergraduates, postgraduates and the general public, whilst researching star formation , planetary habitability and the origins of life . In a paper published by Science in 1998, he helped develop the current paradigm that the left-handed amino acids necessary for the origin of life on Earth were synthesized in star-forming regions spread throughout the Galaxy .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] In 2001, Stuart decided to increase his part-time writing to a full-time occupation. He remains a visiting fellow promoting the university and contributing to observatory open nights. Having crossed from mainstream science into science journalism, he now spends his working life translating astronomy, space research and physics into comprehensible language for the general public. Stuart has also been the accompanying astronomer on a cruise ship and on an eclipse tour to China. He frequently lectures to the public up and down the UK and, increasingly, across the world.

[ 1 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] The Unknown Universe (A New Exploration of Time, Space, and Modern Cosmology), Pegasus, 2016 The Day Without Yesterday ( The Sky's Dark Labyrinth Trilogy : Book III), Polygon, 2013 The Sensorium of God ( The Sky's Dark Labyrinth Trilogy : Book II), Polygon, 2012 The Sky's Dark Labyrinth ( The Sky's Dark Labyrinth Trilogy : Book I), Polygon, 2011 Voyager: 101 Wonders Between Earth and the Edge of the Cosmos , Atlantic, 2012 The Big Questions: The Universe , Quercus Publishing, 2010 Galaxy Exploring the Milky Way , Barnes and Noble, 2008 (UK: Quercus, 2009) Deep Space The Universe from the beginning , Barnes and Noble, 2007 (UK: Quercus, 2008) The Sun Kings: The Unexpected Tragedy of Richard Carrington and the Tale of How Modern Astronomy Began (shortlisted by the Royal Society for their 2008 general science book prize), Princeton University Press, 2009 Journey to the Stars , Oxford University Press, 2000 Life on Other Worlds and How to Find It , Springer-Praxis, 2000 Universe in Focus: The Story of the Hubble Space Telescope , Andromeda, 1997 (updated 1998) Clark has contributed to, as well as performing in, the National Geographic programme Storm Worlds . His other numerous television and radio contributions in person include Radio 4 's Material World , Radio 3 's The Essay , BBC's Tomorrow's World and Nine O'clock News , and Channel 4 's Big Breakfast .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Who is Stuart Clark?" .

stuartclark.com . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ "IV drip" .

The Independent . 9 August 2000.

^ Mansfield, Susan (18 June 2011). "Adjusting to distant light".

The Scotsman .

^ "BBC2 documentary: Isaac Newton: The Last Magician" .

stuartclark.com . 3 April 2013.

External links [ edit ] Official website Clark, Stuart (4 April 2013).

"Dark matter as elusive as ever – despite space station results" .

The Guardian .

Clark's broadcasts "Across the Universe: scientific articles by Clark" .

The Guardian .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Korea Poland Israel Belgium People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stuart_Clark_(author)&oldid=1255273449 " Categories : 21st-century English novelists Living people English male novelists 21st-century English male writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2013 Use dmy dates from April 2022 Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 4 November 2024, at 01:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stuart Clark (author) 3 languages Add topic

