Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Marriage and family 4 Works 5 Atlas and geography textbooks 6 Later life and death 7 Legacy and honors 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Emma Willard 20 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Kotava مصرى Polski Português Русский Shqip Svenska తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American women's rights activist Emma Willard Emma Willard, c. 1805–1815 Born Emma Hart February 23, 1787 Berlin, Connecticut , U.S.

Died April 15, 1870 (aged 83) Troy, New York , U.S.

Occupation(s) Educator, author, women's rights activist Emma Willard ( née Hart ; February 23, 1787 – April 15, 1870) was an American female education activist who dedicated her life to education. She worked in several schools and founded the first school for women's higher education in the United States , the Troy Female Seminary in Troy, New York . With the success of her school, Willard was able to travel across the country and abroad to promote education for women. The seminary was renamed the Emma Willard School in 1895 in her honor.

Early life [ edit ] Emma Willard was born on February 23, 1787, in Berlin, Connecticut .

[ 1 ] She was the sixteenth of seventeen children from her father, Samuel Hart, and his second wife Lydia Hinsdale Hart.

[ 2 ] Her father was a farmer who encouraged his children to read and think for themselves. At a young age, Willard's father recognized her passion for learning. At that time women were only provided basic education, but Willard was included in family discussions such as politics, philosophy, world politics and mathematics that were primarily male subjects.

[ 3 ] At age 15, Willard was enrolled in her first school in 1802 in her hometown of Berlin. She progressed so quickly that just two years later at the age of 17 she was teaching there.  Willard eventually took charge of the academy for a term in 1806.

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] In 1807, Willard left Berlin and briefly worked in Westfield, Massachusetts , before accepting a job offer at a female academy in Middlebury, Vermont . She held the position of principal at the academy  from 1807 to 1809. She was unimpressed by the material taught there and opened a boarding school for women, the Middlebury Female Seminary in 1814, in her own home.

[ 5 ] She was inspired by the subjects her nephew, John Willard, was learning at Middlebury College and strove to improve the curriculum that was taught at girls' schools.

[ 4 ] Willard believed that women could master topics like mathematics and philosophy rather than just subjects taught at finishing schools . This passion for women's education led her to fight for the first women's school for higher education.

Emma Willard Her success inspired her to share her ideas on education and to write A Plan for Improving Female Education in 1819, a pamphlet that she presented to the members of the New York Legislature .

[ 3 ] Her pamphlet rejected contemporary ideas that women did not need a literary or scientific education. For example, the year before, Thomas Jefferson wrote a letter in which he suggested women should not read novels, calling them a "mass of trash" with few exceptions, and added that "For a like reason too much poetry should not be indulged." [ 6 ] In her speech to the legislature, Willard said that existing women's education was inadequate both in the amount girls received compared to boys and in its foundational principles. One issue she took was that women's education "has been too exclusively directed, to fit them for displaying to advantage the charms of youth and beauty". Another was "it has been made the first object in educating our sex, to prepare them to please the other" while "reason and religion teach, that we too are primary existencies... not the satellites of men." [ 7 ] Her plan included a proposal for a women's seminary to be publicly funded just as men's schools were.

[ 3 ] Willard did not receive a response from the legislators, several of whom believed women's education to be contrary to God's will. Willard finally received support from New York Governor DeWitt Clinton , who invited her to open a school there.

[ 4 ] Originally Willard opened an institution in Waterford, New York but she did not receive the promised financial support and therefore moved her school to Troy, New York , where she received more support and funding.

[ 8 ] The Troy Female Seminary opened in September 1821 for boarding and day students.

[ 1 ] This was the first school in the United States to offer higher education for women. The curriculum consisted of the subjects she had longed to include in women's education: mathematics, philosophy, geography, history, and science.

[ 3 ] Willard led the school to success, and in 1831, the school had enrolled over 300 students.

[ 2 ] The school attracted students from wealthy families or families of high position. Although most of the students would still end up as housewives, Willard never hindered her students' pursuit towards women's education and continued to fight for their rights. Despite her reputation today in women's history, Willard was not a supporter of the women's suffrage movement during the mid-19th century. Willard believed that women's education was a much more important matter.

[ 2 ] Marriage and family [ edit ] The Emma Willard House in Middlebury While working at the academy in Middlebury, Willard met her future husband John Willard .

[ 9 ] He was a physician and 28 years her senior.

[ 2 ] John Willard brought four children to the marriage from his previous marriages. His nephew, also named John Willard, lived with them while attending Middlebury College, which gave Emma Willard much inspiration in forming her educational views.

[ 10 ] Emma Willard's younger sister, Almira Hart Lincoln Phelps , joined Emma in 1823, after the death of her first husband, Simeon Lincoln, and taught at Troy Female Seminary for eight years.

[ 11 ] Emma and John Willard had one son together, named John Willard Hart, who received the management of the Troy Female Seminary when Willard left it in 1838.  Emma's first husband died in 1825, and in 1838, she married Christopher C. Yates but was divorced from him in 1843.

[ 10 ] Works [ edit ] Undated photo Along with the profits made from the Troy Female Seminary, Willard also made a living from her writing. She wrote several textbooks throughout her lifetime, including books on history and geography. Some of her works are History of the United States, or Republic of America (1828), A System of Fulfillment of a Promise (1831), A Treatise on the Motive Powers which Produce the Circulation of the Blood (1846), Guide to the Temple of Time and Universal History for Schools (1849), Last Leaves of American History (1849), Astronography; or Astronomical Geography (1854), and Morals for the Young (1857).

[ 2 ] Willard's history and geography texts included women as well as men and emphasized the status of women as the primary determinant in whether a society could be described as civilized.

[ 12 ] Willard also published a book of poetry, The Fulfilment of a Promise (1831), with her most popular poem entitled "Rocked in the Cradle of the Deep," which she reportedly wrote while on an ocean voyage in 1839.

[ 4 ] [ 13 ] In 1830, she made a tour of Europe. Three years later, she donated the proceeds from her book about her travels [ 14 ] to a school for women that she helped to found in Athens, Greece .

[ 10 ] This book Letters from France & Britain was reviewed alongside Abby Jane Morrell's account of her travels in the sub Antarctic, and they were described as "the productions of our self-taught countrywomen who [are] ... creditable to their sex".

[ 15 ] Atlas and geography textbooks [ edit ] Willard cowrote The Woodbridge and Willard Geographies and Atlases (1823) with American geographer William Channing Woodbridge .

[ 16 ] She co-authored with him A System of Universal Geography on the Principles of Comparison and Classification .

[ 17 ] Willard and Woodbridge created the first widely used historical atlas of the U.S. The maps, graphs, and pictures integrated the details of the nation's geography into the broad popular image of the country as a large, powerful complex nation.

[ 18 ] Her map-drawing geographic pedagogy became popular in the United States [ 19 ] and also influential in American missionary schools in South Asia during the nineteenth century.

[ 20 ] Later life and death [ edit ] Statue at Russell Sage College Emma Willard Memorial John Willard, Emma's husband, died in 1825. She headed the Troy Female Seminary until she remarried in 1838, and left the school in the hands of her son and daughter-in-law. She married Dr. Christopher Yates and moved to Boston with him.

[ 1 ] He gave up his career, but after nine months of marriage they separated, and a Decree nisi was granted in 1843.

She spent her later years traveling across America and throughout Europe to promote women's education. In support of her efforts, she published a number of articles and presented lectures across the country to promote the cause. Her personal assistant was Celia M. Burleigh . Willard's efforts helped to establish a school for women in Athens, Greece .

[ 3 ] Emma Willard died on April 15, 1870, in Troy, New York and was interred at Oakwood Cemetery .

Legacy and honors [ edit ] The Troy Female Seminary was renamed the Emma Willard School in 1892 in her honor and today is still promoting her strong belief in women's education.

[ 1 ] A statue honoring her services to the cause of higher education was erected in Troy in 1895 and stands on what is now the Russell Sage College campus.

A marble memorial was erected in Middlebury in 1941. In 1905, Willard was inducted into the Hall of Fame for Great Americans in the Bronx, New York . In 2013, Willard was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame .

[ 21 ] She has been the subject of several biographies.

[ 22 ] Her geographies are discussed by Calhoun [ 23 ] and her histories by Baym.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Chronographer , a type of graphic developed by Willard to display historical events References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Emma Willard Biography – Facts, Birthday, Life Story – Biography." Famous Biographies & TV Shows – Biography.com.

http://www.biography.com/people/emma-willard-9531676 Archived February 23, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d e "Person Detail Emma Hart Willard." Vermont Women's History Project.

http://womenshistory.vermont.gov/?Tabld=61&personID=15 . No longer online at this address; not found (yet) at Archive.org ^ a b c d e "Emma Hart Willard – People of Connecticut." 50 States – Capitals, Maps, Geography, State Symbols, State Facts, Songs, History, Famous People from NETSTATE.COM.

http://www.netstate.com/states/peop/people/ct_ehw.htm ^ a b c d "Emma Willard." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica, 2011. Web.

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/643922/Emma-Willard .

^ "WILLARD, Emma." (n.d.): Funk & Wagnalls New World Encyclopedia. EBSCO. Web.

^ Jefferson, Thomas (March 14, 1818).

"Thomas Jefferson to Nathaniel Burwell, 14 March 1818" . Letter to Nathaniel Burwell .

^ Willard, Emma (Spring 1819).

"An Address to the Public Particularly to the Members of the Legislature of New-York Proposing a Plan for Improving Female Education" .

Speaking While Female Speech Bank .

^ "Emma Willard." Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th Edition (2011): 1. MAS Ultra – School Edition. EBSCO. Web.

^ Jefferson, Thomas (2013). Oberg, Barbara B. (ed.).

The Papers of Thomas Jefferson . Vol. 40. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. pp.

31– 32.

ISBN 978-0-691-16037-5 – via Google Books .

^ a b c Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905).

"Willard, Emma C." .

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

^ "Almira Hart Lincoln Phelps American educator" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved March 15, 2019 .

^ Knupfer, Peter B. (May 2019). "How to Write a History Textbook: The Willard-Willson Debate over History Education in the Common School Era".

History of Education Quarterly .

59 (2): 257– 287.

doi : 10.1017/heq.2019.6 .

S2CID 150916115 .

^ "Emma Willard at Cyberhymnal.org" . Archived from the original on October 26, 2014 . Retrieved September 23, 2011 .

^ Willard, Emma, Journals and Letters from France and Great Britain , Troy, New York: Tuttle, 1833 ^ The Christian Magazine . 1834.

^ Walters, William D. Jr., "Emma Willard's Geographies," Pennsylvania Geographer, XXXVII: 1 (Spring/Summer 1999) 118–138 ^ Willard, Emma and William Channing Woodbridge, A system of Universal Geography Ancient and Modern, on the Principles of Comparison and Classification , Hartford: Oliver D. Cooke, 1824 ^ Susan Schulten, "Emma Willard and the graphic foundations of American history," Journal of Historical Geography (2007) 33#3 pp.542–564.

^ Schulten, Susan (April 28, 2017). "Map Drawing, Graphic Literacy, and Pedagogy in the Early Republic".

History of Education Quarterly .

57 (2): 185– 220.

doi : 10.1017/heq.2017.2 .

S2CID 151621973 .

^ Balmforth, Mark E. (November 2019). "A Nation of Ink and Paint: Map Drawing and Geographic Pedagogy in the American Ceylon Mission".

History of Education Quarterly .

59 (4): 468– 500.

doi : 10.1017/heq.2019.40 .

S2CID 212860728 .

^ National Women's Hall of Fame, Emma Hart Willard ^ Lord, John, The Life of Emma Willard , New York: D. Appleton, 1873; Lutz, A., Emma Willard: Daughter of Democracy , Boston and New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1929; Fowler, H., Mrs. Emma Willard, Memoirs of Teachers, Educators and Promoters of Education Literature and Science , edited by Henry Bernard, New York: Browness, 1859, 125–168 ^ Calhoun, D. "Eyes for the Jacksonian World: William C. Woodbridge and Emma Willard", Journal of the Early Republic, 4 (1984) 1–26 ^ Baym, N. "Women and the Republic: Emma Willard's Rhetoric of History" American Quarterly 43:1 (1991) 1–23 Further reading [ edit ] Baym, Nina. "Women and the Republic: Emma Willard's Rhetoric of History," American Quarterly (1991) 43#1 pp. 1–23 in JSTOR Goodsell, Willystine, et al.

Pioneers of Women's Education in the United States: Emma Willard, Catherine Beecher, Mary Lyon . (1931) Grigg, Susan. "Willard, Emma Hart"; American National Biography Online Feb. 2000. Access Nov 20 2014 Lutz, Alma.

Emma Willard: pioneer educator of American women (Greenwood Press, 1983) Article from the Emma Willard School Anna Callender Brackett, ed., Woman and the higher education (Harper, 1893).

Emma Willard, A plan for improving female education (Middlebury College, 1819).

"Maps Have the Power to Shape History" An article regarding her mapping innovations, Atlas Obscura 2018 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about " Emma Willard ".

Emma Willard School,  Emma (Hart) Willard Collection, 1809–2004 Schulten, Susan , "Emma Willard's Maps of Time " .

The Public Domain Review , January 22, 2020.

Works by Emma Willard at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Emma Willard at the Internet Archive Emma Hart Willard Family Papers at the Amherst College Archives & Special Collections; includes a detailed chronology of her career.

v t e Inductees to the National Women's Hall of Fame 1970–1979 1973 Jane Addams Marian Anderson Susan B. Anthony Clara Barton Mary McLeod Bethune Elizabeth Blackwell Pearl S. Buck Rachel Carson Mary Cassatt Emily Dickinson Amelia Earhart Alice Hamilton Helen Hayes Helen Keller Eleanor Roosevelt Florence Sabin Margaret Chase Smith Elizabeth Cady Stanton Helen Brooke Taussig Harriet Tubman 1976 Abigail Adams Margaret Mead Mildred "Babe" Didrikson Zaharias 1979 Dorothea Dix Juliette Gordon Low Alice Paul Elizabeth Bayley Seton 1980–1989 1981 Margaret Sanger Sojourner Truth 1982 Carrie Chapman Catt Frances Perkins 1983 Belva Lockwood Lucretia Mott 1984 Mary "Mother" Harris Jones Bessie Smith 1986 Barbara McClintock Lucy Stone Harriet Beecher Stowe 1988 Gwendolyn Brooks Willa Cather Sally Ride Mary Risteau Ida B. Wells-Barnett 1990–1999 1990 Margaret Bourke-White Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Florence B. Seibert 1991 Gertrude Belle Elion 1993 Ethel Percy Andrus Antoinette Blackwell Emily Blackwell Shirley Chisholm Jacqueline Cochran Ruth Colvin Marian Wright Edelman Alice Evans Betty Friedan Ella Grasso Martha Wright Griffiths Fannie Lou Hamer Dorothy Height Dolores Huerta Mary Putnam Jacobi Mae Jemison Mary Lyon Mary Mahoney Wilma Mankiller Constance Baker Motley Georgia O'Keeffe Annie Oakley Rosa Parks Esther Peterson Jeannette Rankin Ellen Swallow Richards Elaine Roulet Katherine Siva Saubel Gloria Steinem Helen Stephens Lillian Wald Madam C. J. Walker Faye Wattleton Rosalyn S. Yalow Gloria Yerkovich 1994 Bella Abzug Ella Baker Myra Bradwell Annie Jump Cannon Jane Cunningham Croly Catherine East Geraldine Ferraro Charlotte Perkins Gilman Grace Hopper Helen LaKelly Hunt Zora Neale Hurston Anne Hutchinson Frances Wisebart Jacobs Susette La Flesche Louise McManus Maria Mitchell Antonia Novello Linda Richards Wilma Rudolph Betty Bone Schiess Muriel Siebert Nettie Stevens Oprah Winfrey Sarah Winnemucca Fanny Wright 1995 Virginia Apgar Ann Bancroft Amelia Bloomer Mary Breckinridge Eileen Collins Elizabeth Hanford Dole Anne Dallas Dudley Mary Baker Eddy Ella Fitzgerald Margaret Fuller Matilda Joslyn Gage Lillian Moller Gilbreth Nannerl O. Keohane Maggie Kuhn Sandra Day O'Connor Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin Pat Schroeder Hannah Greenebaum Solomon 1996 Louisa May Alcott Charlotte Anne Bunch Frances Xavier Cabrini Mary A. Hallaren Oveta Culp Hobby Wilhelmina Cole Holladay Anne Morrow Lindbergh Maria Goeppert Mayer Ernestine Louise Potowski Rose Maria Tallchief Edith Wharton 1998 Madeleine Albright Maya Angelou Nellie Bly Lydia Moss Bradley Mary Steichen Calderone Mary Ann Shadd Cary Joan Ganz Cooney Gerty Cori Sarah Grimké Julia Ward Howe Shirley Ann Jackson Shannon Lucid Katharine Dexter McCormick Rozanne L. Ridgway Edith Nourse Rogers Felice Schwartz Eunice Kennedy Shriver Beverly Sills Florence Wald Angelina Grimké Weld Chien-Shiung Wu 2000–2009 2000 Faye Glenn Abdellah Emma Smith DeVoe Marjory Stoneman Douglas Mary Dyer Sylvia A. Earle Crystal Eastman Jeanne Holm Leontine T. Kelly Frances Oldham Kelsey Kate Mullany Janet Reno Anna Howard Shaw Sophia Smith Ida Tarbell Wilma L. Vaught Mary Edwards Walker Annie Dodge Wauneka Eudora Welty Frances E. Willard 2001 Dorothy H. Andersen Lucille Ball Rosalynn Carter Lydia Maria Child Bessie Coleman Dorothy Day Marian de Forest Althea Gibson Beatrice A. Hicks Barbara Holdridge Harriet Williams Russell Strong Emily Howell Warner Victoria Woodhull 2002 Paulina Kellogg Wright Davis Ruth Bader Ginsburg Katharine Graham Bertha Holt Mary Engle Pennington Mercy Otis Warren 2003 Linda G. Alvarado Donna de Varona Gertrude Ederle Martha Matilda Harper Patricia Roberts Harris Stephanie L. Kwolek Dorothea Lange Mildred Robbins Leet Patsy Takemoto Mink Sacagawea Anne Sullivan Sheila E. Widnall 2005 Florence E. Allen Ruth Fulton Benedict Betty Bumpers Hillary Clinton Rita Rossi Colwell Mother Marianne Cope Maya Y. Lin Patricia A. Locke Blanche Stuart Scott Mary Burnett Talbert 2007 Eleanor K. Baum Julia Child Martha Coffin Pelham Wright Swanee Hunt Winona LaDuke Elisabeth Kübler-Ross Judith L. Pipher Catherine Filene Shouse Henrietta Szold 2009 Louise Bourgeois Mildred Cohn Karen DeCrow Susan Kelly-Dreiss Allie B. Latimer Emma Lazarus Ruth Patrick Rebecca Talbot Perkins Susan Solomon Kate Stoneman 2010–2019 2011 St. Katharine Drexel Dorothy Harrison Eustis Loretta C. Ford Abby Kelley Foster Helen Murray Free Billie Holiday Coretta Scott King Lilly Ledbetter Barbara A. Mikulski Donna E. Shalala Kathrine Switzer 2013 Betty Ford Ina May Gaskin Julie Krone Kate Millett Nancy Pelosi Mary Joseph Rogers Bernice Sandler Anna Schwartz Emma Willard 2015 Tenley Albright Nancy Brinker Martha Graham Marcia Greenberger Barbara Iglewski Jean Kilbourne Carlotta Walls LaNier Philippa Marrack Mary Harriman Rumsey Eleanor Smeal 2017 Matilda Cuomo Temple Grandin Lorraine Hansberry Victoria Jackson Sherry Lansing Clare Boothe Luce Aimee Mullins Carol Mutter Janet Rowley Alice Waters 2019 Gloria Allred Angela Davis Sarah Deer Jane Fonda Nicole Malachowski Rose O'Neill Louise Slaughter Sonia Sotomayor Laurie Spiegel Flossie Wong-Staal 2020–2029 2020 Aretha Franklin Barbara Hillary Barbara Rose Johns Henrietta Lacks Toni Morrison Mary Church Terrell 2022 Octavia E. Butler Judy Chicago Rebecca S. Halstead Mia Hamm Joy Harjo Emily Howland Katherine Johnson Indra Nooyi Michelle Obama 2024 Patricia Bath Ruby Bridges Elouise P. Cobell Kimberlé Crenshaw Peggy McIntosh Judith Plaskow Loretta Ross Sandy Stone Anna Wessels Williams Serena Williams v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists Discography of American Historical Recordings People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other SNAC 2 RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emma_Willard&oldid=1280054698 " Categories : 1787 births 1870 deaths Activists from New York (state) American textbook writers American women textbook writers American women's rights activists Burials at Oakwood Cemetery (Troy, New York) Emma Willard School Founders of American schools and colleges Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees People from Berlin, Connecticut People from Middlebury, Vermont People from Troy, New York Women and education Activists from Connecticut Activists from Vermont Educators from New York (state) 19th-century American women educators 19th-century American educators 19th-century American philanthropists Women cartographers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2021 Articles with hCards Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 12 March 2025, at 05:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emma Willard 20 languages Add topic

