Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Institutional levels 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents New institutional economics 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic perspective Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e New Institutional Economics ( NIE ) is an economic perspective that attempts to extend economics by focusing on the institutions (that is to say the social and legal norms and rules) that underlie economic activity and with analysis beyond earlier institutional economics and neoclassical economics .

[ 1 ] The NIE assume that individuals are rational and that they seek to maximize their preferences, but that they also have cognitive limitations , lack complete information and have difficulties monitoring and enforcing agreements. As a result, institutions form in large part as an effective way to deal with transaction costs .

[ 2 ] NIE rejects that the state is a neutral actor (rather, it can hinder or facilitate effective institutions), that there are zero transaction costs, and that actors have fixed preferences.

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] It has its roots in two articles by Ronald Coase , " The Nature of the Firm " (1937) and " The Problem of Social Cost " (1960). In the latter, the Coase theorem (as it was subsequently termed) maintains that without transaction costs , alternative property right assignments can equivalently internalize conflicts and externalities . Thus, comparative institutional analysis arising from such assignments is required to make recommendations about efficient internalization of externalities and institutional design, including Law and Economics .

Analyses are now built on a more complex set of methodological principles and criteria . They work within a modified neoclassical framework in considering both efficiency and distribution issues, in contrast to "traditional", "old" or "original" institutional economics , which is critical of mainstream neoclassical economics.

[ 4 ] The term 'new institutional economics' was coined by Oliver Williamson in 1975.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Among the many aspects in current analyses are organizational arrangements (such as the boundary of the firm), property rights , [ 7 ] transaction costs , [ 8 ] credible commitments, modes of governance , persuasive abilities, social norms , ideological values , decisive perceptions, gained control, enforcement mechanism, asset specificity , human assets , social capital , asymmetric information , strategic behavior, bounded rationality , opportunism , adverse selection , moral hazard , contractual safeguards , surrounding uncertainty , monitoring costs , incentives to collude , hierarchical structures , and bargaining strength.

Major scholars associated with the subject include Masahiko Aoki , Armen Alchian , Harold Demsetz , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Steven N. S. Cheung , [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Avner Greif , Yoram Barzel , Claude Ménard (economist) ,  and five Nobel laureates— Daron Acemoglu , Ronald Coase , [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Douglass North , [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Elinor Ostrom , [ 17 ] and Oliver Williamson .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] A convergence of such researchers resulted in founding the Society for Institutional & Organizational Economics (formerly the International Society for New Institutional Economics) in 1997.

[ 21 ] The NIE has influenced scholars outside of economics, including historical institutionalism , influential works on U.S. Congress (e.g.

Kenneth Shepsle , Barry Weingast ), international cooperation (e.g. Robert Keohane, Barbara Koremenos ), and the establishment and persistence of electoral systems (e.g.

Adam Przeworski ).

[ 22 ] Robert Keohane was influenced by NIE, resulting in his influential 1984 work of International Relations, After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy .

[ 23 ] Herbert A. Simon criticized NIE for solely explaining organizations through market mechanisms and concepts drawn from neoclassical economics.

[ 24 ] He argued that this led to "seriously incomplete" understandings of organizations.

[ 24 ] Jack Knight and Terry Moe have criticized the functionalist components of NIE, arguing that NIE misses the coercion and power politics involved in establishing and maintaining institutions.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Institutional levels [ edit ] Although no single, universally accepted set of definitions has been developed, most scholars doing research under the methodological principles and criteria follow Douglass North 's demarcation between institutions and organizations. Institutions are the "rules of the game", both the formal legal rules and the informal social norms that govern individual behavior and structure social interactions (institutional frameworks).

Organizations , by contrast, are those groups of people and the governance arrangements that they create to co-ordinate their team action against other teams performing also as organizations. To enhance their chance of survival, actions taken by organizations attempt to acquire skill sets that offer the highest return on objective goals, such as profit maximization or voter turnout.

[ 28 ] Firms , universities , clubs , medical associations , and unions are some examples.

Oliver Williamson characterizes four levels of social analysis. The first concerns itself with social theory, specifically the level of embeddedness and informal rules. The second is focused on the institutional environment and formal rules. It uses the economics of property rights and positive political theory. The third focuses on governance and the interactions of actors within transaction cost economics, "the play of the game". Williamson gives the example of contracts between groups to explain it. Finally, the fourth is governed by neoclassical economics, it is the allocation of resources and employment. New Institutional Economics is focused on levels two and three.

[ 29 ] Because some institutional frameworks are realities always "nested" inside other broader institutional frameworks, the clear demarcation is always blurred. A case in point is a university. When the average quality of its teaching services must be evaluated, for example, a university may be approached as an organization with its people, physical capital , the general governing rules common to all that were passed by its governing bodies etc. However, if the task consists of evaluating people's performance in a specific teaching department, for example, along with their own internal formal and informal rules, it, as a whole, enters the picture as an institution. General rules, then, form part of the broader institutional framework influencing the people's performance at the said teaching department.

See also [ edit ] Democracy and economic growth Horizontal integration Public choice Vertical integration References [ edit ] ^ Malcolm Rutherford (2001). "Institutional Economics: Then and Now," Journal of Economic Perspectives , 15(3), pp.  185-90 ( 173-194 ).

L. J. Alston,  (2008). "new institutional economics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ Powell, Walter W.; DiMaggio, Paul J. (1991).

The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis . University of Chicago Press.

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226185941.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-226-67709-5 .

^ North, Douglass Cecil (1981). "6".

Structure and Change in Economic History . Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-01478-5 .

^ Warren Samuels ([1987] 2008), "institutional economics" The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Abstract A scholarly journal particularly featuring traditional institutional economics is the Journal of Economic Issues ; see abstract links to 2008. Scholarly journals particularly featuring the new institutional economics include the Journal of Law Economics and Organization , the Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , and the Journal of Law and Economics .

^ Oliver E. Williamson (1975).

Markets and Hierarchies, Analysis and Antitrust Implications: A Study in the Economics of Internal Organization .

^ Coase, Ronald (2002), Brousseau, Eric; Glachant, Jean-Michel (eds.), "The New Institutional Economics" , The Economics of Contracts: Theories and Applications , Cambridge University Press, pp.

45– 48, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511613807.002 , ISBN 978-0-521-89313-8 ^ Dean Lueck (2008). "property law, economics and," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ M. Klaes (2008). " transaction costs , history of," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ Harold Demsetz (1967). "Toward a Theory of Property Rights," American Economic Review , 57(2), pp.

347-359 [ dead link ] .

^ Harold Demsetz (1969) "Information and Efficiency: Another Viewpoint," Journal of Law and Economics , 12(1), pp.

[1] [ dead link ] .

^ Steven N. S. Cheung (1970). "The Structure of a Contract and the Theory of a Non-Exclusive Resource," Journal of Law and Economics , 13(1), pp.

49 -70.

^ S. N. S. Cheung (1973). "The Fable of the Bees: An Economic Investigation," Journal of Law and Economics , 16(1), pp.

11-33 .

^ Ronald Coase (1998). "The New Institutional Economics," American Economic Review , 88(2), pp.

72 -74.

^ R. H. Coase  (1991). "The Institutional Structure of Production," Nobel Prize Lecture PDF , reprinted in 1992, American Economic Review , 82(4), pp.

713 -719.

^ Douglass C. North (1990).

Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance , Cambridge  University Press.

^ Douglass C. North (1995). "The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development," in The New Institutional Economics and Third World Development , J. Harriss, J. Hunter, and C. M. Lewis, ed., pp.

17-26.

^ Elinor Ostrom (2005). "Doing Institutional Analysis: Digging Deeper than Markets and Hierarchies," Handbook of New Institutional Economics , C. Ménard and  M. Shirley, eds.

Handbook of New Institutional Economics , pp.

819 -848.

Springer.

^ Oliver E. Williamson (2000). "The New Institutional Economics: Taking Stock, Looking Ahead," Journal of Economic Literature , 38(3), pp.

595-613 Archived May 11, 2011, at the Wayback Machine (press + ).

Dzionek-Kozłowska, Joanna; Matera, Rafał (October 2015). "New Institutional Economics' Perspective on Wealth and Poverty of Nations. Concise Review and General Remarks on Acemoglu and Robinson's Concept".

Annals of the Alexandru Ioan Cuza University - Economics .

62 (1): 11– 18.

doi : 10.1515/aicue-2015-0032 (inactive 1 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Keefer, Philip; Knack, Stephen (2005).

"Social capital, social norms and the New Institutional Economics" .

Handbook of New Institutional Economics . pp.

700– 725.

^ "Introductory Reading List: New Institutional Economics" . Ronald Coase Institute.

^ "History" . Society for Institutional & Organizational Economics . Retrieved 3 February 2016 .

^ Thelen, Kathleen (2004).

How Institutions Evolve: The Political Economy of Skills in Germany, Britain, the United States, and Japan . Cambridge University Press. pp.

24– 25.

ISBN 978-0-521-54674-4 .

^ Keohane, Robert O. (2020).

"Understanding Multilateral Institutions in Easy and Hard Times" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

23 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-050918-042625 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

^ a b Simon, Herbert A (1991-05-01).

"Organizations and Markets" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

5 (2): 25– 44.

doi : 10.1257/jep.5.2.25 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

^ Moe, Terry M. (2005). "Power and Political Institutions".

Perspectives on Politics .

3 (2).

doi : 10.1017/s1537592705050176 .

ISSN 1537-5927 .

S2CID 39072417 .

^ Moe, T. M. (1990). "Political Institutions: The Neglected Side of the Story".

Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization .

6 : 213– 253.

doi : 10.1093/jleo/6.special_issue.213 .

ISSN 8756-6222 .

^ Knight, Jack (1992).

Institutions and Social Conflict . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-42189-8 .

^ North, Douglass C. "Transaction Costs, institutions, and Economic Performance." International Center for Economic Growth (n.d.): n. pag.

Khousachonine.ucoz.com . Web.

^ Williamson, Oliver (2000). "The 'New Institutional Economics: Taking Stock, Looking Ahead".

Journal of Economic Literature .

38 (3): 595– 613.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.128.7824 .

doi : 10.1257/jel.38.3.595 .

Further reading [ edit ] Eggertsson, Thráinn (2005).

Imperfect Institutions: Possibilities and Limits of Reform . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0472114566 .

Furubotn, Eirik G.; Richter, Rudolf (2005).

Institutions and Economic Theory: The Contribution of the New Institutional Economics (2nd ed.). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0472030255 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to New institutional economics .

SIOE - Society for Institutional & Organizational Economics, formerly the International Society for New Institutional Economics.

ESNIE - European School on New Institutional Economics.

ASNIE - Austrian Society for New Institutional Economics.

Introductory Reading List in New Institutional Economics - The Ronald Coase Institute IRIS Center - Founded by Mancur Olson, University of Maryland.

Contracting and Organizations Research Center University of Missouri Economics and Institutions WEBSITE - by prof. F. Toboso, University of Valencia, Spain.

"The Rise of New Institutional Economics and Assessment its Contributions to the Post Washington Consensus" v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_institutional_economics&oldid=1302606318 " Categories : New institutional economics Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2016 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 13:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New institutional economics 16 languages Add topic

