Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Memorandum opinion 2 Legal opinions of counsel or government law officers 3 Legal opinion in commercial transactions 4 See also 5 External  links 6 References Toggle the table of contents Legal opinion 9 languages العربية Français Hausa Nederlands Polski Português Română Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Written interpretation of the law as applied to a particular question or case The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Legal and judicial opinions Majority opinion Dissenting opinion Plurality opinion Concurring opinion Memorandum opinion Per curiam opinion Seriatim opinion v t e In law , a legal opinion is in certain jurisdictions a written explanation by a judge or group of judges that accompanies an order or ruling in a case , laying out the rationale and legal principles for the ruling.

Opinions are in those jurisdictions usually published at the direction of the court , and to the extent, they contain pronouncements about what the law is and how it should be interpreted, they reinforce, change, establish, or overturn legal precedent . If a court decides that an opinion should be published, the opinion may be included in a volume from a series of books called law reports ('reporters' in the United States). Published opinions of courts are also collectively referred to as case law , and constitute in the common law legal systems one of the major sources of law .

[ 1 ] Memorandum opinion [ edit ] Not every case decided by a higher court results in the publication of an opinion; in fact, many cases do not, since an opinion is often published only when the law is being interpreted in a novel way, or the case is a high-profile matter of general public interest and the court wishes to make the details of its ruling public.

[ citation needed ] In the majority [ citation needed ] of US cases, the judges issue a memorandum decision that indicates how state or federal law applies to the case and affirms or reverses the decision of the lower court. A memorandum decision does not establish legal precedent or re-interpret the law, and cannot be invoked in subsequent cases to justify a ruling. Opinions, on the other hand, always establish a particular legal interpretation.

[ 2 ] Legal opinions of counsel or government law officers [ edit ] In the United Kingdom and other common law countries, a legal opinion also refers to written legal advice on a point of law issued by either a barrister or advocate (often referred to as "counsel's opinion") or occasionally a senior government law officer, such as an attorney general .  Where the opinion is given by a foreign lawyer or foreign law firm it is usually referred to as a ' foreign legal opinion '.

The latter form of opinion is sometimes made available to the public either because of public pressure (see for example Lord Goldsmith's opinion on the Iraq War , Yoo memo ), or because a general clarification of the law is called for (see for example, the Yorke–Talbot slavery opinion ). In the United States , several state attorneys general issue attorney general's opinions.

Several areas of commercial practice call for formal legal opinions of counsel.  The Legal Aid scheme in the United Kingdom requires a legal opinion showing reasonable prospects for success before the Legal Aid board will fund any claim.

Insurance policies for professional negligence will frequently require an opinion of counsel before the insurer is required to pay out on any putative claim (sometimes called a QC clause , when it must be an opinion of leading counsel ).

Legal opinion in commercial transactions [ edit ] In commercial transactions, particularly in the context of financing, the lender will require an opinion as to the corporate capacity of the borrower and enforceability of the transaction documents the borrower is intended to enter into. This type of opinion is generally issued by the borrower's counsel or the lender's counsel, depending on the ethical rule governing the issuance of those opinion applicable to the jurisdiction.  When the subject company is from a foreign jurisdiction, the opinion will often be referred to as a foreign legal opinion .

See also [ edit ] Appellate court Case law Consilia – a historic medical opinion Law reports or reporters Memorandum opinion Judicial genre Judicial interpretation External  links [ edit ] R. C. A. White, I. Boussiakou Separate opinions in the European Court of Human Rights Orin S. Kerr, How to read a legal opinion: A guide for new law students References [ edit ] ^ https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/opinion%7C Cornell.edu - Legal Opinion ^ https://www.law.berkeley.edu/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/How-to-Read-A-Legal-Opinion.pdf%7C [ permanent dead link ] Berkeley University - Legal Opinion Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legal_opinion&oldid=1306022195 " Category : Legal terminology Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from November 2021 United States-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 13:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legal opinion 9 languages Add topic

