Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Birth and family 2 Appearance and personality 3 Career Toggle Career subsection 3.1 Overview 3.2 Archbishop of Valencia 3.3 Election to the papacy 3.4 Early years in office 3.5 French involvement 3.6 French in retreat 3.7 Crime 3.8 Savonarola 3.9 Familial aggrandizement 3.10 The Jubilee (1500) 4 Personal life 5 Slavery 6 Last years 7 Death 8 Legacy 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Bibliography 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Pope Alexander VI 89 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Rome from 1492 to 1503 "Rodrigo de Borja" redirects here. For the Spanish nobleman, see Rodrigo de Borja (Spanish noble) .

This article may have too many section headers .

Please help consolidate the article.

( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pope Alexander VI Valentinus ("The Valencian ") [ 1 ] Bishop of Rome Portrait attributed to Pedro Berruguete ( c.

1495 , oil on canvas, Vatican Museums ) Church Catholic Church Papacy began 11 August 1492 Papacy ended 18 August 1503 Predecessor Innocent VIII Successor Pius III Previous post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of San Nicola in Carcere (1456–1471) Administrator of Girona (1457–1458) Cardinal-Deacon of Santa Maria in Via Lata (1458–1492) Administrator of Valencia (1458–1492) Bishop of Urgell (1467–1472) Cardinal-Bishop of Albano (1471–1476) Cardinal-Bishop of Porto e Santa Rufina (1476–1492) Administrator of Cartagena (1482–1492) Administrator of Mallorca (1489–1492) Administrator of Eger (1491–1492) Archbishop of Valencia (1492) Orders Ordination 1468 [ 2 ] Consecration 30 October 1471 Created cardinal 17 September 1456 by Callixtus III Personal details Born Roderic de Borja c.

1431 Xàtiva , Kingdom of Valencia , Crown of Aragon (now Spain ) Died 18 August 1503 (aged 71–72) Rome, Papal States Buried Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli , Rome Nationality Valencian , Aragonese Denomination Catholic Church Parents Jofré Llançol i Escrivà Isabel de Borja Partner Vannozza dei Cattanei Children Pier Luigi Girolama Isabella Cesare Giovanni Lucrezia Gioffre Others disputed [ Note 1 ] Education University of Bologna Coat of arms Other popes  named Alexander Papal styles of Pope Alexander VI Reference style His Holiness Spoken style Your Holiness Religious style Holy Father Posthumous style None Pope Alexander VI ( Italian : Alessandro VI , Valencian : Alexandre VI , Spanish : Alejandro VI ; born Roderic Llançol i de Borja ; [ Note 2 ] epithet : Valentinus ("The Valencian "); [ 6 ] c.

1431 – 18 August 1503) was head of the Catholic Church and ruler of the Papal States from 11 August 1492 until his death in 1503.

Born into the prominent Borja family in Xàtiva in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon (in present-day Spain ), he was known as Roderic de Borja, and he is commonly referred to by the Italianized form as Rodrigo Borgia. He studied law at the University of Bologna . He was ordained deacon and made a cardinal in 1456 after the election of his uncle as Pope Callixtus III , and a year later he became vice-chancellor of the Catholic Church. He proceeded to serve in the Roman Curia under the next four popes, acquiring significant influence and wealth in the process. In 1492, Rodrigo was elected pope, taking the name Alexander VI.

Alexander's papal bulls of 1493 confirmed or reconfirmed the rights of the Spanish crown in the New World following the finds of Christopher Columbus in 1492. During the second Italian war , Alexander VI supported his son Cesare Borgia as a condottiero for the French king. The scope of his foreign policy was to gain the most advantageous terms for his family.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Alexander is one of the most controversial of the Renaissance popes, partly because he acknowledged fathering several children by his mistresses. As a result, his Italianized Valencian surname, Borgia , became a byword for libertinism and nepotism , which are traditionally considered as characterizing his pontificate.

Birth and family [ edit ] Roderic de Borja was born c. 1431, in the town of Xàtiva near Valencia , one of the component realms of the Crown of Aragon , in what is now Spain.

[ 9 ] He was named for his paternal grandfather, Rodrigo Gil de Borja y Fennolet . His parents were Jofré Llançol i Escrivà (died bef. 24 March 1437) and his Aragonese wife and distant cousin Isabel de Borja y Cavanilles (died 19 October 1468), daughter of Juan Domingo de Borja y Doncel . He had a younger brother, Pedro . His family name is written Llançol in Valencian and Lanzol in Castillian . Roderic adopted his mother's family name of Borja in 1455 following the elevation to the papacy of maternal uncle Alonso de Borja (Italianized to Alfonso Borgia) as Callixtus III .

[ 10 ] His cousin and Callixtus's nephew Luis de Milà y de Borja became a cardinal.

Gerard Noel writes that Rodrigo's father was Jofré de Borja y Escrivà, making Rodrigo a Borja from his mother and father's side.

[ 11 ] However, Cesare, Lucrezia and Jofre were known to be of Llançol paternal lineage.

G. J. Meyer suggests that Rodrigo would have likely been uncle (from a shared female family member) to the children, and attributes the confusion to attempts to connect Rodrigo as the father of Giovanni (Juan), Cesare , Lucrezia , and Gioffre (Jofré in Valencian ), who were surnamed Llançol i Borja .

[ 3 ] Appearance and personality [ edit ] Peter de Roo gives a flattering summary of contemporary descriptions of Alexander, relating him to have been "of a medium complexion, with dark eyes and 
slightly full lips, of robust health"; in later life, he reports that "his aspect [was declared] to be venerable and far more 
august than an ordinary human appearance", and that he was "so familiar with Holy Writ , that his speeches were fairly sparkling with well-chosen texts of the Sacred Books".

[ 12 ] Plaque outside the Archbishop's Palace, Valencia . Translation: Alexander VI, 9 July 1492, Pope Innocent VIII, at the request of Cardinal Borja and the Catholic Monarchs, raised the Valencian See to the rank of metropolitan, making Rodrigo of Borja the first Archbishop of Valencia 1492–1503.

Career [ edit ] Overview [ edit ] Roderic de Borja's career in the Church began in 1445 at the age of 14, when he was appointed sacristan at the Cathedral of Valencia by his influential uncle, Alfons Cardinal de Borja , who had been appointed a cardinal by Pope Eugene IV the previous year.

[ 13 ] In 1448, de Borja became canon at the cathedrals of Valencia, Barcelona, and Segorbe. His uncle, Cardinal de Borja, persuaded Pope Nicholas V to allow young de Borja to perform this role in absentia and receive the associated income, so that de Borja could travel to Rome .

[ 14 ] While in Rome, Rodrigo Borgia (as his name was usually spelled in Italian ) studied under Gaspare da Verona, a humanist tutor. He then studied law at Bologna where he graduated, not simply as Doctor of Law , but as "the most eminent and judicious jurisprudent." [ 12 ] The election of his uncle, Alfons Cardinal de Borja, as Pope Callixtus III in 1455 enabled Borgia's appointments to other positions in the Church. These nepotistic appointments were characteristic of the era. Each pope during this period found himself surrounded by the servants and retainers of his predecessors who often owed their loyalty to the family of the pontiff who had appointed them.

[ 15 ] In 1455, he inherited his uncle's post as bishop of Valencia, and Callixtus appointed him Dean of Santa Maria in Xàtiva. The following year, he was ordained deacon and created cardinal-deacon of San Nicola in Carcere . Rodrigo Borgia's appointment as cardinal only occurred after Callixtus III asked the cardinals in Rome to create three new positions in the College of Cardinals , two for his nephews Rodrigo and Luis Juan de Milà, and one for the Prince Jaime of Portugal.

[ 16 ] In 1457, Callixtus III assigned the young Cardinal de Borja (or Borgia in Italian) to go to Ancona as a Papal legate to quell a revolt. Borgia was successful in his mission, and his uncle rewarded him with his appointment as vice-chancellor of the Holy Roman Church.

[ 17 ] The position of vice-chancellor was both incredibly powerful and lucrative, and Borgia held this post for 35 years until his own election to the papacy in 1492. At the end of 1457, Rodrigo Cardinal Borgia's elder brother, Pedro Luis Borgia, fell ill, so Rodrigo temporarily filled Pedro Luis' position as captain-general of the papal army until he recovered.

[ 18 ] In 1458, Cardinal Borgia's uncle and greatest benefactor, Pope Callixtus, died.

In the papal election of 1458 , Rodrigo Borgia was too young to seek the papacy himself, so he sought to support a cardinal who would maintain him as vice-chancellor. Borgia was one of the deciding votes in the election of Cardinal Piccolomini as Pope Pius II , and the new pope rewarded Borgia not only with maintaining the chancellorship but also with a lucrative abbey benefice and another titular church.

[ 19 ] In 1460, Pope Pius rebuked Cardinal Borgia for attending a private party which Pius had heard turned into an orgy. Borgia apologized for the incident but denied that there had been an orgy. Pope Pius forgave him, and the true events of the evening remain unknown.

[ 20 ] In 1462, Rodrigo Borgia had his first son, Pedro Luis, with an unknown mistress. He sent Pedro Luis to grow up in Spain.

[ 21 ] The following year, Borgia acceded to Pope Pius's call for cardinals to help fund a new crusade. Before embarking to lead the crusade personally, Pope Pius II fell ill and died, so Borgia would need to ensure the election of yet another ally to the papacy to maintain his position as vice-chancellor.

On the first ballot, the conclave of 1464 elected Borgia's friend Pietro Barbo as Pope Paul II . Borgia was in high standing with the new pope and retained his positions, including that of vice-chancellor. Paul II reversed some of his predecessor's reforms that diminished the power of the chancellory. Following the election, Borgia fell ill of the plague but recovered. Borgia had two daughters, Isabella (*1467) and Girolama (*1469), with an unknown mistress. He openly acknowledged all three of his children.

[ 22 ] Pope Paul II died suddenly in 1471.

While Borgia had acquired the reputation and wealth to mount a bid for the papacy in this conclave , there were only three non-Italians, making his election a near-impossibility. Consequently, Borgia continued his previous strategy of positioning himself as kingmaker. This time, Borgia gathered the votes to make Francesco della Rovere (the uncle of future Borgia rival Giuliano della Rovere ) Pope Sixtus IV . Della Rovere's appeal was that he was a pious and brilliant Franciscan friar who lacked many political connections in Rome.

[ 23 ] He seemed to be the perfect cardinal to reform the Church, and the perfect cardinal for Borgia to maintain his influence. Sixtus IV rewarded Borgia for his support by promoting him to cardinal-bishop and consecrating him as the Cardinal-Bishop of Albano , requiring Borgia's ordination as a priest. Borgia also received a lucrative abbey from the pope and remained vice-chancellor.

[ 24 ] At the end of the year, the pope appointed Borgia to be the papal legate for Spain to negotiate a peace treaty between Castile and Aragon and to solicit their support for another crusade. In 1472, Borgia was appointed to be the papal chamberlain until his departure to Spain. Borgia arrived in his native Aragon in the summer, reuniting with family and meeting with King Juan II and Prince Ferdinand. The pope gave Cardinal Borgia discretion over whether to give dispensation for Ferdinand 's marriage to his second cousin Isabella of Castile , and Borgia decided in favour of approving the marriage. The couple named Borgia to be the godfather of their first son in recognition of this decision.

[ 25 ] The marriage of Ferdinand and Isabella was critical in the unification of Castile and Aragon into Spain. Borgia also negotiated peace between Castile and Aragon and an end to the civil wars in the latter Kingdom, gaining the favour of the future King Ferdinand - who would go on to promote the interests of the Borgia family in Aragon.

[ 26 ] Borgia returned to Rome the following year, narrowly surviving a storm that sank a nearby galley that was carrying 200 men of the Borgia household.

Vannozza dei Cattanei Back in Rome, Borgia began his affair with Vannozza dei Cattenei which would yield four children: Cesare in 1475, Giovanni in 1474 or 1476, Lucrezia in 1480, and Gioffre in 1482. In 1476, Pope Sixtus appointed Borgia to be the cardinal-bishop of Porto. In 1480, the pope legitimized Cesare as a favour to Cardinal Borgia, and in 1482, the pope began to appoint the seven-year-old to church positions, demonstrating Borgia's intention to use his influence to promote his children. Contemporaneously, Borgia continued to add to his list of benefices, becoming the wealthiest cardinal by 1483.

[ 27 ] He also become Dean of the College of Cardinals in that year. In 1484, Pope Sixtus IV died, necessitating another election for Borgia to manipulate to his advantage.

Borgia was wealthy and powerful enough to mount a bid, but he faced competition from Giuliano della Rovere , the late pope's nephew. Della Rovere's faction had the advantage of being incredibly large as Sixtus had appointed many of the cardinals who would participate in the election. Borgia's attempts to gather enough votes included bribery and leveraging his close ties to Naples and Aragon. However, many of the Spanish cardinals were absent from the conclave and della Rovere's faction had an overwhelming advantage. Della Rovere chose to promote Cardinal Cibo as his preferred candidate, and Cibo wrote to the Borgia faction wanting to strike a deal. Once again, Borgia played kingmaker and conceded to Cardinal Cibo who became Pope Innocent VIII .

[ 28 ] Again, Borgia retained his position of vice-chancellor, successfully holding this position over the course of five papacies and four elections.

In 1485, Pope Innocent VIII nominated Borgia to become the Archbishop of Seville , a position that King Ferdinand II wanted for his own son. In response, Ferdinand angrily seized the Borgia estates in Aragon and imprisoned Borgia's son Pedro Luis. However, Borgia healed the relationship by turning down this appointment. Pope Innocent, at the urging of his close ally Giuliano della Rovere, decided to declare war against Naples, but Milan, Florence, and Aragon chose to support Naples over the pope. Borgia led the opposition within the College of Cardinals to this war, and King Ferdinand rewarded Borgia by making his son Pedro Luis the Duke of Gandia and arranging a marriage between his cousin Maria Enriquez and the new duke. Now, the Borgia family was directly tied to the royal families of Spain and Naples. While Borgia gained the favour of Spain, he stood opposed to the pope and the della Rovere family. As a part of his war opposition, Borgia sought to obstruct an alliance negotiation between the papacy and France. These negotiations were unsuccessful and in July 1486, the pope capitulated and ended the war.

[ 29 ] In 1488, Borgia's son Pedro Luis died, and Juan Borgia became the new duke of Gandia. In the following year, Borgia hosted the wedding ceremony between Orsino Orsini and Giulia Farnese , and within a few months, Farnese had become Borgia's new mistress. She was 15, and he was 58.

[ 30 ] Borgia continued to acquire new benefices with their large streams of income, including the bishopric of Majorca and Eger in Hungary. In 1492, Pope Innocent VIII died. Since Borgia was 61, this was likely his last chance to become pope.

Archbishop of Valencia [ edit ] When his uncle Alonso de Borja ( bishop of Valencia ) was elected Pope Callixtus III,
he "inherited" the post of bishop of Valencia. Sixteen days before the death of Pope Innocent VIII , he proposed Valencia as a metropolitan see and became the first archbishop of Valencia. When Rodrigo Borgia was elected pope as Alexander VI following the death of Innocent VIII, his son Cesare Borgia "inherited" the post as second archbishop of Valencia. The third and the fourth archbishops of Valencia were Juan de Borja and Pedro Luis de Borja , grandnephews of Alexander VI.

[ 31 ] Election to the papacy [ edit ] Main article: Papal conclave, 1492 Coat of arms of Alexander VI – Castel Sant'Angelo, Rome There was change in the constitution of the College of Cardinals during the course of the 15th century, especially under Sixtus IV and Innocent VIII. Of the 27 cardinals alive in the closing months of the reign of Innocent VIII no fewer than 10 were cardinal-nephews , eight were crown nominees, four were Roman nobles and one other had been given the cardinalate in recompense for his family's service to the Holy See ; only four were able career churchmen.

[ 15 ] On the death of Pope Innocent VIII on 25 July 1492, the three likely candidates for the Papacy were the 61-year-old Borgia, [ 15 ] seen as an independent candidate, Ascanio Sforza for the Milanese, and Giuliano della Rovere , seen as a pro-French candidate.
It was rumoured but not substantiated that Borgia succeeded in buying the largest number of votes and Sforza, in particular, was bribed with four mule-loads of silver.

[ 32 ] Mallett shows that Borgia was in the lead from the start and that the rumours of bribery began after the election with the distribution of benefices; Sforza and della Rovere were just as willing and able to bribe as anyone else.

[ 33 ] The benefices and offices granted to Sforza, moreover, would be worth considerably more than four mule-loads of silver.

Johann Burchard , the conclave's master of ceremonies and a leading figure of the papal household under several popes, recorded in his diary that the 1492 conclave was a particularly expensive campaign. Della Rovere was bankrolled to the cost of 200,000 gold ducats by King Charles VIII of France , with another 100,000 supplied by the Republic of Genoa .

[ 34 ] The leading candidates in the first ballot were Oliviero Carafa of Sforza's party with nine votes, and Giovanni Michiel and Jorge Costa, both of della Rovere's party with seven votes each. Borgia himself gathered seven votes. However, Borgia convinced Sforza to join with his camp through the promise of being appointed vice-chancellor as well as bribes that included benefices and perhaps four mule-loads of silver. With Sforza now canvassing for votes, Borgia's election was assured. Borgia was elected on 11 August 1492 and assumed the name of Alexander VI (due to confusion about the status of Pope Alexander V , elected by the Council of Pisa ). Many inhabitants of Rome were happy with their new pope because he was a generous and competent administrator who had served for decades as vice-chancellor.

[ 35 ] Early years in office [ edit ] Papal bulla of Alexander VI In contrast to the preceding pontificate, Pope Alexander VI adhered initially to strict administration of justice and orderly government. Before long, though, he began endowing his relatives at the Church's and at his neighbours' expense.

Cesare Borgia , his son, while a youth of seventeen and a student at Pisa , was made Archbishop of Valencia , and Giovanni Borgia inherited the Spanish Dukedom of Gandia , the Borgias' ancestral home in Spain. For the Duke of Gandia and for Gioffre , also known as Goffredo, the Pope proposed to carve fiefs out of the Papal States and the Kingdom of Naples . Among the fiefs destined for the duke of Gandia were Cerveteri and Anguillara , lately acquired by Virginio Orsini , head of that powerful house. This policy brought Alexander into conflict with Ferdinand I of Naples as well as with Cardinal della Rovere, whose candidature for the papacy had been backed by Ferdinand. Della Rovere fortified himself in his bishopric of Ostia at the Tiber 's mouth as Alexander formed a league against Naples (25 April 1493) and prepared for war.

[ 36 ] Ferdinand allied himself with Florence , Milan and Venice . He also appealed to Spain for help, but Spain was eager to be on good terms with the papacy to obtain the title to the recently discovered New World . Alexander, in the bull Inter caetera on 4 May 1493, divided the title between Spain and Portugal along a demarcation line. This became the basis of the Treaty of Tordesillas .

[ 37 ] French involvement [ edit ] Main article: Italian War of 1494–1498 This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Italy 1494 Pope Alexander VI made many alliances to secure his position. He sought help from Charles VIII of France (1483–1498), who was allied to Ludovico "il Moro" Sforza (the Moor, so-called because of his swarthy complexion), the de facto Duke of Milan, who needed French support to legitimise his rule. As King Ferdinand I of Naples was threatening to come to the aid of the rightful duke Gian Galeazzo Sforza , the husband of his granddaughter Isabella , Alexander encouraged the French king in his plan for the conquest of Naples.

But Alexander, always ready to seize opportunities to aggrandize his family, then adopted a double policy. Through the intervention of the Spanish ambassador, he made peace with Naples in July 1493 and cemented the peace by a marriage between his son Gioffre and Doña Sancha , another granddaughter of Ferdinand I.

[ 34 ] In order to dominate the College of Cardinals more completely, Alexander, in a move that created much scandal, created 12 new cardinals. Among the new cardinals was his own son Cesare, then only 18 years old.

Alessandro Farnese (later Pope Paul III), the brother of one of the Pope's mistresses, Giulia Farnese , was also among the newly created cardinals.

On 25 January 1494, Ferdinand I died and was succeeded by his son Alfonso II (1494–1495).

[ 34 ] Charles VIII of France now advanced formal claims on the Kingdom of Naples. Alexander authorised him to pass through Rome, ostensibly on a crusade against the Ottoman Empire , without mentioning Naples. But when the French invasion became a reality Pope Alexander VI became alarmed, recognised Alfonso II as king of Naples, and concluded an alliance with him in exchange for various fiefs for his sons (July 1494). A military response to the French threat was set in motion: a Neapolitan army was to advance through Romagna and attack Milan, while the fleet was to seize Genoa . Both expeditions were badly conducted and failed, and on 8 September Charles VIII crossed the Alps and joined Ludovico il Moro at Milan. The Papal States were in turmoil, and the powerful Colonna faction seized Ostia in the name of France. Charles VIII rapidly advanced southward, and after a short stay in Florence, set out for Rome (November 1494).

Alexander appealed to Ascanio Sforza and even to the Ottoman Sultan Bayazid II for help. He tried to collect troops and put Rome in a state of defence, but his position was precarious. When the Orsini offered to admit the French to their castles, Alexander had no choice but to come to terms with Charles. On 31 December, Charles VIII entered Rome with his troops, the cardinals of the French faction, and Giuliano della Rovere. Alexander now feared that Charles might depose him for simony , and that the king would summon a council to nominate a new pope. Alexander was able to win over the bishop of Saint-Malo , who had much influence over the king, by making him a cardinal. Alexander agreed to send Cesare as legate to Naples with the French army; to deliver Cem Sultan , held as a hostage, to Charles VIII, and to give Charles Civitavecchia (16 January 1495). On 28 January Charles VIII departed for Naples with Cem and Cesare, but the latter slipped away to Spoleto . Neapolitan resistance collapsed, and Alfonso II fled and abdicated in favour of his son Ferdinand II . Ferdinand was abandoned by all and also had to escape, and the Kingdom of Naples was conquered with surprising ease.

[ 2 ] French in retreat [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A reaction against Charles VIII soon set in, for all the European powers were alarmed at his success. On 31 March 1495 the Holy League was formed among the pope, the emperor, Venice , Ludovico il Moro and Ferdinand of Spain .

[ 38 ] The League was ostensibly formed against the Turks, but in reality it was made to expel the French from Italy. Charles VIII had himself crowned King of Naples on 12 May, but a few days later began his retreat northward. He met the League at Fornovo and cut his way through them and was back in France by November. Ferdinand II was reinstated at Naples soon afterwards, with Spanish help. The expedition, if it produced no material results, demonstrated the foolishness of the so-called "politics of equilibrium", the Medicean doctrine of preventing one of the Italian principates from overwhelming the rest and uniting them under its hegemony.

Charles VIII's belligerence in Italy had made it transparent that the "politics of equilibrium" did nothing but render the country unable to defend itself against a powerful invading force. Italy was shown to be very vulnerable to the predations of the powerful nation-states, France and Spain, that had forged themselves during the previous century. Alexander VI now followed the general tendency of all the princes of the day to crush the great feudatories and establish a centralized despotism. In this manner, he was able to take advantage of the defeat of the French in order to break the power of the Orsini. From that time on, Alexander was able to build himself an effective power base in the Papal States.

Castel Sant'Angelo in Rome Virginio Orsini , who had been captured by the Spanish, died a prisoner at Naples, and the Pope confiscated his property. The rest of the Orsini clan still held out, defeating the papal troops sent against them under Guidobaldo da Montefeltro , Duke of Urbino and Giovanni Borgia , Duke of Gandia, at Soriano (January 1497). Peace was made through Venetian mediation, the Orsini paying 50,000 ducats in exchange for their confiscated lands; the Duke of Urbino, whom they had captured, was left by the pope to pay his own ransom. The Orsini remained very powerful, and Pope Alexander VI could count on none but his 3,000 Spanish troops. His only success had been the capture of Ostia and the submission of the Francophile cardinals Colonna and Savelli .

Then occurred a major domestic tragedy for the house of Borgia. On 14 June, his son the Duke of Gandia , who was lately created Duke of Benevento and had a questionable lifestyle, disappeared; the next day, his corpse was found in the Tiber.

[ 36 ] Alexander, overwhelmed with grief, shut himself up in Castel Sant'Angelo . He declared that henceforth the moral reform of the Church would be the sole object of his life. Every effort was made to discover the assassin. No conclusive explanation was ever reached, [ 39 ] and it may be that the crime was simply as a result of one of the Duke's sexual liaisons.

Crime [ edit ] This section's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There is no evidence that the Borgias resorted to poisoning, judicial murder, or extortion to fund their schemes and the defense of the Papal States. The only contemporary accusations of poisoning were from some of their servants, extracted under torture by Alexander's bitter enemy Della Rovere, who succeeded him as Pope Julius II .

[ 40 ] Savonarola [ edit ] Girolamo Savonarola The debased state of the Curia was a major scandal. Opponents, such as the powerful Florentine friar Girolamo Savonarola , launched invectives against papal corruption and appealed for a general council to confront the papal abuses. Alexander is reported to have been reduced to laughter when Savonarola's denunciations were related to him. Nevertheless, he appointed Sebastian Maggi to investigate the friar, and he responded on 16 October 1495: We are displeased at the disturbed state of affairs in Florence, the more so in that it owes its origin to your preaching. For you predict the future and publicly declare that you do so by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit when you should be reprehending vice and praising virtue ... Prophecies like these should not be made when your charge is to forward peace and concord. Moreover, these are not the time for such teachings, calculated as they are to produce discord even in times of peace let alone in times of trouble. ... Since, however, we have been most happy to learn from certain cardinals and from your letter that you are ready to submit yourself to the reproofs of the Church, as becomes a Christian and a religious, we are beginning to think that what you have done has not been done with an evil motive, but from a certain simple-mindedness and a zeal, however misguided, for the Lord's vineyard. Our duty, however, prescribes that we order you, under holy obedience, to cease from public and private preaching until you are able to come to our presence, not under armed escort as is your present habit, but safely, quietly and modestly as becomes a religious, or until we make different arrangements. If you obey, as we hope you will, we for the time being suspend the operation of our former Brief so that you may live in peace in accordance with the dictates of your conscience.

[ 41 ] The hostility of Savonarola seems to have been political rather than personal, and the friar sent a letter of condolence to the pope on the death of the Duke of Gandia ; "Faith, most Holy Father, is the one and true source of peace and consolation... Faith alone brings consolation from a far-off country." [ 42 ] But eventually the Florentines tired of the friar's moralising and the Florentine government condemned the reformer to death, executing him on 23 May 1498.

[ 43 ] Familial aggrandizement [ edit ] The prominent Italian families looked down on the Spanish Borgia family, and they resented their power, which they sought for themselves. This is, at least partially, why both Pope Callixtus III and Pope Alexander VI gave powers to family members whom they could trust.

[ Note 3 ] Papal bull Desiderando nui , 1499 In these circumstances, Alexander, feeling more than ever that he could rely only on his own kin, turned his thoughts to further family aggrandizement. He had annulled Lucrezia's marriage to Giovanni Sforza , who had responded to the suggestion that he was impotent with the unsubstantiated counterclaim that Alexander and Cesare indulged in incestuous relations with Lucrezia, in 1497.

[ Note 4 ] Unable to arrange a union between Cesare and the daughter of King Frederick IV of Naples (who had succeeded Ferdinand II the previous year), he induced Frederick by threats to agree to a marriage between the Duke of Bisceglie , a natural son of Alfonso II, and Lucrezia. Alexander and the new French king Louis XII entered a secret agreement; in exchange for a bull of divorce between the king and Joan of France (so he could marry Anne of Brittany ) and making Georges d'Amboise (the king's chief advisor) the cardinal of Rouen , Cesare was given the duchy of Valentinois in France (chosen because it was homophonous with his nickname, Valentino, derived from his father's papal epithet Valentinus ("The Valencian ", as seen on his coins [ 46 ] denoting his origin in the Kingdom of Valencia , Spain), military assistance to help him subjugate the feudal princelings of papal Romagna, [ 47 ] and a princess bride, Charlotte of Albret from the Kingdom of Navarre .

[ 48 ] Alexander hoped that Louis XII's help would be more profitable to his house than that of Charles VIII had been. In spite of the remonstrances of Spain and of the Sforza, he allied himself with France in January 1499 and was joined by Venice. By autumn Louis XII was in Italy expelling Lodovico Sforza from Milan. With French success seemingly assured, the Pope determined to deal drastically with Romagna, which although nominally under papal rule was divided into a number of practically independent lordships on which Venice, Milan, and Florence cast hungry eyes. Cesare, empowered by the support of the French, began to attack the turbulent cities one by one in his capacity as nominated gonfaloniere (standard bearer) of the church. But the expulsion of the French from Milan and the return of Lodovico Sforza interrupted his conquests, and he returned to Rome early in 1500.

The Jubilee (1500) [ edit ] In the Jubilee year 1500, Alexander ushered in the custom of opening a holy door on Christmas Eve and closing it on Christmas Day the following year. After consulting with his Master of Ceremonies, Johann Burchard , Pope Alexander VI opened the first holy door in St. Peter's Basilica on Christmas Eve 1499, and papal representatives opened the doors in the other three patriarchal basilicas. For this, Pope Alexander had a new opening created in the portico of St. Peter's and commissioned a marble door.

[ Note 5 ] [ Note 6 ] Alexander was carried in the sedia gestatoria to St. Peter's. He and his assistants, bearing candles, processed to the holy door, as the choir chanted Psalm 118:19–20.

[ 51 ] The pope knocked on the door three times, workers moved it from the inside, and everyone then crossed the threshold to enter into a period of penance and reconciliation. Thus, Pope Alexander formalized the rite and began a longstanding tradition that is still in practice. Similar ceremonies were held at the other three basilicas.

[ 49 ] Alexander instituted a special rite for the closing of a holy door, as well. On the Feast of the Epiphany in 1501, two cardinals began to seal the holy door with two bricks, one silver and one gold.

Sampietrini (basilica workers) [ Note 7 ] completed the seal, placing specially-minted coins and medals inside the wall.

[ 49 ] Personal life [ edit ] Of Alexander's many mistresses, one of his favourites was Vannozza dei Cattanei , born in 1442, and who was married to three different men. The relationship began in 1470, and she had four children whom the pope openly acknowledged as his own: Cesare (born 1475), Giovanni , afterwards duke of Gandia (commonly known as Juan, born 1474 or 1476), Lucrezia (born 1480), and Gioffre (Goffredo in Italian, born 1481 or 1482).

Rodrigo only legitimized his children after becoming pope. He had pretended that his four children with Vannozza were his niece and nephews and that they were fathered by Vannozza's husbands.

[ 53 ] G. J. Meyer argued that the birth dates of the four children in comparison with Alexander's known whereabouts preclude him from having fathered any of them. His "acknowledgement" merely consisted of addressing them as "beloved son / daughter" in correspondence (while applying the same address to, e.g., Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile in the same letter).

[ 3 ] Another mistress was the beautiful Giulia Farnese (" Giulia la Bella "), wife of Orsino Orsini . Giulia was mother of Laura Orsini , born in 1492, probably daughter of Alexander. However, he still loved Vannozza and his children by her. Caring for them proved the determining factor of his whole career. He lavished vast sums on them. Vannozza lived in the Palace of a late Cardinal, or in a large, palatial villa. The children lived between their mother's home and the Papal Palace itself.

[ 36 ] Giovanni Borgia , 2nd Duke of Gandia.

Portrait of a Gentleman ( Cesare Borgia ) Presumed portrait of Lucrezia Borgia (attributed to Dosso Dossi , c. 1519, National Gallery of Victoria [ 54 ] ) Gioffre Borgia (1482–1517) Prince of Squillace.

Six other children, Girolama , Isabella, Pedro-Luiz , Giovanni the "Infans Romanus" , Rodrigo and Bernardo, were of uncertain maternal parentage. His daughter Isabella was the great-great-grandmother of Pope Innocent X , who was therefore descended in a direct line from Alexander.

[ 55 ] Giulia Farnese as – A Virgin with a Unicorn , by Domenichino , c. 1604–05, from Palazzo Farnese Ercole II d'Este, Duke of Ferrara Francis Borgia, 4th Duke of Gandía Luisa de Guzmán , Queen consort of Portugal Alexander VI kneeling in front of the Madonna , said to be a likeness of Giulia Farnese.

[ Note 8 ] Slavery [ edit ] While the explorers of Spain imposed a form of slavery called " encomienda " on the indigenous peoples they met in the New World, [ 57 ] some popes had spoken out against the practice of slavery. In 1435, Pope Eugene IV had issued an attack on slavery in the Canary Islands in his papal bull Sicut dudum , which included the excommunication of all those who engaged in the slave trade with native chiefs there. A form of indentured servitude was allowed, being similar to a peasant's duty to his liege lord in Europe.

In the wake of Columbus 's landing in the New World, Pope Alexander was asked by the Spanish monarchy to confirm their ownership of these newly found lands.

[ 58 ] The bulls issued by Pope Alexander VI: Eximiae devotionis (3 May 1493), Inter caetera (4 May 1493) and Dudum siquidem (23 September 1493), granted rights to Spain with respect to the newly discovered lands in the Americas similar to those Pope Nicholas V had previously conferred on Portugal with the bulls Romanus Pontifex and Dum Diversas .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Morales Padron (1979) concludes that these bulls gave power to enslave the natives.

[ 62 ] Minnich (2010) asserts that this "slave trade" was permitted to facilitate conversions to Christianity.

[ 60 ] Other historians and Vatican scholars strongly disagree with these accusations and assert that Alexander never gave his approval to the practice of slavery.

[ 63 ] Other later popes, such as Pope Paul III in Sublimis Deus (1537), Pope Benedict XIV in Immensa Pastorium (1741), and Pope Gregory XVI in his letter In supremo apostolatus (1839), continued to condemn slavery.

Thornberry (2002) asserts that Inter caetera was applied in the Spanish Requirement of 1513 , which was read to American Indians (who could not understand the colonisers' language) before hostilities against them began. They were given the option to accept the authority of the pope and Spanish crown or face being attacked and subjugated.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] In 1993, the Indigenous Law Institute called on Pope John Paul II to revoke Inter caetera and to make reparation for "this unreasonable historical grief". This was followed by a similar appeal in 1994 by the Parliament of World Religions .

[ 64 ] Last years [ edit ] A danger now arose in the shape of a conspiracy by the deposed despots, the Orsini, and of some of Cesare's own condottieri . At first, the papal troops were defeated and things looked bleak for the house of Borgia. But a promise of French help quickly forced the confederates to come to terms. Cesare, by an act of treachery, then seized the ringleaders at Senigallia and put Oliverotto da Fermo and Vitellozzo Vitelli to death (31 December 1502). When Alexander VI heard the news, he lured Cardinal Orsini to the Vatican and cast him into a dungeon, where he died. His goods were confiscated and many other members of the clan in Rome were arrested, while Alexander's son Goffredo Borgia led an expedition into the Campagna and seized their castles. Thus the two great houses of Orsini and Colonna, who had long fought for predominance in Rome and often flouted the pope's authority, were subjugated and the Borgias' power increased. Cesare then returned to Rome, where his father asked him to assist Goffredo in reducing the last Orsini strongholds; this he was unwilling to do, much to his father's annoyance; but he eventually marched out, captured Ceri and made peace with Giulio Orsini, who surrendered Bracciano .

[ 36 ] The war between France and Spain for the possession of Naples dragged on, and the pope was forever intriguing, ready to ally himself with whichever power promised the most advantageous terms at any moment. He offered to help Louis XII on condition that Sicily be given to Cesare, and then offered to help Spain in exchange for Siena , Pisa and Bologna .

Death [ edit ] The tomb of Pope Alexander VI Jacopo Pesaro being presented by Pope Alexander VI to Saint Peter , painting by Titian Cesare was preparing for another expedition in August 1503 when, after he and his father had dined with Cardinal Adriano Castellesi on 6 August, they were taken ill with fever a few days later. Cesare, who "lay in bed, his skin peeling and his face suffused to a violet colour" [ 66 ] as a consequence of certain drastic measures to save him, eventually recovered; but the aged Pontiff apparently had little chance.

Burchard's Diary provides a few details of the pope's final illness and death at age 72: [ 67 ] Saturday, 12 August 1503, the pope fell ill in the morning. After the hour of vespers, between six and seven o'clock a fever appeared and remained permanently. On 15 August thirteen ounces of blood were drawn from him and the tertian ague supervened. On Thursday, 17 August, at nine o'clock in the forenoon he took medicine. On Friday, the 18th, between nine and ten o'clock he confessed to the Bishop Gamboa of Carignola, who then read Mass to him. After his Communion he gave the Eucharist to the pope who was sitting in bed. Then he ended the Mass at which were present five cardinals, Serra, Juan and Francesco Borgia, Casanova and Loris. The pope told them that he felt very bad. At the hour of vespers after Gamboa had given him Extreme Unction, he died.

As for his true faults [ clarification needed ] , known only to his confessor, Pope Alexander VI apparently died genuinely repentant.

[ Note 9 ] The bishop of Gallipoli , Alexis Celadoni, spoke of the pontiff's contrition during his funeral oration [ Note 10 ] to the electors of Alexander's successor, Pope Pius III : [ 71 ] [ Note 11 ] When at last the pope was suffering from a very severe sickness, he spontaneously requested, one after another, each of the last sacraments. He first made a very careful confession of his sins, with a contrite heart, and was affected even to the shedding of tears, I am told; then he received in Communion the most Sacred Body and Extreme Unction was administered to him.

The interregnum witnessed again the ancient "tradition" of violence and rioting.

[ Note 12 ] Cesare, too ill to attend to the business himself, sent Don Micheletto , his chief bravo , to seize the pope's treasures before the death was publicly announced. The next day the body was exhibited to the people and clergy of Rome, but was covered by an "old tapestry" ("antiquo tapete"), having become greatly disfigured by rapid decomposition. According to Raphael Volterrano : "It was a revolting scene to look at that deformed, blackened corpse, prodigiously swelled, and exhaling an infectious smell; his lips and nose were covered with brown drivel, his mouth was opened very widely, and his tongue, inflated by poison, ... therefore no fanatic or devotee dared to kiss his feet or hands, as custom would have required." [ 76 ] The Venetian ambassador stated that the body was "the ugliest, most monstrous and horrible dead body that was ever seen, without any form or likeness of humanity".

[ 76 ] Ludwig von Pastor insists that the decomposition was "perfectly natural", owing to the summer heat.

[ Note 13 ] Commentaries [ who?

] attribute the pope's death to malaria , then prevalent in Rome, or to another such pestilence.

[ 78 ] One contemporary official wrote home that there was little surprise that Alexander and Cesare had both fallen ill, as the bad air had led to many in Rome, and especially in the Roman Curia , becoming sick.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] After a short stay, the body was removed from the crypts of St. Peter's and installed in the lesser known Spanish national church of Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli .

Legacy [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not include all significant viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue .

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A Glass of Wine with Caesar Borgia (1893) by John Collier . From left: Cesare Borgia , Lucrezia Borgia , Pope Alexander VI, and a young man holding an empty glass. The painting represents the popular view of the treacherous nature of the Borgias —the implication being that the young man cannot be sure that the wine is not poisoned.

Detail of fresco Resurrection in the Borgia Apartments, showing Alexander VI humbly in prayer [ 81 ] Following the death of Alexander VI, his rival and successor Julius II said on the day of his election: "I will not live in the same rooms as the Borgias lived. He desecrated the Holy Church as none before." [ 82 ] The Borgia Apartments remained sealed until the 19th century.

[ 82 ] Catholic apologists of Alexander VI have argued that the behaviors he receives criticism for were not atypical of the period.

De Maistre , in his work Du Pape , "The latter are forgiven nothing, because everything is expected from them, wherefore the vices lightly passed over in a Louis XIV become most offensive and scandalous in an Alexander VI." [ 83 ] Alexander VI had sought reforms of the increasingly irresponsible Curia, putting together a group of his most pious cardinals in order to move the process along. The planned reforms included new rules on the sale of Church property, the limiting of cardinals to one diocese, and stricter moral codes for clergy, though these were not implemented.

[ Note 14 ] Alexander VI was known for his patronage of the arts, and in his days a new architectural era was initiated in Rome with the coming of Bramante .

Raphael , Michelangelo , and Pinturicchio all worked for him.

[ 36 ] He commissioned Pinturicchio to lavishly paint a suite of rooms in the Apostolic Palace in the Vatican, which are today known as the Borgia Apartments . He took a great interest in theatrics, and he even had Plautus 's Menaechmi performed in his apartments.

[ 85 ] In addition to the arts, Alexander VI also encouraged the development of education. In 1495, he issued a papal bull at the request of William Elphinstone , Bishop of Aberdeen, and James IV of Scotland , founding King's College, Aberdeen .

[ 86 ] King's College now forms an integral element of the University of Aberdeen . Alexander VI also, in 1501, approved the University of Valencia .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Alexander VI, whom papal rival and successor Giuliano della Rovere alleged without evidence was a marrano , demonstrated relatively benign treatment of Jews. After the 1492 expulsion of the Jews from Spain , some 9,000 impoverished Iberian Jews arrived at the borders of the Papal States . Alexander welcomed them into Rome, declaring that they were "permitted to lead their life, free from interference from Christians, to continue in their own rites, to gain wealth, and to enjoy many other privileges". He similarly allowed the immigration of Jews expelled from Portugal in 1497 and from Provence in 1498.

[ 89 ] Bohuslav Hasištejnský z Lobkovic , a Bohemian humanist poet (1461–1510), wrote a hostile epitaph on Alexander in Latin: [ 90 ] Epitaphium Alexandri Papae Cui tranquilla quies odio, cui proelia cordi et rixa et caedes seditioque fuit, mortuus hac recubat populis gaudentibus urna pastor Alexander, maxima Roma, tuus.

Vos, Erebi proceres, vos caeli claudite portas atque Animam vestris hanc prohibete locis.

In Styga nam veniens pacem turbabit Averni, committet superos, si petat astra, poli.

Epitaph to Pope Alexander One who hated peace and quiet, and who loved battles, strife, murder, and treason, Lies in this urn as all peoples rejoice, Alexander, thy shepherd, o greatest Rome.

Ye prelates of Erebus , close the doors of Heaven and prohibit this Soul from your realm.

If it enters Styx , it will disrupt the peace of Avernus , and if it seeks heaven it will set the inhabitants of the sky against each other.

Despite Julius II's hostility, the Roman barons and Romagna vicars were never again to be the same problem for the papacy and Julius' successes owe much to the framework laid by the Borgias.

[ 91 ] Unlike Julius, Alexander never made war unless absolutely necessary, preferring negotiation and diplomacy.

[ 92 ] Alexander Lee argues that the crimes attributed to the Borgias were exaggerated by contemporaries because they were outsiders expanding their holdings at the expense of the Italians, that they were Spaniards when it was felt that Spain had too much control on the Italian peninsula, and that after the death of Alexander the family lost its influence and therefore any incentive for anyone to defend them.

[ 93 ] On the other hand, two of Alexander's successors, Sixtus V and Urban VIII , described him as one of the most outstanding popes since Saint Peter .

[ 94 ] See also [ edit ] Biography portal Catholicism portal Banquet of Chestnuts Birthplace of Pope Alexander VI Cardinals created by Alexander VI List of popes from the Borgia family List of sexually active popes Route of the Borgias Spanish Empire References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Claims of paternity and numbers of children are disputed. See G. J. Meyer, [ 3 ] Christopher Hibbert, [ 4 ] and Ferdinand Gregorovius.

[ 5 ] There are claims about Cesare, Giovanni, Lucrezia, Gioffre (or Goffredo), Girolama (or Jeronima), Isabella, Pier Luigi (or Pedro Luis), Bernardo, Rodrigo, Giovanni Infans Romanus , and Laura .

^ Valencian : Roderic Llançol i de Borja [roðeˈɾiɡ ʎanˈsɔl i ðe ˈbɔɾdʒa] ; Spanish : Rodrigo Lanzol y de Borja [roˈðɾiɣo lanˈθol i ðe ˈβoɾxa] ; Italian : Rodrigo Borgia [roˈdriːɡo ˈbɔrdʒa] ^ "The Spaniards had been trying to take back their country from the Moors for almost 800 years. By the middle of the 15th century, this reconquest was almost complete, but Spain was still a hodgepodge of competing principalities and, because of its constant state of warfare, still a very backward country. In Italy, on the other hand, the Renaissance, which had hardly begun in Spain, had reached its high point and the Italians, in general, did not look kindly on a citizen of this backward country being elevated to the highest post in the Church. Remember, too, that the pope at the time, besides his spiritual powers, was a sovereign political power with large areas of the peninsula, nominally, at least, under his control. Italy was, politically, in a worse state than Spain. In the south, Naples was a fief of the pope, but its ruler, King Ferrante, refused to acknowledge the pope's authority. In the north of the peninsula, many small principalities vied for dominance and were often at war with one another, changing alliances as rapidly as opportunity invited. In the Papal States themselves, noble families, such as the Orsini and the Colonna, acted as petty tyrants in the cities and areas which they controlled, grinding down the people and constantly seeking to achieve their independence from their sovereign, the pope. These Roman families even sought to control the Papacy itself. It was probably only because they could not agree on an Italian successor to Nicholas V that the elderly Callistus had been elected; one who, in all probability, would not live long...Callistus III was acknowledged by all as religious and austere, though severely criticized for his largesse to his family. But he was surrounded by enemies both within the Church and among the rulers of Europe. When elected, he did what all leaders do, he surrounded himself with people whom he believed he could trust. A Spaniard in Italy, he was hard-pressed to find such trustworthiness except from members of his own family; hence his patronage of them, though it is not to be denied that it was probably also for personal reasons." [ 44 ] ^ "As for her reputation, there is absolutely no evidence for the rumors of incest with one or more of her brothers – or indeed with her father – apart from that given by her first husband, Giovanni Sforza, during the divorce proceedings, during which several other baseless accusations were leveled in both directions." [ 45 ] ^ "The holy year 1500 definitively ushered in the custom of opening a holy door on Christmas Eve and closing it the following year on Christmas Day. Alexander opened the first holy door in St. Peter's Basilica on Christmas Eve, 1499, and papal legates opened the doors in the other three patriarchal basilicas. For this occasion, Pope Alexander had a new opening created in the portico of St. Peter's and commissioned a door, made of marble, 3.5 meters high and 2.2 wide. It lasted until 1618 when another door was installed in the new basilica. The door, in turn, was replaced in 1950 by the bronze door, which is still in use. In a ceremony strikingly similar in many ways to today's ritual opening of a holy door, Alexander was carried in the gestatorial chair to the portico of St. Peter's. He and the members of his retinue, bearing long candles, processed to the holy door, as the choir intoned Psalm 118:19–20: "Open for me the gate of Yahweh, where the upright go in." The pope knocked thrice on the door, it gave way (assisted from within by workers), and everyone then crossed the threshold to enter into a period of penance and reconciliation. Thus, Pope Alexander, a lover of pomp and ceremony, formalized the rite of opening a holy door and began a tradition that continues, with few variations, to this day. Similar rites were held at the other patriarchal basilicas. Alexander was also the first to institute a special rite for the closing of a holy door. On the feast of the Epiphany, 6 January 1501, two cardinals – one with a silver brick and the other with a gold one – symbolically began to seal the holy door. Basilica workers known as sanpietrini completed the task, which included placing small coins and medals, minted during the holy year, inside the wall." [ 49 ] ^ "[A]ll the clergy of the city were invited to the opening of the [1500] Jubilee. The pope himself performed this ceremony on Christmas Eve, 1499, having taken pains to settle all the details beforehand with his Master of Ceremonies. The ceremonial observed on these occasions was no modern invention, but, as the Bull of Indiction expressly says, was founded on ancient rites and full of symbolic meaning. According to Burchard, the crowd which assisted at these solemnities numbered 200,000 persons. Although this may be an exaggeration, still it is certain that, in spite of the troubles of the times and the insecurity in Rome itself, the numbers attending this Jubilee were very large." [ 50 ] ^ "The permanent group of skilled workers and artisans, in every trade, who with their assistants take care of St. Peter's Basilica." [ 52 ] ^ Doubtful, but possible. On a similar claim: "Without any solid evidence Giulia is said to have been the model for Pinturicchio's 'Virgin and Child' surrounded by angels in the Borgia Apartments of the Vatican." [ 56 ] ^ "[T]here is every reason to believe," writes the Dublin Review , that Pope Alexander VI died "in sentiments of piety and devotion." [ 68 ] ^ The historical value of Bishop Celadoni's funeral oration is said to be immense: "On 16 Sept 1503 Burchardus records in his diary that Alexius Celadenus or Celadonius, bishop of Gallipoli, delivered a discourse to the cardinals about to enter into conclave for the election of a successor to Pope Alexander VI.

Et fuit tediosa et longa oratio . Burchardus's most recent editor, Thuasne, states that this oration exists in manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale ... He omits to observe that, granting that the discourse may have been too long for the cardinals, the longer the better for us, inasmuch as it contains an account of Pope Alexander of almost unique value, not merely as the judgment of a contemporary, but as delivered in public before an audience of contemporaries whose station in the church had brought them into almost daily intercourse with the deceased pope, and before whom any serious misrepresentation would have been impossible ..." [ 69 ] [ 70 ] ^ Latin text: "Dum graviter aegrotaret, factorum conscientia punctus contrito dolentique animo ad lachrymas ut audio fusus, sacrosanctum communionis corpus sua sponte, dilutis prius diligentissima confessione peccatis, petierit, et alia sacramenta ..." [ 72 ] ^ "Throughout the Middle Ages a 'tradition' or 'custom' involving pillaging was attached to the death and election of high-ranking prelates." [ 73 ] And as early as 633, "the Fourth Council of Toledo condemned the violence of the interregnum ." [ 74 ] Nor were the Romans alone guilty of such misbehavior. In the eleventh century, Peter Damian , writing to the clergy and people of Osimo , sharply reproved the "perverse and wholly detestable practice of certain people, who at the death of the bishop break in like enemies and rob his house, like thieves make off with his belongings, set fire to the homes on his estate, and with fierce and savage barbarity cut down his grape vines and orchards".

[ 75 ] ^ "In consequence of the simultaneous illness of both the Pope and his son, and the rapid decomposition of the body, which, considering the heat of the weather, was perfectly natural, the cry of poison was raised at once; but on 19 August the Mantuan Envoy writes that there was no sort of ground for supposing this." [ 77 ] ^ "As part of his proposed new reforms, Alexander now nominated a commission of six of the most pious cardinals, and less than two months later a draft Bull of Reformation had been prepared. The pope was banned from selling benefices and from transferring Church property to laypersons. As for the cardinals, who were to be drawn from all the nations, none should possess more than one bishopric; their households were limited to eighty people and thirty horses; they were banned from hunting, theaters, carnivals, and tournaments; and their funeral expenses were not to exceed 1,500 ducats. The lesser clergy were similarly reined in: they must refuse all bribes and put away their concubines." [ 84 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ See inscription on 5 Ducat piece File:Roma, alessandro VI, 5 ducati, 1492-1503.jpg "Alexander VI Pontifex Maximus Borgia Valentinus" ("The Valencian", his epithet indicating his birth in Xàtiva in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon (now Spain) ^ a b "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Pope Alexander VI" .

www.newadvent.org .

^ a b c G. J. Meyer (2014). "Background: The paternity question: An apology".

The Borgias: The Hidden History . Bantam. pp.

239– 247.

ISBN 978-0-345-52692-2 .

^ Hibbert (2008) [ page needed ] ^ Ferdinand Gregorovius (1900).

History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages . Vol. 7, Part 1. London: George Bell. p. 353.

ISBN 978-1-108-01509-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ See inscription on 5 Ducat piece File:Roma, alessandro VI, 5 ducati, 1492-1503.jpg "Alexander VI Pontifex Maximus Borgia Valentinus" ("The Valencian", his epithet indicating his birth in Xàtiva in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon (now Spain) ^ Weckman-Muñoz, Luis."The Alexandrine Bulls of 1493" in First Images of America: The Impact of the New World on the Old . Edited by Fredi Chiappelli. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1976, pp. 201–210.

^ Batllori, Miguel, S.J. "The Papal Division of the World and its Consequences" in First Images of America: The Impact of the New World on the Old . Edited by Fredi Chiappelli. pp. 211–220.

^ Downey, Kirstin (28 October 2014).

Isabella: The Warrior Queen . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-385-53412-3 .

^ Catherine B. Avery, 1972, The New Century Italian Renaissance Encyclopedia , Appleton-Century-Crofts, ISBN 0-13-612051-2 ISBN 978-0-13-612051-3 p. 189.

[1] ^ Noel (2006) [ page needed ] ^ a b Monsignor Peter de Roo (1924), Material for a History of Pope Alexander VI, His Relatives and His Time , (5 vols.), Bruges, Desclée, De Brouwer, volume 2, p. 29.

"Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 December 2011 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) volumes 1–5 ^ Hollingsworth, Mary (2014).

The Borgias: history's most notorious dynasty . London. p. 17.

ISBN 978-1-78206-944-7 .

OCLC 868380201 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hollingsworth 2014, pp. 17–19 ^ a b c "The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church – Papal elections – XV Century" .

^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 36 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 43 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 45 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 55 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 60 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 65 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 81 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 82 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 85 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 95 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 87 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 100 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 106 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 111 ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 114 ^ Gaetano Moroni , Dizionario di Erudizione Storico-Ecclesiastica da S. Pietro sino ai nostri giorni , vol. 6, p. 50 (in Italian) ^ de Rossa (1989) , p. 144 ^ Mallett (1981) , pp. 123–126 ^ a b c Johann Burchard, Diaries 1483–1492 (translation: A.H. Matthew, London, 1910) ^ Hollingsworth 2014, p. 126 ^ a b c d e Villari (1911) ^ Verzijl, Jan H. (26 September 1979).

International law in historical perspective. 10 . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.

ISBN 90-286-0158-9 – via Google Books.

^ Anderson, M. S. (1993).

The Rise of Modern Diplomacy 1450–1919 . London: Longman. p. 3.

ISBN 0-582-21232-4 .

^ Mallett (1981) , pp. 162–166 ^ Mallett (1981) , p. 236 ^ de la Bédoyère (1958) , pp. 154–155 ^ de la Bédoyère (1958) , p. 24 ^ de la Bédoyère (1958) , passim [ page needed ] ^ J.B. Darcy, What you don't know about the Borgia Pope: Alexander VI (1492–1503) .

^ Norwich (2011) , p. 272 ^ See inscription on 5 Ducat piece File:Roma, alessandro VI, 5 ducati, 1492-1503.jpg "Alexander VI Pontifex Maximus Borgia Valentinus" ("The Valencian", his epithet indicating his birth in Xàtiva in the Kingdom of Valencia under the Crown of Aragon (now Spain) ^ Machiavelli, Niccolò (1981).

The Prince and Selected Discourses (Bantam Classic ed.). New York: Bantam Books. p.

127 .

ISBN 0-553-21227-3 .

^ Adot Lerga, Álvaro (2005).

Juan de Albret y Catalina de Foix o la defensa del Estado navarro (1483–1517) . Pamplona/Iruñea: Pamiela. pp.

164– 65.

ISBN 84-7681-443-7 .

^ a b c Allen Duston, O.P., and Roberto Zanoli, 2003, Saint Peter and the Vatican: The Legacy of the Popes , Art Services Intl., ISBN 978-0-88397-140-6 , pp. 158–159.

^ "How awful was Catholic life under those immoral Renaissance Popes!" . Rorate Caeli . Retrieved 25 March 2014 .

^ Psalm 118:19–20 ^ "Dictionary: Sampietrini" . Catholic Culture . Retrieved 25 March 2014 .

^ Darcy, J.B. "What You Don't Know About the Borgia Pope: Alexander VI (1492–1503).(FEATURE ARTICLE)(Biography)." Catholic Insight 19.8 (2011): n. pag. Print.

^ "NGV Solves Mystery of Renaissance Portrait" (26 November 2008), NGV. Retrieved 4 June 2020.

^ Williams (2004) , p. 70 ^ de la Bédoyère (1958) , p. 94 ^ " Encomienda or Slavery? The Spanish Crown's Choice of Labor Organization in Sixteenth-Century Spanish America.

" (PDF). Latin American Studies.

^ Stogre (1992) , pp. 69–70 ^ Raiswell, p. 469 ^ a b Minnich (2010) , p. 281 ^ Rivera (1992) , pp. 25–28 ^ cited by Rivera (1992) , p. 28 ^ Patrick Madrid, "Pope Fiction" ^ a b Thornberry (2002) , p. 65 ^ Rivera (1992) , p. 37 ^ The Borgias , 1981, Georgina Masson , Marion Johnson, Penguin, ISBN 0-14-139075-1 ISBN 978-0-14-139075-8 , p. 179.

^ Johann Burchard, 1921, Pope Alexander VI and His Court: Extracts from the Latin Diary of Johannes Burchardus , F. L. Glaser, tr., N.L. Brown, New York, p. 179.

[2] ^ Nicholas Patrick Wiseman , ed., 1858, The Dublin Review , London, Thomas Richardson & Son, vol. 45, p. 351.

[3] ^ "A Contemporary Oration on Pope Alexander VI", The English Historical Review , 1892, vol. 7, p. 318.

^ See also The Oration of Alexis Celadoni , in The Ideal Renaissance Pope: Funeral Oratory from the Papal Court , John M. MacManamon, S.J., Archivum Historiae Pontificiae, 1976, Vol. 14. pp. 54ff.

^ Peter de Roo, 1924, Material for a History of Pope Alexander VI , vol. 5, p. 89, note. 112.

[4] (Word frequency and page number of specific words and phrases for all 5 vols. at HathiTrust ) [5] ^ Alexis Celadoni (Alexius Celadonius, Celadeni, 1451–1517), Bishop of Gallipoli, Italy (1494–1508), Alexii Celadeni Episcopi Gallipolitani Oratio ad sacrum cardinalium senatum ingressurum ad novum pontificem eligendum , Publisher: Rome: Johann Besicken, 1503.

[6] ^ Joëlle Rollo-Koster, 2008, Raiding Saint Peter: Empty Sees, Violence, and the Initiation of the Great Western Schism (1378) , Leiden; Boston: Brill, ISBN 90-04-16560-6 ISBN 978-90-04-16560-1 , Introduction , p. 1.

[7] ^ Bertelli (2001) , p. 41 ^ Letter 35, Easter Synod, 1050.

Letters 31–60 , Owen J. Blum (Translator), 1990, Catholic University of America Press, ISBN 0-8132-0707-X ISBN 978-0-8132-0707-0 , p. 61.

[8] ^ a b Cawthorne (1996) , p. 218 ^ "Ludwig von Pastor, History of the Popes, Vol. 6, p. 135" . 1899.

^ Norwich (2011) , p. 273 ^ Sabatini, Rafael (1914).

The Life of Cesare Borgia: Of France, Duke of Valentinois and Romagna, Prince of Andria and Venafri, Count of Dyois, Lord of Piombino, Camerino, and Urbino, Gonfalonier and Captain-general of Holy Church: a History and Some Criticisms . New York: John Lane. pp.

407 .

per la mala condictione de aere.

^ Gregorovius, Ferdinand (1900).

History of the City of Rome in the Middle Ages . Vol. 7, part 2. Translated by Hamilton, Annie. London: G. Bell & sons. p. 519.

^ Paintings of a Pope [ usurped ] . Publisher: The Catholic Dormitory.

^ a b Cawthorne (1996) , p. 219 ^ The Catholic Encyclopedia: an international work of reference on the constitution, doctrine, discipline, and history of the Catholic Church . Vol. 1.

Knights of Columbus Catholic Truth Committee. 1907. p. 294.

^ Norwich (2011) , pp. 268–269 ^ "Ludwig von Pastor, History of the Popes , Vol. 5, p. 124" . 1899.

Under Alexander VI. the taste for theatrical representations made great progress. Plays, for the most part of an extremely objectionable character, were a prominent feature in all court festivities, and also in the Carnival amusements, in which Alexander took a great interest. In 1502 the Pope had the Menaechmi performed in his own apartments.

^ "King's College: About" . University of Aberdeen . Retrieved 20 June 2020 .

^ "History of the UV" .

www.uv.es .

^ "La Nau Building – Foundation of the Estudi General " .

^ Carroll (2002) , pp. 363–364 ^ Bohuslav Hasištejnský z Lobkovic: Carmina selecta , Praha 1996, p.14 ^ Mallett (1981) , p. 265 ^ Mallett (1981) , passim [ page needed ] ^ "Lee, Alexander. "Were the Borgias Really So Bad?", History Today , 1 October 2013" .

^ Mallett (1981) , p. 9 Bibliography [ edit ] Bertelli, Sergio (2001).

The King's Body: Sacred Rituals of Power in Medieval and Early Modern Europe . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-271-02102-7 .

Carroll, James (2002).

Constantine's Sword . Boston: Houghton Mifflin .

ISBN 978-0-395-77927-9 .

Cawthorne, Nigel (1996).

Sex Lives of the Popes . Prion.

de la Bédoyère, Michael (1958).

The Meddlesome Friar and the Wayward Pope . London: Collins.

Hibbert, Christopher (2008).

The Borgias and Their Enemies . Harcourt.

ISBN 978-0-15-101033-2 .

Minnich, Nelson H. (2010). "The Catholic Church and the pastoral care of black Africans in Renaissance Italy". In Earle, T. F.; Lowe, K. J. P. (eds.).

Black Africans in Renaissance Europe . Cambridge University Press. pp.

280– 300.

ISBN 978-0-521-17660-6 .

Mallett, M. (1981) [1969].

The Borgias (Granada ed.).

Meyer, G. J. (2013).

The Borgias: the Hidden History . Random House.

ISBN 978-0-345-52693-9 .

Noel, Gerard (2006).

The Renaissance Popes . Robinson.

ISBN 978-1-84529-343-7 .

Norwich, John Julius (2011).

Absolute Monarchs: a History of the Papacy . Random House.

ISBN 978-1-4000-6715-2 .

Reston, James (2006).

Dogs of God: Columbus, the Inquisition, and the Defeat of the Moors . New York: Anchor Books.

ISBN 978-1-4000-3191-7 .

Rivera, Luis N. (1992).

A Violent Evangelism: the Political and Religious Conquest of the Americas . Louisville, KY: Westminster/John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-25367-7 .

de Rossa, Peter (1989).

Vicars of Christ: the Dark Side of the Papacy . Corgi.

Stogre, Michael (1992).

That the world may believe: the development of Papal social thought on aboriginal rights . Médiaspaul.

ISBN 978-2-89039-549-7 .

Thornberry, Patrick (2002).

Indigenous peoples and human rights . Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7190-3794-8 .

Tuchman, Barbara (1984).

The March of Folly . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-394-52777-2 .

Villari, Luigi (1911).

"Alexander (popes)" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Williams, George L. (2004).

Papal Genealogy: the Families and Descendants of the Popes . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-2071-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Batllori, Miguel, S.J. "The Papal Division of the World and its Consequences" in First Images of America: The Impact of the New World on the Old . Edited by Fredi Chiappelli. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1976, pp. 211–220.

Burchard, John.

Diaries 1483–1492 (translation: A.H. Matthew, London, 1910) Burkle-Young, Francis A., "The election of Pope Alexander VI (1492)", in Miranda, Salvador.

Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church Eamon Duffy , Saints & Sinners: A History of the Popes (Yale Nota Bene, 2002) Encyclopædia Britannica , 11th edition.

The Historical Encyclopedia of World slavery , Editor Junius P. Rodriguez, ABC-CLIO, 1997, ISBN 978-0-87436-885-7 Loughlin, James Francis (1913).

"Pope Alexander VI" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

von Pastor, Ludwig (1902).

The History of the Popes, from the close of the Middle Ages , third edition, Volume V Saint Louis: B. Herder 1902.

von Pastor, Ludwig.

The History of the Popes, from the close of the Middle Ages , second edition, Volume VI Saint Louis: B. Herder 1902.

Weckman-Muñoz, Luis. "The Alexandrine Bulls of 1493" in First Images of America: The Impact of the New World on the Old . Edited by Fredi Chiappelli. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press 1976, pp. 201–210.

Diario Borja Borgia (in Spanish) 1494: How a Family Feud in Medieval Spain Divided the world in Half Archived 4 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Thirty-Two Years with Alexander VI , The Catholic Historical Review , vol. 8, no. 1, April 1922, pp. 55–58.

Thirty-Two Years with Alexander VI The Catholic Historical Review Grandes de España, tomo cuarto Archived 1 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Una rama subsistente del linaje Borja en América española, por Jaime de Salazar y Acha, Académico de Número de la Real Academia Matritense de Heráldica y Genealogía Archived 12 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Boletín de la Real Academia Matritense de Heráldica y Genealogía (in Spanish) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alexander VI .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Alexander VI Wikiquote has quotations related to Pope Alexander VI .

Francisco Fernández de Bethencourt – Historia Genealógica y Heráldica Española, Casa Real y Archived 1 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Literature by and about Pope Alexander VI in the German National Library catalogue "bishop/bdeborjar" .

Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney.

" Alexander VI.

" in the Ecumenical Lexicon of Saints Duque de Gandía at the Wayback Machine (archived 18 January 2012) (in Spanish) Works by Pope Alexander VI at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Catholic Church titles Preceded by Innocent VIII Pope 11 August 1492 – 18 August 1503 Succeeded by Pius III v t e Popes of the Catholic Church List of popes graphical canonised Papal names Tombs extant non-extant Antipope Pope emeritus papal resignation Pope-elect Apocryphal Pope Donus II 1st–4th centuries Peter Linus Anacletus Clement I Evaristus Alexander I Sixtus I Telesphorus Hyginus Pius I Anicetus Soter Eleutherius Victor I Zephyrinus Callixtus I Urban I Pontian Anterus Fabian Cornelius Lucius I Stephen I Sixtus II Dionysius Felix I Eutychian Caius Marcellinus Marcellus I Eusebius Miltiades Sylvester I Mark Julius I Liberius Damasus I Siricius Anastasius I 5th–8th centuries Innocent I Zosimus Boniface I Celestine I Sixtus III Leo I Hilarius Simplicius Felix III Gelasius I Anastasius II Symmachus Hormisdas John I Felix IV Boniface II John II Agapetus I Silverius Vigilius Pelagius I John III Benedict I Pelagius II Gregory I Sabinian Boniface III Boniface IV Adeodatus I Boniface V Honorius I Severinus John IV Theodore I Martin I Eugene I Vitalian Adeodatus II Donus Agatho Leo II Benedict II John V Conon Sergius I John VI John VII Sisinnius Constantine Gregory II Gregory III Zachary Stephen II Paul I Stephen III Adrian I Leo III 9th–12th centuries Stephen IV Paschal I Eugene II Valentine Gregory IV Sergius II Leo IV Benedict III Nicholas I Adrian II John VIII Marinus I Adrian III Stephen V Formosus Boniface VI Stephen VI Romanus Theodore II John IX Benedict IV Leo V Sergius III Anastasius III Lando John X Leo VI Stephen VII John XI Leo VII Stephen VIII Marinus II Agapetus II John XII Benedict V Leo VIII John XIII Benedict VI Benedict VII John XIV John XV Gregory V Sylvester II John XVII John XVIII Sergius IV Benedict VIII John XIX Benedict IX Sylvester III Gregory VI Clement II Damasus II Leo IX Victor II Stephen IX Nicholas II Alexander II Gregory VII Victor III Urban II Paschal II Gelasius II Callixtus II Honorius II Innocent II Celestine II Lucius II Eugene III Anastasius IV Adrian IV Alexander III Lucius III Urban III Gregory VIII Clement III Celestine III Innocent III 13th–16th centuries Honorius III Gregory IX Celestine IV Innocent IV Alexander IV Urban IV Clement IV Gregory X Innocent V Adrian V John XXI Nicholas III Martin IV Honorius IV Nicholas IV Celestine V Boniface VIII Benedict XI Clement V John XXII Benedict XII Clement VI Innocent VI Urban V Gregory XI Urban VI Boniface IX Innocent VII Gregory XII Martin V Eugene IV Nicholas V Callixtus III Pius II Paul II Sixtus IV Innocent VIII Alexander VI Pius III Julius II Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Paul III Julius III Marcellus II Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Urban VII Gregory XIV Innocent IX Clement VIII 17th–21st centuries Leo XI Paul V Gregory XV Urban VIII Innocent X Alexander VII Clement IX Clement X Innocent XI Alexander VIII Innocent XII Clement XI Innocent XIII Benedict XIII Clement XII Benedict XIV Clement XIII Clement XIV Pius VI Pius VII Leo XII Pius VIII Gregory XVI Pius IX Leo XIII Pius X Benedict XV Pius XI Pius XII John XXIII Paul VI John Paul I John Paul II Benedict XVI Francis Leo XIV History of the papacy Antiquity and Early Middle Ages During the Roman Empire (until 493) Under Constantine (312–337) Ostrogothic Papacy (493–537) Byzantine Papacy (537–752) Frankish Papacy (756–857) Saeculum obscurum (904–964) Crescentii era (974–1012) High and Late Middle Ages Tusculan Papacy (1012–1044 / 1048) Conflicts with the HRE (1048–1257) Wandering Papacy Viterbo , 1257–1281 Orvieto , 1262–1297 Perugia , 1228–1304 Avignon Papacy (1309–1378) Western Schism (1378–1417) Early Modern and Modern Era Renaissance Papacy (1417–1534) Reformation Papacy (1534–1585) Baroque Papacy (1585–1689) Age of Enlightenment (c. 1640–1740) Revolutionary Papacy (1775–1848) Roman question (1870–1929) Vatican City (1929–present) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1945–1991) Category Portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Chile Greece Sweden Poland 2 Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jmp8q
Cached time: 20250817043834
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.289 seconds
Real time usage: 1.687 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9997/1000000
Revision size: 85873/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 296029/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20075/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 255877/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.690/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19986152/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1310.800      1 -total
 28.05%  367.657      2 Template:Reflist
 10.56%  138.365     28 Template:Cite_book
 10.30%  134.990     12 Template:Cite_web
  8.63%  113.158      3 Template:Sister_project
  8.52%  111.661      3 Template:Side_box
  6.75%   88.437      6 Template:Langx
  5.41%   70.849      1 Template:Popes
  5.24%   68.639      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
  5.20%   68.127      2 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23791:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043834 and revision id 1303311812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pope_Alexander_VI&oldid=1303311812 " Categories : Pope Alexander VI 1431 births 1503 deaths 15th-century popes 15th-century Roman Catholic archbishops in the Kingdom of Aragon 16th-century popes 16th-century Spanish people Archbishops of Valencia Burials at Santa Maria in Monserrato degli Spagnoli Cardinal-bishops of Albano Cardinal-bishops of Porto Cardinal-nephews Deans of the College of Cardinals House of Borgia People from Xàtiva People of the Italian Wars of 1499–1504 Popes Renaissance Papacy Roman Catholic Clergy sexuality Simony Spanish art patrons Spanish popes University of Bologna alumni Hidden categories: Articles containing Valencian-language text Pages with Valencian IPA Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2017 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from May 2024 All pages needing cleanup Use dmy dates from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references Accuracy disputes from April 2022 All accuracy disputes Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2021 Articles needing more viewpoints from April 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter Wikipedia articles containing unlinked shortened footnotes This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pope Alexander VI 89 languages Add topic

