Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Father and brother 2 Education 3 Accomplishments 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Metius 13 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Frysk Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Metius" redirects here. For other uses, see Metius (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Adriaan Metius" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Metius Metius Born 9 December 1571 Alkmaar Died 6 September 1635 (aged 63) Franeker Nationality Dutch Alma mater University of Franeker Scientific career Fields Geometer Astronomer Adriaan Adriaanszoon , called Metius , (9 December 1571 – 6 September 1635), was a Dutch geometer and astronomer born in Alkmaar . The name "Metius" comes from the Dutch word meten ("measuring"), and therefore means something like "measurer" or "surveyor." Father and brother [ edit ] Adriaan Metius was born in Alkmaar , North Holland . His father, Adriaan Anthonisz , was a mathematician , land-surveyor , cartographer , and military engineer who from 1582 served also as burgomaster of Alkmaar.

Metius' brother, Jacob Metius , worked as an instrument-maker and a specialist in grinding lenses . Also born in Alkmaar, Jacob died between 1624 and 1631. Little is known of him besides the fact that, in October 1608, the States General discussed his patent application for an optical telescope of his own invention described as a device for "seeing faraway things as though nearby", consisting of a convex and concave lens in a tube, and the combination magnified three or four times.

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] Adriaan Metius attended a Latin school in Alkmaar and studied philosophy in 1589 at the recently founded University of Franeker . He continued his studies at Leiden in 1594, where he studied under Rudolph Snellius . He worked for a brief time under Tycho Brahe on the island of Hven , where Brahe had built two observatories, and subsequently worked at Rostock and Jena , where he gave lectures in 1595. Subsequently, he returned to Alkmaar and assisted his father for a time as a military engineer inspecting fortifications , and also worked as a teacher of mathematics at Franeker in Frisia , his teaching especially geared towards the training of surveyors.

At the University of Franeker , he was appointed professor extraordinarius in 1598, and served from 1600 to 1635 as professor ordinarius of mathematics, navigation , surveying, military engineering, and astronomy . He was permitted to teach in the vernacular instead of Latin. He served as rector of the university in 1603 and 1632.

With his father and brother he established an instrument making business which specialised in optical instruments. The family business seems to have manufactured the precision Jacob's staffs used by Tycho Brahe for his star sightings.

He died in Franeker.

Accomplishments [ edit ] Adriaen Metius: De genuino usu utriusqve globi tractatus. Adjecta est nova Sciatericorum, & artis Navigandi ratio novis Instrumentis, & inventionibus illustrata . Franeker, 1624.

Though he scoffed at astrology , Metius is said to have spent a lot of time pursuing alchemy , especially the philosophers' stone .

Metius published treatises on the astrolabe and on surveying . His works include Arithmeticæ et geometriæ practica (1611), Institutiones Astronomicae Geographicae , and Arithmeticæ libri duo: et geometriæ libri VI (1640). Metius also manufactured astronomical instruments and developed a special form of Jacob's staff .

In 1585, his father had estimated the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter, later called pi , to be approximately ⁠ 355 / 113 ⁠ .

[ 2 ] Metius later published his father's results, and the value ⁠ 355 / 113 ⁠ is traditionally referred to as Metius' number .

[ 3 ] The lunar crater Metius is named after him.

In Vermeer's painting The Astronomer (1668), the book lying on the table has been identified as a 1621 second edition of Metius's Institutiones Astronomicae Geographicae . It is opened to Book III, where "inspiration from God" is recommended for astronomical research along with knowledge of geometry and the aid of mechanical instruments.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "The Telescope" .

The Galileo Project . Retrieved 8 May 2025 .

^ Looijen, Maarten (January 1, 1970).

Over getallen gesproken - Talking about numbers . Van Haren. p. 517.

ISBN 9789401806015 .

OCLC 1050132649 .

^ "Two Historical Puzzles" .

Real Numbers and Fascinating Fractions . Archived from the original on 2005-11-01 . Retrieved 2025-05-08 .

Based on N.M. Beskin's work with the title Fascinating Fractions, translated by V.I.Kisin, MIR Publishers, Moscow, 1986 ^ "Information about Johannes Vermeer's "Astronomer" " . Archived from the original on 2007-10-11 . Retrieved 2016-04-11 .

External links [ edit ] (in English) Galileo Project: Metius (in French) Metius (in French) Imago Mundi: Metius (in Dutch) Metius Family Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Chile Sweden Vatican Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adriaan_Metius&oldid=1289510065 " Categories : 1571 births 1635 deaths People from Alkmaar 17th-century Dutch mathematicians 17th-century Dutch inventors Dutch surveyors 17th-century Dutch astronomers Dutch scientific instrument makers University of Franeker alumni Leiden University alumni Academic staff of the University of Franeker Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) This page was last edited on 9 May 2025, at 02:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adriaan Metius 13 languages Add topic

