Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Books included Toggle Books included subsection 1.1 Old Testament (46 books) 1.2 New Testament (27 books) 2 Canon law 3 Principles of translation 4 Catholic English versions 5 Languages with a Catholic translation of the Bible 6 Differences from Catholic lectionaries 7 Differences from other Christian Bibles 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle the table of contents Catholic Bible 11 languages العربية Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Português Simple English Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic Church canon of Bible books The prologue of the Gospel of John , Sixto-Clementine Vulgate , 1922 edition Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e The term Catholic Bible can be understood in two ways. More generally, it can refer to a Christian Bible that includes the whole 73-book canon recognized by the Catholic Church , including some of the deuterocanonical books (and parts of books) of the Old Testament which are in the Greek Septuagint collection, but which are not present in the Hebrew Masoretic Text collection. More specifically, the term can refer to a version or translation of the Bible which is published with the Catholic Church's approval, in accordance with Catholic canon law . The current official version of the Catholic Church is the Nova Vulgata .

According to the Decretum Gelasianum (a work written by an anonymous scholar between AD 519 and 553), Catholic Church officials cited a list of books of scripture presented as having been made canonical at the Council of Rome (382). Later, the Catholic Church formally affirmed its canon of scripture with the Synod of Hippo (393), followed by a Council of Carthage (397), another Council of Carthage (419), the Council of Florence (1431–1449), and the Council of Trent (1545–1563). The canon consists of 46 books in the Old Testament and 27 books in the New Testament , for a total of 73 books in the Catholic Bible.

[ 1 ] Books included [ edit ] See also: Old Testament § Content , and New Testament § Content The Catholic Bible is composed of 73 books: an Old Testament of 46 books (including 7 deuterocanonical books and additional deuterocanonical content in 2 books) and a New Testament of 27 books.

Old Testament (46 books) [ edit ] The 7 deuterocanonical books are indicated by an asterisk (*) and the 2 books with additional deuterocanonical material by a plus sign (+) Pentateuch (5) : Genesis , Exodus , Leviticus , Numbers , Deuteronomy Historical books (16) : Joshua , Judges , Ruth , 1 Samuel , 2 Samuel , 1 Kings , 2 Kings , 1 Chronicles , 2 Chronicles , Ezra , Nehemiah , Tobit (*), Judith (*), Esther (+), 1 Maccabees (*), 2 Maccabees (*) Poetic Books (7) : Job , Psalms , Proverbs , Ecclesiastes , Song of Songs , Wisdom of Solomon (*), Sirach (*) Prophetic books (18) : Isaiah , Jeremiah , Lamentations , Baruch (*), Ezekiel , Daniel (+), Hosea , Joel , Amos , Obadiah , Jonah , Micah , Nahum , Habakkuk , Zephaniah , Haggai , Zechariah , Malachi The Sixto-Clementine Vulgate and the original Douay–Rheims Bible also included in an appendix three books whose canonicity was questioned: 1 Esdras , 2 Esdras , and Prayer of Manasseh .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] New Testament (27 books) [ edit ] The Gospels (4) : Matthew , Mark , Luke , John Historical book (1) : Acts of the Apostles Pauline epistles (13) : Romans , 1 Corinthians , 2 Corinthians , Galatians , Ephesians , Philippians , Colossians , 1 Thessalonians , 2 Thessalonians , 1 Timothy , 2 Timothy , Titus , Philemon Hebrews (1) General epistles (7) : James , 1 Peter , 2 Peter , 1 John , 2 John , 3 John , Jude Prophetic book (1) : Apocalypse of John Canon law [ edit ] Main article: Canon law of the Catholic Church The term "Catholic Bible" also refers to a Bible published in accordance with the prescriptions of Catholic canon law , which states: Books of the sacred scriptures cannot be published unless the Apostolic See or the conference of bishops has approved them. For the publication of their translations into the vernacular, it is also required that they be approved by the same authority and provided with necessary and sufficient annotations.
With the permission of the Conference of Bishops, Catholic members of the Christian faithful in collaboration with separated brothers and sisters can prepare and publish translations of the sacred scriptures provided with appropriate annotations.

[ 4 ] — Canon 825 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law Principles of translation [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Without diminishing the authority of the texts of the books of Scripture in the original languages, the Council of Trent declared the Vulgate the official translation of the Bible for the Latin Church , but did not forbid the making of translations directly from the original languages.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ronald Knox , the author of what has been called the Knox Bible , a formal equivalence mode bible, wrote: "When I talk about translating the Bible, I mean translating the Vulgate." [ 7 ] Today, the version of the Bible that is used in official documents in Latin is the Nova Vulgata , a revision of the Vulgate.

[ 8 ] The original Bible text is, according to Catholics, "written by the inspired author himself and has more authority and greater weight than any, even the very best, translation whether ancient or modern".

[ 9 ] The principles expounded in Pope Pius XII 's encyclical Divino afflante Spiritu regarding exegesis or interpretation, as in commentaries on the Bible, apply also to the preparation of a translation. These include the need for familiarity with the original languages and other cognate languages, the study of ancient codices and even papyrus fragments of the text and the application to them of textual criticism, "to insure that the sacred text be restored as perfectly as possible, be purified from the corruptions due to the carelessness of the copyists and be freed, as far as may be done, from glosses and omissions, from the interchange and repetition of words and from all other kinds of mistakes, which are wont to make their way gradually into writings handed down through many centuries".

[ 10 ] A Catholic Bible, therefore, contains a translation of scripture that valid Church authorities have found to be in conformity with Catholic teaching and have also approved for use by Catholics for personal prayer and study or, in some cases, also in liturgy. This approval is typically indicated by the presence of an imprimatur . However, in the interest of collaborating with other Christian traditions in joint translation projects, the Dicastery for Promoting Christian Unity states: In some circumstances, it may be wise to consider a preface including a joint recommendation by ecclesiastical authorities instead of a formal nihil obstat and imprimatur.

[ 11 ] — Guidelines for Interconfessional Cooperation in Translating the Bible, section 2.8 Catholic English versions [ edit ] The following are English versions of the Bible that correspond to the description above and canon law: Abbreviation Name Date DRB Douay–Rheims Bible 1582, 1609, 1610 [ a ] DRB Douay–Rheims Bible Challoner Revision 1749–1752 CB Confraternity Bible 1941 [ b ] Knox Knox Bible 1950 KLNT Kleist – Lilly New Testament 1956 [ c ] RSV Revised Standard Version - Oxford Annotated Bible 1965 [ 13 ] RSV–CE Revised Standard Version Catholic Edition 1966 JB Jerusalem Bible 1966 NEB New English Bible 1970 [ 14 ] NAB New American Bible 1970 TLB–CE The Living Bible Catholic Edition 1971 NJB New Jerusalem Bible 1985 CCB Christian Community Bible 1988 REB Revised English Bible 1989 [ 15 ] [ unreliable source?

] NRSV–CE New Revised Standard Version Catholic Edition 1993 GNT–CE Good News Translation Catholic Edition [ d ] 1993 RSV–2CE Revised Standard Version, Second Catholic Edition 2006 CTS–NCB CTS New Catholic Bible 2007 [ e ] NABRE New American Bible Revised Edition 2011/1986 (OT/NT) NLT-CE New Living Translation Catholic Edition [ 17 ] 2015 ESV-CE English Standard Version Catholic Edition [ 18 ] 2017 NCB New Catholic Bible (St. Joseph New Catholic Bible) [ f ] 2019 [ 20 ] RNJB Revised New Jerusalem Bible [ 21 ] 2019 In 2013, The Message - Catholic / Ecumenical Edition was also published, with the deuterocanonical books translated by a Catholic scholar, William Griffin.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Languages with a Catholic translation of the Bible [ edit ] Precise details of how many languages a full Catholic version of the Bible has been translated into that correspond to the description above and canon law are hard to establish but by 2025 the Global Bible Catalogue contained over 1200 entries in 191 languages for Bibles that included deuterocanonical books.

[ 24 ] Recent translations include a translation in both official written languages of Norway, Bokmål and Nynorsk, [ 25 ] and Kibeembe in the Republic of Congo, [ 26 ] both published in 2024.

Differences from Catholic lectionaries [ edit ] Lectionaries for use in the liturgy differ somewhat in text from the Bible versions on which they are based. Many liturgies, including the Roman , omit some verses in the biblical readings that they use.

[ 27 ] Another difference concerns the usage of the Tetragrammaton .

Yahweh appears in some Bible translations such as the Jerusalem Bible (1966) throughout the Old Testament. Long-standing Jewish and Christian tradition holds that the name is not to be spoken in worship or printed in liturgical texts out of reverence.

[ 16 ] [ 28 ] A 2008 letter from the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments explicitly forbids the use of the name in worship texts, stating: "For the translation of the biblical text in modern languages, intended for the liturgical usage of the Church, what is already prescribed by n. 41 of the Instruction Liturgiam authenticam is to be followed; that is, the divine tetragrammaton is to be rendered by the equivalent of Adonai / Kyrios ; Lord, Signore, Seigneur, Herr, Señor, etc." [ 16 ] Currently, [ when?

] there is only one lectionary reported to be in use corresponding exactly to an in-print Catholic Bible translation: the Ignatius Press lectionary based on the Revised Standard Version, Second Catholic (or Ignatius) Edition (RSV-2CE) approved for liturgical use in the Antilles [ 29 ] and by former Anglicans in the personal ordinariates .

[ 30 ] In 2007 the Catholic Truth Society published the "CTS New Catholic Bible", consisting of the original 1966 Jerusalem Bible text revised to match its use in lectionaries throughout most English-speaking countries, in conformity with the directives of the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments [ 16 ] [ 28 ] and the Pontifical Biblical Commission .

[ 31 ] In 2012, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops "announced a plan to revise the New Testament of the New American Bible Revised Edition so a single version can be used for individual prayer, catechesis and liturgy" in the United States.

[ 32 ] After developing a plan and budget for the revision project, work began in 2013 with the creation of an editorial board made up of five people from the Catholic Biblical Association (CBA). The revision is now underway and, after the necessary approvals from the bishops and the Vatican, is expected to be done around the year 2025.

[ 33 ] Differences from other Christian Bibles [ edit ] The contents page for a complete 80‑book Bible in the King James Version , listing "The Books of the Old Testament", "The Books called Apocrypha", and "The Books of the New Testament" Bibles used by Catholics differ in the number and order of books from those typically found in bibles used by Protestants , as Catholic bibles retain in their canon seven books that are regarded as non-canonical in Protestantism (though regarding them as non-canonical, many Protestant Bibles traditionally include these books and others as an intertestamental section known as the Apocrypha , totaling to an 80 book Bible , e.g. the King James Version with Apocrypha ).

[ 34 ] As such, its canon of Old Testament texts is somewhat larger than that in translations used by Protestants, which are typically based exclusively on the shorter Hebrew and Aramaic Masoretic Text .

[ 35 ] On the other hand, its canon, which does not accept all the books that are included in the Septuagint, [ 36 ] is shorter than that of some churches of Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy , which recognize other books as sacred scripture. According to the Greek Orthodox Church, "The translation of the Seventy [the Septuagint] was for the Church the Apostolic Bible, to which both the Lord and His disciples refer. [...] It enjoys divine authority and prestige as the Bible of the indivisible Church of the first eight centuries. It constitutes the Old Testament, the official text of our Orthodox Church and remains the authentic text by which the official translations of the Old Testament of the other sister Orthodox Churches were made; it was the divine instrument of pre-Christ evangelism and was the basis of Orthodox Theology." [ 37 ] The Greek Orthodox Church generally considers Psalm 151 to be part of the Book of Psalms , the Prayer of Manasseh as the final chapter of 2 Chronicles , and accepts the "books of the Maccabees" as four in number, but generally places 4 Maccabees in an appendix.

[ 38 ] [ g ] The Bible of the Tewahedo Churches differs from the Western and Greek Orthodox Bibles in the order, naming, and chapter/verse division of some of the books. The Ethiopian "narrow" biblical canon includes 81 books altogether: The 27 books of the New Testament; the Old Testament books found in the Septuagint and that are accepted by the Eastern Orthodox (more numerous than the Catholic deuterocanonical books); [ h ] and in addition Enoch , Jubilees , 1 Esdras , 2 Esdras , Rest of the Words of Baruch and 3 books of Meqabyan . A "broader" Ethiopian New Testament canon includes 4 books of "Sinodos" (church practices), 2 "Books of Covenant", "Ethiopic Clement", and "Ethiopic Didascalia" ( Apostolic Church-Ordinances ). This "broader" canon is sometimes said to include with the Old Testament an 8-part history of the Jews based on the writings of Titus Flavius Josephus , and known as "Pseudo-Josephus" or "Joseph ben Gurion" ( Yosēf walda Koryon ).

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Biblical canon Chapters and verses of the Bible Christian biblical canons Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Council of Trent Dei verbum Divino afflante Spiritu Dynamic and formal equivalence Encyclopaedia Biblica International Commission on English in the Liturgy Liturgiam authenticam Pontifical Biblical Commission Protestant Bible Second Vatican Council Notes [ edit ] ^ The New Testament was published in 1582, the Old Testament in two volumes, one in 1609, the other in 1610. The Old Testament was followed by three Apocrypha books which are in the appendix of the Clementine Vulgate ; Prayer of Manasseh , 3 Esdras , and 4 Esdras .

[ 12 ] ^ NT released in 1941. The OT contained material from the Challoner Revision until the entire OT was completed in 1969. This Old Testament became the basis for the 1970 NAB ^ New Testament only; Gospels by James Kleist, rest by Joseph Lilly.

^ Formerly known as the Today's English Version ^ The Jerusalem Bible except for the Book of Psalms, which is replaced by the Grail Psalms, and with the word "Yahweh" altered to "the Lord", as directed by the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments for Bibles intended to be used in the liturgy.

[ 16 ] ^ Approved by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines [ 19 ] ^ There are differences from Western usage in the naming of some books (see, for instance, Esdras#Naming conventions ).

^ See Deuterocanonical books#In Eastern Orthodoxy References [ edit ] ^ New Catholic Encyclopedia (Vol. 3 ed.). Catholic University of America. 2003. pp. 20, 26.

ISBN 978-0-7876-4004-0 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Our Beans: The Vulgate Appendix" . 23 July 2018.

^ "1610 A.D. Douay Old Testament, 1582 A.D. Rheims New Testament" .

^ "Code of Canon Law - Book III - The teaching function of the Church (Cann. 822-833)" .

www.vatican.va .

^ Pope Pius XII.

" Divino afflante Spiritu , 20–22" .

Holy See . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ Akin, James.

"Uncomfortable Facts About The Douay–Rheims" .

CatholicCulture.org . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ Knox, Ronald Arbuthnott (1949).

On Englishing the Bible . Burns, Oates. p. 1.

^ "Scripturarum Thesarurus, Apostolic Constitution, 25 April 1979, John Paul II" . Vatican: The Holy See . Retrieved 19 December 2013 .

^ Divino Afflante Spiritu , 16 ^ Divino Afflante Spiritu , 17 ^ "Guidelines for Interconfessional Cooperation in Translating the Bible, section 2.8" (PDF) .

www.christianunity.va .

^ "1610 A.D. Douay Old Testament, 1582 A.D. Rheims New Testament" . Retrieved 5 April 2023 – via Internet Archive.

^ "The Bible: One for All at Last" . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ "Guest Post: The Revised English Bible (Part 3)" . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ Marc (22 August 2018).

"A Few Days with the Revised English Bible: Part 1" .

Catholic Bible Talk (Blog) . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ a b c d Arinze, Francis; Ranjith, Malcolm.

"Letter to the Bishops Conferences on The Name of God" .

Bible Research: Internet Resources for Students of Scripture . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ "Launch of the new living translation catholic edition" .

c-b-f.org . Retrieved 15 March 2020 .

^ "Bengaluru: Catholic edition of ESV Bible launched" .

www.daijiworld.com .

^ "First Look: New Catholic Bible (NCB) from Catholic Book Publishing Company – Catholic Bible Talk" . 8 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 March 2021 .

^ "ISBN 9781947070417 - St. Joseph New Catholic Bible" .

isbnsearch.org . Retrieved 7 March 2021 .

^ "The Revised New Jerusalem Bible: Study Edition" .

dltbooks.com . Retrieved 18 November 2019 .

^ "The Message - CatholicEcumenical Edition" .

The Message - CatholicEcumenical Edition . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ "Catholics get 'The Message' in new edition of Bible" .

National Catholic Reporter . 26 July 2014 . Retrieved 17 January 2020 .

Griffin said he used the Catholic-approved New Latin Vulgate as the basis for his translations.

^ "Global Bible Catalogue" . Retrieved 21 April 2025 .

^ Wimmer, AC (18 March 2024).

"Norwegian Bishop Celebrates Nordic Country's First Catholic Bible" .

National Catholic Register . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ "Beembe Bible Produced in the Republic of Congo" .

United Bible Societies . 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 21 March 2025 .

^ Booneau, Normand (1998).

The Sunday Lectionary . Liturgical Press. pp. 50–±51.

ISBN 978-0-8146-2457-9 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ a b Gilligan, Michael.

"Use of Yahweh in Church Songs" .

American Catholic Press . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ McNamara, Edward.

"Which English Translation to Use Abroad" .

Eternal Word Television Network . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ Burnham, Andrew.

"The Liturgy of the Ordinariates: Ordinary, Extraordinary, or Tertium Quid? [PDF]" (PDF) .

Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham . Retrieved 16 January 2015 .

^ Roxanne King (15 October 2008).

"No 'Yahweh' in liturgies is no problem for the archdiocese, officials say" .

Denver Catholic Register . Archdiocese of Denver. Archived from the original on 4 November 2013 . Retrieved 28 September 2017 .

^ Bauman, Michelle.

"New American Bible to be revised into single translation" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 14 January 2015 .

^ "NAB New Testament Revision Project" .

Catholic Biblical Association of America . Archived from the original on 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 21 January 2015 .

^ King James Version Apocrypha, Reader's Edition . Hendrickson Publishers. 2009. p. viii.

ISBN 978-1-59856-464-8 .

The version of 1611, following its mandate to revise and standardize the English Bible tradition, included the fourteen (or fifteen) books of the Apocrypha in a section between the Old and New Testaments (see the chart on page vi). Because of the Thirty-Nine Articles, there was no reason for King James' translators to include any comments as to the status of these books, as had the earlier English translators and editors.

^ Meade, John (7 November 2021).

"Why Are Protestant and Catholic Bibles Different?" .

Text & Canon Institute .

^ Pietersma, Albert ; Wright, Benjamin G. (2007).

A New English Translation of the Septuagint . Oxford University Press. pp.

v– vi.

ISBN 978-0-19-974397-1 . Retrieved 22 January 2015 .

^ Mihăilă, Alexandru (2018).

"The Septuagint and the Masoretic Text in the Orthodox Church(es)" .

Review of Ecumenical Studies Sibiu .

10 : 35.

doi : 10.2478/ress-2018-0003 .

S2CID 171863532 .

^ McDonald and Sanders' The Canon Debate , Appendix C: Lists and Catalogs of Old Testament Collections, Table C-4: Current Canons of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, page 589=590.

^ Cowley, R. W.

"The Biblical Canon Of The Ethiopian Orthodox Church Today" .

www.islamic-awareness.org . Retrieved 25 August 2019 .

^ "Fathers" . Christian Classics Ethereal Library (CCEL). Archived from the original on 17 September 2009 . Retrieved 10 March 2014 .

v t e Catholic Church and the Bible Background Biblical canon ( Canon of Trent and Deuterocanonical books ) Septuagint Vetus Latina Vulgate ( Sixtine Vulgate and Sixto-Clementine Vulgate ) Post-Vatican II theology Events Council of Rome (382) Synod of Hippo (393) Councils of Carthage (397 and 419) Council of Florence (1431) Council of Trent (1545) Documents Prologus Galeatus Gelasian Decree Providentissimus Deus Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Divino afflante Spiritu Dei verbum ( Second Vatican Council ) Holy See Pontifical Biblical Institute ( Biblica · Elenchus of Biblica · Pontifical Biblical Institute Library ) Pontifical Biblical Commission Organisations École Biblique ( Revue Biblique ) Studium Biblicum Franciscanum ( Liber Annuus ) Catholic Biblical Association ( Catholic Biblical Quarterly ) Bible portal · Catholicism portal v t e The Bible Hebrew Bible / Old Testament - New Testament Overview Biblical authority Biblical canon Biblical criticism Biblical studies Bible translations Chronology of the Bible Historicity of the Bible Topics Alcohol in the Bible Allegorical interpretation of the Bible Biblical hermeneutics Criticism of the Bible Ethics in the Bible Internal consistency of the Bible Muhammad and the Bible The Bible and homosexuality The Bible and humor The Bible and slavery The Bible and violence Women in the Bible Hebrew Bible Commentaries Covenant Crime and punishment Capital crimes Events Homosexuality Prayer Rape Sex Warfare Witchcraft and divination Christian Bible Catholic Protestant Canons Development Outline • Category • Portal • WikiProject v t e Part of a series on the Biblical canon Background Development of the Hebrew Bible canon Samaritan Pentateuch Council of Jamnia Christian canons Christian biblical canons Catholic Bible Protestant Bible Orthodox Tewahedo Bible Development of the Christian biblical canon Synod of Hippo Prologus Galeatus Gelasian Decree Council of Trent Thirty-nine Articles Westminster Confession of Faith Synod of Jerusalem Bible portal · Christianity portal v t e Books of the Bible Old Testament Hebrew Bible (protocanon) Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth 1–2 Samuel 1–2 Kings 1–2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Deuterocanon or apocrypha Catholic , Eastern Orthodox & others Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Susanna Song of the Three Children Bel and the Dragon Eastern Orthodox & others 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Syriac Peshitta Psalms 152–155 2 Baruch Beta Israel Testaments of the Three Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob New Testament Canon Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude Revelation Antilegomena Acts of Paul Apocalypse of Peter Didache Gospel of the Hebrews Epistle of Barnabas 1 Clement 2 Clement 3 Corinthians Shepherd of Hermas Subdivisions Chapters and verses Pentateuch Historical books Wisdom books ( Poetic Books ) Prophetic books Major prophets Minor prophets Gospels List Synoptic Epistles Pauline Johannine Pastoral Catholic Apocalyptic literature Development Authorship Jewish canon Intertestamental period Christian canon Old Testament canon New Testament canon Antilegomena Apocrypha Jewish Old Testament New Testament Pseudepigrapha Old Testament Dating the Bible Manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Samaritan Pentateuch Septuagint Targum Diatessaron Muratorian fragment Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Masoretic Text New Testament manuscript categories New Testament papyri New Testament uncials Related Bible version debate English Bible translations Other books referenced in the Bible Additional Scriptures Studies Biblical and Quranic narratives Synod of Hippo Textual criticism Category Portal WikiProject Articles related to Catholic Bible v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Portals : Bible Catholicism Authority control databases International VIAF National Israel 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catholic_Bible&oldid=1305939790 " Categories : Catholic bibles Bible versions and translations Catholic Church Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2024 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catholic Bible 11 languages Add topic

