Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evaluating the potential for adverse effects 2 Lactation risk categories Toggle Lactation risk categories subsection 2.1 L1 Compatible 2.2 L2 Probably Compatible 2.3 L3 Probably Compatible 2.4 L4 Possibly Hazardous 2.5 L5 Hazardous 3 Over the counter medications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Breastfeeding and medications 5 languages العربية Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Madhurâ മലയാളം Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Breastfeeding and medications is the description of the medications that can be used by a breastfeeding mother, and the balance between maternal health and the safety of the breastfeeding infant.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Medications, when administered to breastfeeding mothers, almost always are transferred to breast milk, albeit usually in small quantities.

[ 3 ] The degree of impact on the nursing infant varies, with many medications posing minimal risk. Nonetheless, informed decision-making and professional guidance is needed.

The National Institutes of Health (NIH) maintains a database, which contains information on drugs and other chemicals to which breastfeeding mothers may be exposed. It includes information on the levels of such substances in breast milk and infant blood, and the possible adverse effects in the nursing infant. Suggested therapeutic alternatives to those drugs are provided, where appropriate.

[ 4 ] Some medications and herbal supplements can be of concern. This can be because the drug can accumulate in breastmilk or have effects on the infant and the mother. Those medications of concern are those medications used to treat substance and alcohol addiction. Other medications of concern are those that are used in smoking cessation . Pain medications, such as opioids among others, and antidepressants need evaluation.

[ 5 ] Evaluating the potential for adverse effects [ edit ] The determination of the safety of a medication can be evaluated by considering the following: If and how much of the drug is present in breastmilk.

[ 2 ] The age and maturity of the infant.

Full term infants are better able to metabolize medications than premature infants .

[ citation needed ] The weight of the infant.

The amount and percentage of breastmilk consumed by the infant. An infant taking solid foods with breastfeeding will receive a lower dose of medication.

The general health of the infant and the general health of the mother.

The nature of the mother's illness, if present.

The general information about the drug other literature documenting studies related to the drug and breastfeeding.

The duration of the drug therapy.

Is the drug short-acting? A short-acting form of the drug may be a better choice for a breastfeeding mother rather than a longer-acting form that stays in the mother's system for a longer period.

How is the medication being given?

Does the drug interfere with lactation?

[ 1 ] Lactation risk categories [ edit ] Drugs can be categorised in one of five categories to determine how safe they are for breastfeeding: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] L1 Compatible [ edit ] "Drug which has been taken by a large number of breastfeeding mothers without any observed increase in adverse effects in the infant. Controlled studies in breastfeeding women fail to demonstrate a risk to the infant and the possibility of harm to the breastfeeding infant is remote; or the product is not orally bioavailable in an infant." [ 6 ] L2 Probably Compatible [ edit ] "Drug which has been studied in a limited number of breastfeeding women without an increase in adverse effects in the infant. And/or, the evidence of a demonstrated risk which is likely to follow use of this medication in a breastfeeding woman is remote." [ 6 ] L3 Probably Compatible [ edit ] "There are no controlled studies in breastfeeding women, however the risk of untoward effects to a breastfed infant is possible; or, controlled studies show only minimal non-threatening adverse effects. Drugs should be given only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the infant. (New medications that have absolutely no published data are automatically categorized in this category, regardless of how safe they may be.)" [ 6 ] L4 Possibly Hazardous [ edit ] "There is positive evidence of risk to a breastfed infant or to breastmilk production, but the benefits of use in breastfeeding mothers may be acceptable despite the risk to the infant (e.g. if the drug is needed in a life-threatening situation or for a serious disease for which safer drugs cannot be used or are ineffective)." [ 6 ] L5 Hazardous [ edit ] "Studies in breastfeeding mothers have demonstrated that there is significant and documented risk to the infant based on human experience, or it is a medication that has a high risk of causing significant damage to an infant. The risk of using the drug in breastfeeding women clearly outweighs any possible benefit from breastfeeding. The drug is contraindicated in women who are breastfeeding an infant." [ 6 ] Over the counter medications [ edit ] Over the counter medications are those medications that do not require a prescription to purchase in the US. Medications that require a prescription to purchase in the US may be available in other countries without a prescription. The following guidelines are recommended: taking oral medications after breastfeeding rather than before will allow some of the medication to leave the mother's body through her kidneys between nursings.

in most women without kidney disease, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and paracetamol (acetaminophen) are used safely.

aspirin can cause rashes and even cause bleeding in infants.

limit the use of antihistamines for long periods of time. These anti-allergy medications can cause crying, sleep problems, fussiness, excessive sleepiness in babies. Antihistamines have an effect on the amount of milk the body produces and decrease the supply.

carefully observe the infant for changes or side effects when first taking a medication to watch for side effects. Side effects indicating that the medication is having an effect on the baby is difficulty breathing, rash and other questionable changes that occurred after the medication was started by the mother.

many times other young children are in the home and keeping these over the counter medications out of their reach is a safe practice.

[ 10 ] Other substances or chemicals have been evaluated regarding their safe use during pregnancy. Hair dye or solutions used for a 'permanent' do not pass to breastmilk. No adverse reports of using oral antihistamines and breastfeeding are found. Some of the older antihistamines used by a nursing mother can cause drowsiness in the infant. This may be a concern if the infant misses feedings by sleeping instead of nursing.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "The La Leche League InternationalI - Medications and Breastfeeding" . La leche League International . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

^ a b Spencer, Jeanne P.; III, Luis S. Gonzalez; Barnhart, Donna (1 July 2001).

"Medications in the Breast-Feeding Mother" .

American Family Physician .

64 (1): 119– 26.

PMID 11456429 .

^ "Breastfeeding" (PDF) . Office on Women's Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 May 2017 . Retrieved 20 July 2017 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) . 2006.

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Breastfeeding and Medication" . American Association of Pediatrics. Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 .

^ a b c d e f Hale, Thomas Wright; Rowe, Hilary E. (2016-12-30).

Medications and Mothers' Milk 2017 (17th ed.). New York: Springer Publishing Co Inc.

ISBN 9780826128584 .

ASIN 0826128580 .

^ "Medications and Mothers Milk Online" .

www.medsmilk.com . Archived from the original on 2018-01-23 . Retrieved 2018-03-24 .

^ "Lactation Drug Risk Categories" .

CMBC Medical Reference . Retrieved 2018-03-24 .

^ Riordan, Jan (2005).

Breastfeeding and Human Lactation . Jones & Bartlett Learning. p. 138.

ISBN 9780763745851 .

^ staff, familydoctor.org editorial (1 September 2005).

"OTC Medicines and Pregnancy - familydoctor.org" .

^ "Drugs in Breastmilk -Is It Safe?" . The Breasfeeding Network - Britains Nonprofit Breastfeeding Support Organization. Archived from the original on 7 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 August 2017 .

External links [ edit ] La Leche League International US Clinical trials related to breastfeeding v t e Breastfeeding Anatomy, physiology and immunology Anti inflammatory agents in breast milk Areola Areolar gland (gland of Montgomery) Breast Breast anatomy Breast crawl Breast milk Breastfeeding and medications Dysphoric milk ejection reflex Frenulum of tongue Galactose Human milk oligosaccharide Hypothalamic–pituitary–prolactin axis Latching on Lactation suppression Lactiferous duct Lactose Milk Overactive let-down Oxytocin Passive immunity Prolactin Prolactin modulator Colostrum Lactation Nipple Mammary gland Mammary alveoli Mammary lobule Disorders and difficulties Blocked milk duct Breastfeeding difficulties Breast engorgement Low milk supply Fissure of the nipple Inverted nipple Cracked nipple Mastitis Nipple bleb Nipple vasospasm Neonatal jaundice Nipple pain in breastfeeding Breastfeeding infertility Breastfeeding and HIV Prolactinoma Breastfeeding and mental health Culture and support Breastfeeding advocacy Breastfeeding in art Breastfeeding in Islam Breastfeeding in public Breastfeeding in the United States Breastfeeding organizations Breastfeeding promotion Child's Right to Nurse Act Diana West (lactation consultant) History and culture of breastfeeding Human-animal breastfeeding Human milk bank Human milk banking in North America International Breastfeeding Symbol Jack Newman (doctor) International Breast Milk Project La Leche League Lactation room Lactivism Mothers' rights Pat Shelly Amy Spangler Mary Rose Tully World Breastfeeding Week Roles Doula Midwifery Lactation consultant Lactation counselor List of breastfeeding activists Wet nurse Equipment used with breastfeeding Breast pump Nipple shield Nursing bra Nursing chair Supplemental nursing system Other topics Baby-led weaning Weaning Extended breastfeeding Nipple confusion Breastfeeding and fertility Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding contraindications Breastfeeding and mental health v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud v t e Breast disease Inflammation Mastitis Nonpuerperal mastitis Granulomatous mastitis Subareolar abscess Physiological changes and conditions Adipomastia (lipomastia, pseudogynecomastia) Amastia Anisomastia Breast atrophy Breast engorgement Breast hypertrophy Duct ectasia of breast Chronic cystic mastitis Dense breast tissue Gynecomastia Mammoplasia Micromastia Nipple Cracked nipples Inverted nipple Nipple discharge Galactorrhea Nipple pigmentation Masses Breast cyst Breast hematoma Breast lump Galactocele Pseudoangiomatous stromal hyperplasia Other Amazia Fat necrosis Pain Ptosis Tension v t e Pathology of pregnancy , childbirth , and the puerperium Pregnancy Pregnancy with abortive outcome Abortion Ectopic pregnancy Abdominal Cervical Heterotopic Interstitial Ovarian Rudimentary horn Embryo loss Fetal resorption Molar pregnancy Miscarriage Stillbirth Edema , proteinuria , and hypertensive disorders Gestational hypertension Pre-eclampsia HELLP syndrome Eclampsia Other, predominantly related to pregnancy Digestive system Acute fatty liver of pregnancy Gestational diabetes Hepatitis E Hyperemesis gravidarum Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy Integumentary system / dermatoses of pregnancy Gestational pemphigoid Impetigo herpetiformis Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy Linea nigra Prurigo gestationis Pruritic folliculitis of pregnancy Pruritic urticarial papules and plaques of pregnancy (PUPPP) Stretch marks Nervous system Chorea gravidarum Blood Gestational thrombocytopenia Pregnancy-induced hypercoagulability Maternal care related to the fetus and amniotic cavity amniotic fluid Oligohydramnios Polyhydramnios Braxton Hicks contractions chorion / amnion Chorioamnionitis Chorionic hematoma Constriction ring syndrome Monoamniotic twins Prelabor rupture of membranes Obstetrical bleeding Antepartum placenta Circumvallate placenta Monochorionic twins Placenta accreta Placenta praevia Placental abruption Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome Labor Amniotic fluid embolism Cephalopelvic disproportion Obstructed labour Shoulder dystocia Fetal distress Locked twins Nuchal cord Obstetrical bleeding Postpartum Pain management during childbirth placenta Placenta accreta Preterm birth Postmature birth Umbilical cord prolapse Uterine inversion Uterine rupture Vasa praevia Uterine atony Puerperal Breastfeeding difficulties Low milk supply Cracked nipples Breast engorgement Childbirth-related post-traumatic stress disorder Pubic symphysis diastasis Postpartum bleeding Peripartum cardiomyopathy Postpartum depression Postpartum infections Postpartum psychosis Postpartum thyroiditis Puerperal mastitis Other Concomitant conditions Diabetes mellitus Systemic lupus erythematosus Thyroid disorders Maternal death Sexual activity during pregnancy Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Breastfeeding_and_medications&oldid=1301003256 " Categories : Breastfeeding Human female endocrine system Pathology of pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 15:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Breastfeeding and medications 5 languages Add topic

