Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Early life 3 Career 4 Legacy 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Military science 5.2 Mathematics 5.3 Astronomy 5.4 Agriculture 6 Family 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Xu Guangqi 28 languages བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese intellectual of the Ming dynasty In this Chinese name , the family name is Xú (徐) .

Servant of God Xu Guangqi 徐光啓 Portrait of Xu Guangqi Minister of Rites In office 1630–1633 Preceded by Ma Zhiqi Succeeded by Li Sunchen Grand Secretary of the Wenyuan Library In office 1632–1633 Senior Grand Secretary Zhou Tingru Wen Tiren Personal details Born April 24, 1562 Shanghai County , Songjiang , South Zhili , Ming Empire [ 1 ] Died November 8, 1633 (1633-11-08) (aged 71) [ 2 ] Beijing , Shuntian , North Zhili , Ming Empire Resting place Guangqi Park , Xujiahui , Xuhui District , Shanghai , China Nationality Chinese Spouse Wu [ 3 ] Relations Candida Xu (granddaughter) [ 4 ] (Xu Zhun) [ 4 ] (Xu Maheux) [ 4 ] Children Xu Ji (徐驥) Parent(s) Xu Sicheng (徐思誠), father Education Jinshi Degree (1604) [ 5 ] Occupation scholar-official ( Minister of Rites and Grand Secretary ),  agronomist, astronomer, mathematician, writer Known for Three Pillars of Chinese Catholicism Chinese translation of Euclid's Elements Chongzhen calendar Complete Treatise on Agriculture Baptismal name Paul Xu Chinese name Traditional Chinese 徐 光 啓 Simplified Chinese 徐 光 启 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xú Guāngqǐ Wade–Giles Hsü 2 Kuang 1 -ch‘i 3 IPA [ɕy̌ kwáŋtɕʰì] Courtesy name Chinese 子 先 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zǐxiān Wade–Giles Tzu 3 -hsien 1 Second alternative Chinese name Chinese 玄 扈 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xuánhù Wade–Giles Hsüan-hu Third alternative Chinese name Chinese 文 定 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Wéndìng Wade–Giles Wên 2 -ting 4 Fourth alternative Chinese name Traditional Chinese 保祿 Simplified Chinese 保禄 Literal meaning Paulus Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Bǎolù Wade–Giles Pao 3 -lu 4 Servant of God Xu Guangqi Xu Guangqi with Matteo Ricci (left) From Athanasius Kircher 's China Illustrata , 1667 Born April 24, 1562 Shanghai, China Died November 8, 1633 Beijing, China Xu Guangqi or Hsü Kuang-ch'i (April 24, 1562 – November 8, 1633), also known by his baptismal name Paul or Paul Siu , was a Chinese agronomist, astronomer, mathematician, politician , and writer during the late Ming dynasty .

[ 6 ] Xu was appointed by the Chinese Emperor in 1629 to be the leader of the Shixian calendar reform, which he embarked on with the assistance of Jesuits.

[ 7 ] Xu was a colleague and collaborator of the Italian Jesuits Matteo Ricci and Sabatino de Ursis and assisted their translation of several classic Western texts into Chinese, including part of Euclid 's Elements . He was also the author of the Nong Zheng Quan Shu , a treatise on agriculture.

He is one of the " Three Pillars of Chinese Catholicism ". The Roman Catholic Church considers him a Servant of God , [ 8 ] one of the stages towards formal sainthood.

[ 9 ] On April 15, 2011, Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi announced the start of a beatification process for Xu Guangqi, [ 10 ] which has stalled.

[ 11 ] Name [ edit ] Xu Guangqi is the pinyin romanization of the Mandarin Chinese pronunciation of Xu's Chinese name. His name is written Hsü Kuang-ch‘i using the Wade–Giles system. His courtesy name was Zixian and his penname was Xuanhu . In the Jesuits' records, it is the last which is used as his Chinese name, in the form "Siù Hsven Hú".

[ 12 ] At his conversion , he adopted the baptismal name Paul ( Latin : Paulus ). In Chinese, its transcription is employed as a kind of courtesy name (i.e., Xu Baolu) and the Jesuits sometimes referred to him as "Siù Pao Lò" [ 12 ] or Ciù Paulus .

[ 13 ] More often, however, they describe him as "Doctor Paul" ( Latin : Doctor Paulus ; [ 14 ] [ 12 ] Portuguese : Doutor Paulo ), [ 15 ] "Our Paul" ( Latin : noster Paulus ), or "Paul Siu" [ 16 ] or "Ciu".

[ 13 ] [ 12 ] [ 17 ] Early life [ edit ] Xu Guangqi was born in Shanghai in Southern Zhili 's Songjiang Prefecture on April 24, 1562, [ 1 ] under China 's Ming dynasty . At the time, Shanghai was merely a small walled county seat in the old quarter around the present city's Yu Garden . His family, including an older and younger sister, lived in the Taiqing Quarter at the south end of the town. Guangqi's branch of the Xu clan were not related to those who had passed the imperial examinations and joined Shanghai's local gentry .

[ 18 ] His father Xu Sicheng (died c.

1607 ) [ 19 ] had been orphaned at age 5 and seen most of his inheritance lost to "Japanese" pirate raids and insolvent friends in the 1550s.

[ 18 ] At the time of Guangqi's birth, his father worked twenty mu (1¼ ha ) [ 20 ] or less south of the city wall.

[ 21 ] About half of this would have been used to feed the family, [ 22 ] with the rest used to supplement his income from small-scale trading.

[ 18 ] By the time Guangqi was 6, the family had saved enough to send him to a local school, where a later hagiographer records him piously upbraiding his classmates when they spoke of wanting to use their education for wealth or mystical power.

Guangqi supposedly advised, "None of these things is worth doing. If you want to talk about the sort of person you want to become, then it should be to establish yourself and to follow the Way . Bring order to the state and the people. Revere the orthodox and expose the heterodox. Don't waste the chance to be someone who matters in this world." [ 21 ] From 1569 to 1573, the family sent Guangqi to the school at the Buddhist monastery at Longhua .

[ 1 ] It is not recorded, but this school was probably a separate secular and fee-based institution for families too poor to hire private tutors for their sons.

[ 21 ] His mother died on May 8, 1592, and he undertook the ritual mourning period in her honor.

[ 23 ] His whereabouts over the next few years are uncertain but he seems to have failed the provincial exam at Beijing in 1594, after the mourning period was over.

[ 23 ] Career [ edit ] In 1596, he moved to Xunzhou (now Guiping) in Guangxi to assist its prefect Zhao Fengyu , a Shanghai native who had passed the juren exams in 1555.

[ 23 ] The next year, he traveled to Beijing in the spring and passed its provincial exam , becoming a juren .

[ 23 ] He seems to have stayed there for the imperial exam the next year, but failed to pass. He then returned to Shanghai around April, turning his attention to the study of military and agricultural subjects.

[ 23 ] The next year he studied under Cheng Jiasui .

[ 23 ] He first met Matteo Ricci , the Italian Jesuit , in Nanjing in March or April 1600.

[ 23 ] He collaborated with Ricci in translating several classic Western texts—most notably the first part of Euclid 's Elements —into Chinese, as well as several Chinese Confucian texts into Latin .

[ 7 ] Ricci's influence led to Xu being baptized as a Roman Catholic in 1603. His descendants remained Catholics or Protestants into the 21st century.

[ citation needed ] From 1607 until 1610, Xu was forced to retire from public office and returned to his home in Shanghai. It was during this time that he experimented with Western-style irrigation methods.

[ 24 ] He also experimented with the cultivation of sweet potatoes , cotton , and the nu zhen tree.

[ 24 ] He was called once more to serve the Chinese bureaucracy, where he rose to a high rank and became known late in his career simply as "The Minister".

[ 7 ] Yet he continued to experiment and learn of new agricultural practices while he served his office, promoting the use of wet-rice in the Northeast China .

[ 24 ] From 1613 until 1620 he often visited Tianjin , where he helped organize self-sufficient military settlements ( tun tian ).

[ 24 ] In 1629, memorials by Xu successfully moved the court to permit the Portuguese captain Gonçalo Teixeira-Correa to bring 10 artillery pieces and 4 "excellent bombards" across China to the capital to demonstrate the effectiveness of Western artillery .

[ 14 ] An earlier demonstration in 1623 had gone disastrously, with an exploding cannon killing one Portuguese artillerist and three Chinese observers, but on this occasion the pieces were accepted and directed to Dengzhou (now Penglai) in Shandong .

[ 25 ] The Christian convert Ignatius Sun , a protégé of Xu's, was governor there [ 26 ] and had also been a strong advocate of modernizing China's military. Together with Captain Teixeira and his translator João Rodrigues , Sun used the pieces to train his troops to oppose the ongoing Manchu invasion . However, Sun's lenient treatment of a 1632 mutiny under Kong Youde and Geng Zhongming permitted them to successfully capture Dengzhou, seize the artillery, and establish an independent power base that eventually joined the Manchus.

[ 26 ] Xu's memorials for clemency were unsuccessful and Sun was court-martialed and executed.

[ 16 ] He held the positions of Minister of Rites ( 禮部尙書 ), overseeing government programs related to culture, education, and foreign affairs, and Deputy Senior Grand Secretary ( 內閣次輔 ), effectively a deputy prime minister for the imperial cabinet.

Johann Adam Schall von Bell stayed with Xu during his final illness in 1633 and oversaw the return of his body to his family in Shanghai.

[ 27 ] There, it was publicly displayed at his villa until 1641, when it was buried "in a time of hardship".

[ 16 ] Legacy [ edit ] See also: Tomb of Xu Guangqi Xu Guangqi's tomb remains the centerpiece of Shanghai's Guangqi Park on Nandan Road ( 南丹路 ), just south of Xujiahui Cathedral .

The 350th anniversary of his death in 1983 was celebrated very publicly, both with ceremonies in Shanghai and a laudatory article in the Beijing Review . The vocal Communist support for these memorials has been seen as signaling support for Deng Xiaoping 's policies of opening up and modernizing China.

[ 28 ] Most Chinese treatments of his life and legacy, however, focus upon his desire for scientific, technological, and political progress and its effect upon Chinese development, whereas Western treatments nearly universally attach great importance to his Christian conversion and identity.

[ 28 ] Works [ edit ] Military science [ edit ] Xu Guangqi wrote a book on military techniques and strategies entitled Mr Xu's Amateur Observations in response to the criticisms he faced for daring discuss military matters in spite of being a mere scholar.

[ 29 ] He frequently cited the Xunzi and Guanzi , and made use of rewards and punishments along the lines of the Legalists , at least in relief activities.

[ 30 ] Xu Guangqi put forward the concept of a "Rich Country and Strong Army" (富國強兵), which would be adopted by Japan for its modernization in the end of the 19th century, under the name Fukoku Kyohei .

Mathematics [ edit ] In 1607, Xu and Ricci translated the first parts of Euclid's Elements (a treatise on mathematics, geometry, and logic) into Chinese. Some Chinese scholars credit Xu as having "started China's enlightenment".

[ 7 ] Astronomy [ edit ] After followers of Xu and Ricci publicly predicted a solar eclipse in 1629, Xu was appointed by the Chongzhen Emperor as the leader of an effort to reform the Chinese calendar . The reform, which constituted the first major collaboration between scientists from Europe and from the Far East, was completed after his death and became known as the Chongzhen calendar .

[ 7 ] It's notable for systematically introducing the concepts and development of European mathematics and astronomy to China for the first time, including extensive translations and references to Euclid's Elements and the works of Nicolaus Copernicus , Johannes Kepler , Galileo Galilei , and Tycho Brahe , whose Tychonic system was used as its main theoretical basis.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Agriculture [ edit ] Xu Guangqi's work on military matters Mr Xu's Amateur Observations Xu Guangqi wrote the Complete Treatise on Agriculture , an outstanding agricultural treatise that followed in the tradition of those such as Wang Zhen (wrote the Wang Zhen Nong Shu of 1313 AD) and Jia Sixia (wrote the Chi Min Yao Shu of 535 AD).

[ 33 ] Like Wang Zhen, Xu lived in troubled times, and was devoted as a patriot to aiding the rural farmers of China.

[ 24 ] His main interests were in irrigation , fertilizers , famine relief, economic crops, and empirical observation with early notions of chemistry .

[ 24 ] It was an enormous written work, some 700,000 written Chinese characters , making it 7 times as large as the work of both Jia Sixia and Wang Zhen.

[ 34 ] Although its final draft was unfinished by Xu Guangqi by the time of his death in 1633, the famous Jiangnan scholar Chen Zilong assembled a group of scholars to edit the draft, publishing it in 1639.

[ 34 ] The topics covered by his book are as follows: [ 34 ] The Fundamentals of Agriculture ( Nong Ben ): quotations from the classics on the importance of encouraging agriculture Field System ( Tian Zhi ): land distribution, field management Agricultural Tasks ( Nong Shi ): clearing land, tilling; also a detailed exposition on settlement schemes Water Control ( Shui Li ): various methods of irrigation, types of irrigation equipment, and the last two chapters devoted to new Western-style irrigation equipment Illustrated Treatise on Agricultural Implements ( Nong Chi Tu Pu ): based largely on Wang Zhen's book of 1313 AD Horticulture ( Shi Yi ): vegetables and fruit Sericulture ( Can Sang ): silk production Further Textile Crops ( Can Sang Guang Lei ): cotton, hemp, etc.

Silviculture ( Chong Chi ): forestry preservation Animal Husbandry (Mu Yang) Culinary Preparations ( Zhi Zao ) Famine Control ( Huang Zheng ): administrative measures, famine flora Family [ edit ] Xu's only son was John Xu [ 16 ] ( t 徐驥 , s 徐 骥 , Xú Jì ), [ 3 ] whose daughter was Candida Xu ( 徐 甘第大 , Xú Gāndìdà ; 1607–1680). A devout Christian, she was recognized as an important patron of Christianity in Jiangnan during the early Qing era. The Jesuit Philippe Couplet , who worked closely with her, composed her biography in Latin. This was published in French translation as A History of the Christian Lady of China, Candide Hiu ( Histoire d'une Dame Chrétienne de la Chine, Candide Hiu ) in 1688.

[ 35 ] Her son was Basil Xu, who served as an official under the Qing .

[ 16 ] Gallery [ edit ] Paul Xu (bottom left) and his granddaughter Candida (bottom right), along with Ricci , Schall , and Verbiest (top row) Xu's statue in Xujiahui , on North Caoxi Road Xu's tomb in Shanghai's Guangqi Park Introduction to Astronomy , translated by Xu Guangqi Portuguese translation of "Doctor Paul"'s letter to the king of Portugal See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal China portal History portal Biography portal Xu Guangqi Memorial Hall Tomb of Xu Guangqi Roman Catholicism in China Jesuit China missions Three Pillars of Chinese Catholicism Shanghainese people History of agriculture Xavier School in San Juan, Metro Manila, the Philippines References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c Dudink (2001) , p.

399 ^ Dudink (2001) , p. 409.

^ a b Dudink (2001) , p.

400 ^ a b c Brockey (2008) , p. 140.

^ Brockey (2008) , p. 59.

^ Hummel, Arthur W. Sr.

, ed. (1943).

"Hsü Kuang-ch'i" .

Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period .

United States Government Printing Office .

^ a b c d e Stone (2007) .

^ Roman Catholic Diocese of Shanghai : 徐光启列品案筹备进程 ^ "In a first, Shanghai-born Ming Dynasty bureaucrat and scientist Xu Guangqi to be beatified" .

Shanghaiist . May 5, 2018.

^ "Church to beatify early China convert in Shanghai" .

UCA News . 2011 . Retrieved May 24, 2018 .

^ "The 29th International Conference of the US-China Catholic Association August 2-4, 2024 DePaul University — Lincoln Park Campus Chicago, IL" .

USCCA . Retrieved August 10, 2024 .

^ a b c d Blue (2001) , p.

48 ^ a b Blue (2001) , p.

33 ^ a b Blue (2001) , p.

44 ^ Vasconcelos (2012) , p.

163 .

^ a b c d e Blue (2001) , p.

45 ^ Blue (2001) , p.

49 ^ a b c Brook (2001) , p.

93 ^ Blue (2001) , p.

35 .

^ Wilkinson (2000) , p.

243 .

^ a b c Brook (2001) , p.

94 ^ Clunas (1996) , p.

40 .

^ a b c d e f g Dudink (2001) , p.

402 ^ a b c d e f Needham (1984) , p. 65.

^ Chan (1976) , p.

1147 .

^ a b Fang (1943) .

^ Blue (2001) , pp.

42–3 .

^ a b Blue (2001) , p.

19 ^ Xu Guangqi Memorial Hall permanent exhibit ^ Smith (2009) , p. 252.

^ "明版《崇祯历书》原貌再现" (in Chinese). Archived from the original on June 2, 2015 . Retrieved May 28, 2010 .

^ 徐光启和《崇祯历书》 Archived 2011-05-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ Needham (1984) , pp. 64–5.

^ a b c Needham (1984) , p. 66.

^ Mungello (1989) , pp. 253–254.

Sources [ edit ] Blue, Gregory (2001), "Xu Guangqi in the West: Early Jesuit Sources and the Construction of an Identity" , Statecraft & Intellectual Renewal in Late Ming China: The Cross-Cultural Synthesis of Xu Guangqi (1562–1633) , Sinica Leidensia , Vol. 50, Leiden , South Holland : Brill , pp.

19–71 , ISBN 9004120580 .

Brockey, Liam Matthew (2008), Journey to the East: The Jesuit Mission to China, 1579–1724 , Cambridge, MA: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press Brook, Timothy (2001), "Xu Guangqi in His Context: The World of the Shanghai Gentry", Statecraft & Intellectual Renewal in Late Ming China: The Cross-Cultural Synthesis of Xu Guangqi (1562–1633) , BRILL, ISBN 9004120580 .

Chan, Albert (1976), "João Rodrígues" , Dictionary of Ming Biography, 1368–1644, Vol. II: M–Z , New York, NY: Columbia University Press, pp.

1145–47 , ISBN 9780231038331 .

Clunas, Craig (1996), Fruitful Sites: Garden Culture in Ming Dynasty China , Envisioning Asia, London, England: Reaktion Books, ISBN 9780948462887 .

Dudink, Adrianus Cornelis (2001), "Xu Guangqi's Career: An Annotated Chronology", Statecraft & Intellectual Renewal in Late Ming China , BRILL, ISBN 9004120580 .

Wilkinson, Endymion Porter (2000), Chinese History: A Manual , Cambridge, MA : Harvard University Asia Center for the Harvard–Yenching Institute , ISBN 9780674002494 .

Fang Zhaoying (1943).

"Sun Yüan-hua" . In Hummel, Arthur W. Sr.

(ed.).

Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period .

United States Government Printing Office . p. 686.

Mungello, David E. (1989), Curious Land: Jesuit Accommodation and the Origins of Sinology , Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 0-8248-1219-0 .

Needham, Joseph (1984), Science and Civilisation in China, Vol. VI: Biology and Biological Technology, Part 2: Agriculture , Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press .

Smith, Joanna Handlin (2009), The Art of Doing Good: Charity in Late Ming China .

Stone, Richard (2007), "Scientists Fete China's Supreme Polymath", Science , vol. 318, p. 733, doi : 10.1126/science.318.5851.733 , ISSN 0036-8075 , PMID 17975042 , S2CID 162156995 .

Vasconcelos de Saldanha, António (2012), "The Last Imperial Honours: From Tomás Pereira to the Eulogium Europeorum Doctorum in 1711" , In the Light and Shadow of an Emperor: Tomás Pereira, SJ (1645–1708), the Kangxi Emperor, and the Jesuit Mission in China , Newcastle, England : Cambridge Scholars Publishing, pp.

144–227 , ISBN 9781443838542 .

Further reading [ edit ] Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilisation in China: Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; reprinted: Taipei: Caves Books, 1986.

OCLC Zhao, Jikai, "Xu Guangqi" .

Encyclopedia of China (Economics Edition), 1st ed.

Mei, Rongzhao, "Xue Guangqi" .

Encyclopedia of China (Mathematics Edition), 1st ed.

Hummel, Arthur W. Sr.

, ed. (1943).

"Hsü Kuang-ch'i" .

Eminent Chinese of the Ch'ing Period .

United States Government Printing Office .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Xu Guangqi ( category ) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Xu Guangqi" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Ricci Roundtable at the University of San Francisco University of Texas article mentioning him Xu Guangqi at the University of Maine Archived August 28, 2008, at the Wayback Machine v t e Christianity in China Foundations Timeline of Chinese history Christianity Catholic Church in China Catholic Church in Sichuan Catholic Church in Shaanxi Catholic Church in Tibet Protestantism in China Protestantism in Sichuan Chinese Orthodox Church Terms for God Tianzhu Shen Shangdi Bible translations Delegates' Version Chinese Union Version Studium Biblicum Version Chinese New Version Today's Chinese Version Hymns Hymns of Universal Praise Chinese New Hymnal Canaan Hymns Mission history Church of the East Xi'an Stele Jingjiao Documents Mogao Christian painting Murals from the Christian temple at Qocho Alopen Adam Catholic Franciscan missions (Yuan) Jesuit missions (Ming) Foreign Missions Society John of Montecorvino Odoric of Pordenone Giovanni de' Marignolli Francis Xavier Matteo Ricci Joachim Bouvet Angelo Zottoli Frédéric-Vincent Lebbe Chinese Rites controversy Martyr Saints of China St. Paul's College, Macau Protestant Agencies Medical missions in China Robert Morrison Karl Gützlaff Divie Bethune McCartee Hudson Taylor Lottie Moon Timothy Richard Jonathan Goforth Cambridge Seven Eric Liddell Gladys Aylward (more...) By province and region East Christianity in Anhui Christianity in Fujian Christianity in Jiangsu Christianity in Jiangxi Christianity in Shandong Christianity in Shanghai Christianity in Zhejiang West Christianity in Chongqing Christianity in Gansu Christianity in Guizhou Christianity in Ningxia Christianity in Qinghai Christianity in Shaanxi Christianity in Sichuan Christianity in Tibet Christianity in Xinjiang Christianity in Yunnan Central Christianity in Henan Christianity in Hubei Christianity in Hunan North Christianity in Beijing Christianity in Hebei Christianity in Heilongjiang Christianity in Inner Mongolia Christianity in Jilin Christianity in Liaoning Christianity in Shanxi Christianity in Tianjin South Christianity in Guangdong Christianity in Guangxi Christianity in Hainan Christianity in Hong Kong Christianity in Macau Chinese Christians (by period of prominence) Ming Candida Xu Xu Guangqi Yang Tingyun Qing Hong Xiuquan Liang Fa Xi Shengmo Republic T. C. Chao Chiang Kai-shek Cheng Jingyi Deng Yuzhi (Cora Deng) Feng Yuxiang Francis Hsu Jia Yuming Lu Zhengxiang Ma Xiangbo Watchman Nee Mary Stone (Shi Meiyu) John Sung Sun Yat-sen Tseng Pao-sun Wang Ming-Dao Francis C. M. Wei Paul Wei John Ching Hsiung Wu Wu Leichuan Wu Yi-fang Y. C. James Yen Ying Lianzhi Dora Yu Paul Yu Pin David Z. T. Yui People's Republic Joseph Gu He Guanghu Aloysius Jin Luxian Ignatius Kung Pin-Mei Samuel Lamb Lin Shengben Liu Xiaofeng Lü Xiaomin Matthias Lu K. H. Ting Wang Weifan Wang Yi Y. T. Wu Allen Yuan Zhao Fusan Church-state relations in People's Republic Catholic Patriotic Association Underground church The Christian Manifesto Protestant Lianghui Three-Self Patriotic Movement China Christian Council Seminaries House church Events Rites controversy Century of humiliation Opium Wars Taiping Rebellion Yangzhou riot Boxer Rebellion Tianjin Massacre Xinhai Revolution Anti-Christian Movement Nanjing incident Chinese Civil War Second Sino-Japanese War Denunciation Movement Cultural Revolution Boluan Fanzheng Impact Science and technology Anti-sex-selective abortion Anti-footbinding campaign Anti-opium campaign Chinese Roman Type Cantonese Roman Type Chinese Christian Colleges Manchurian revival Sino-Christian theology Interdenominational organisations China Christian Council National Christian Council of China v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Netherlands Norway Korea Vatican Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xu_Guangqi&oldid=1303041637 " Categories : Xu Guangqi 1562 births 1633 deaths 16th-century Chinese astronomers 16th-century Chinese mathematicians 17th-century Chinese astronomers 17th-century Chinese mathematicians Chinese Roman Catholic writers Chinese agronomists Chinese technology writers Christian apologists Converts to Roman Catholicism Grand secretaries of the Ming dynasty Mathematicians from Shanghai Ming dynasty classicists Ming dynasty translators 16th-century Chinese scholars Ming dynasty government officials Politicians from Shanghai Scientists from Shanghai Chinese Servants of God Writers from Shanghai 17th-century agronomists 16th-century agronomists 17th-century Chinese translators Ming dynasty Christians Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2011 Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 20:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xu Guangqi 28 languages Add topic

