Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Catasterismi 2 languages Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prose retelling of the mythic origins of stars and constellations The Catasterismi or Catasterisms ( Greek Καταστερισμοί Katasterismoi , "Constellations" or "Placings Among the Stars" [ 1 ] ) is a lost work by Eratosthenes of Cyrene . It was a comprehensive compendium of astral mythology including origin myths of the stars and constellations . Only a summary of the original work survives, called the Epitome Catasterismorum , by an unknown author sometimes referred to as pseudo-Eratosthenes .

[ 2 ] Summary [ edit ] The Epitome records the mature and definitive development of a long process: the Hellenes' assimilation of a Mesopotamian zodiac , transmitted through Persian interpreters and translated and harmonized with the known terms of Greek mythology . A fundamental effort in this translation was the application of Greek mythic nomenclature to designate individual stars, both asterisms like the Pleiades and Hyades , and the constellations. In Classical Greece , the "wandering stars" and the gods who directed them were separate entities, as for Plato ; in Hellenistic culture, the association became an inseparable identification, so that Apollo , no longer the regent of the Sun, actually was Helios (Seznec 1981, pp 37–40).

Chapters 1–42 of the Epitome treat forty-three of the forty-eight constellations (including the Pleiades ) known to Ptolemy (2nd century CE); chapters 43–44 treat the five planets and the Milky Way .

Ursa Major Ursa Minor Draco "The Kneeler" ( Hercules ) "The Crown" ( Corona Borealis ) Ophiuchus Scorpius Boötes Virgo Gemini Cancer Leo Auriga Taurus Cepheus Cassiopeia Andromeda "The Horse" ( Pegasus ) Aries "The Delta -Shape" ( Triangulum ) Pisces Perseus The Pleiades † Lyra "The Bird" or "The Swan" ( Cygnus ) Aquarius Capricornus Sagittarius Sagitta Aquila Delphinus Orion "The Dog" ( Canis Major ) Lepus Argo Navis † Cetus "The River" ( Eridanus ) "The Fish" ( Piscis Austrinus ) Ara Centaurus Hydra , Crater , and Corvus "The One Preceding the Dog"/" Procyon " ( Canis Minor ) "The Planets "† "The Galaxy" ( Milky Way )† † Not one of the modern constellations.

Of the 48 Ptolemaic constellations , the ones not included are Corona Australis , Equuleus , Libra , Lupus , and Serpens . In modern times , Argo Navis (the ship Argo ) has been divided into three constellations: Carina (the keel), Puppis (the stern), and Vela (the sails); and the Pleiades are recognized as a star cluster within the constellation Taurus.

The work cites in some places the lost Astronomia attributed to Hesiod . A similar later account is the Poeticon Astronomicon , or De Astronomica (tellingly also titled De Astrologia in some manuscripts that follow Hyginus' usage in his text) attributed to Gaius Julius Hyginus .

During the Renaissance , printing of the Epitome under the title Catasterismi , began early, but the work was always overshadowed by Hyginus , the only other ancient repertory of catasterisms. The Catasterismi was illustrated by woodcuts in the first illustrated edition by Erhard Ratdolt , (Venice 1482). Johann Schaubach's [ 3 ] edition of the Catasterismi (Meiningen 1791) was also illustrated with celestial maps drawn from another work, Johann Buhle 's Aratus (Leipzig, 2 volumes, 1793–1801).

After the old Teubner edition of A. Olivieri, Pseudo-Eratosthenis Catasterismi (Leipzig 1897), the text has a new complete edition including the recensio Fragmenta Vaticana.

[ 4 ] In 2013, there is a greek-french scientific translation and commentary by Jordi Pàmias I Massana and Arnaud Zucker.

[ 5 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ 'Καταστερισμός' etymology ^ Hard, pp. i, xviii–xx, xxiii, xxiv, xxxvii; Decker, pp. 2–3 ; Kanas, p. 109 .

^ Johann Konrad Schaubach (1764-1849), a historian of ancient astronomy  and educator in Meiningen , was also the author of Geschichte der griechischen Astronomie bis auf Eratosthenes (1802).

^ Eratòstenes de Cirene, Catasterismes, Introducció, edició crítica, traducció i notes de J. PÀMIAS I MASSANA, Barcelona 2004 and ERATOSTHENES, Catasterismi, Text, Übers., Komm. von J. PÀMIAS u. K. GEUS, Oberhaid 2007.

^ Ératosthène de Cyrène , Catastérismes, Paris, CUF, Belles Lettres, 2013.

References [ edit ] Condos, Theony, Star Myths of the Greeks and Romans: A Sourcebook, Containing The Constellations of Pseudo-Eratosthenes and the Poetic Astronomy of Hyginus (Grand Rapids [MI]: Phanes Press, 1997) ISBN 1-890482-92-7 (hb); ISBN 1-890482-93-5 (pb). Reviewed by Roger Ceragioli in: Journal for the History of Astronomy, 30.1 (1999), pp. 313–315; by John McMahon in: Archaeoastronomy: The Journal of Astronomy in Culture , XVI (2001), pp. 98–99 and by John T. Ramsey, as "Bryn Mawr Classical Review 98.6.28" .

Decker, Elly, Illustrating the Phaenomena: Celestial Cartography in Antiquity and the Middle Ages , Oxford University Press , 2013.

ISBN 978-0-19-960969-7 .

Hard, Robin, (trans.) Eratosthenes and Hyginus: Constellation Myths, With Aratus's Phaenomena , Oxford University Press , 2015.

ISBN 978-0-19-871698-3 .

Kanas, Nick, Star Maps: History, Artistry, and Cartography , Springer, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-387-71668-8 .

Seznec, Jean , The Survival of the Pagan Gods (Princeton [NJ]: Princeton University Press, 1981).

External links [ edit ] Katasterismoi ancient greek original text.

The Katasterismoi: Part 1 and Part 2 in ADSABS Mythographoi. Scriptores poetiace historiae graeci , Antonius Westermann (ed.), Brunsvigae sumptum fecit Georgius Westermann, 1843, pagg. 239-67 .

Mythographi Graeci , Alexander Olivieri (ed.), vol. III, fasc. I , Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1897.

Eratosthenis catasterismorum fragmenta vaticana , Albert Rehm (ed.), Ansbach, Druck von C. Bruegel & Sohn, 1899.

Italica: Rinascimento: Ilaria Miarelli Mariani, "Astrologia" (in Italian) Bradley E. Schaefer, "The epoch of the constellations on the Farnese Atlas and their origins in Hipparchus's lost catalogue" Daniel Marin, "The History of Constellations" (in Spanish) Ian Ridpath, Star Tales – The mythographers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catasterismi&oldid=1282848232 " Categories : Ancient astronomy Astrological texts Ancient Greek pseudepigrapha References on Greek mythology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 00:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catasterismi 2 languages Add topic

