Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Competition Events 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Muster (event) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Muster" event – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Muster" event – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) For other uses of the word, see muster (disambiguation) .

A muster (or " fire muster ") is an event pertaining to fire/rescue services . It is held in a central area such as a park and has many activities for fire department members and sometimes other community members. A muster typically revolves around a firematic competition between fire companies from around the surrounding area. Other attractions include a flea market , live music , food, demonstrations, apparatus judging, vehicle shows and contests.

[ 1 ] Competition Events [ edit ] These events differ in the format of each muster but most follow a basic structure.

Hose Lay : The hose lay consists of a race against the clock to see which team can connect hoses the fastest. Competitors start at a starting line, and on the signal, run to couple lengths of hose in various configurations.

Hose Roll : In hose roll, competitors race each other to roll up a length of hose unfurled in a straight line in front of them from one end to the other.

Midnight Alarm : Midnight alarm is supposed to simulate a fire call in the middle of the night. Competitors either start out "sleeping" by lying down on the starting line or simply standing on it, depending on local rules. At the starting signal, competitors must run a distance of about 25 ft to the dressing area where they must don firefighter's gear. After they are all dressed, they then must complete a task together in their gear such as a hose lay (see above) or simply run to a finish line, or the "firetruck". Fastest time wins.

Ladder Climb : In ladder climb, competitors race each other for the fastest time to reach the top of a ladder.

Bucket Brigade : In the bucket brigade race, competitors must work together in a bucket brigade to transfer a set amount of water, such as 25 gallons, from one container to another spilling as little as possible. Another variant of this uses a small house roughly 48 inches by 48 inches and roughly 6 feet tall, the water must be drawn by buckets from a small pool.  These buckets are then passed from member to member roughly 10 feet to a "thrower" the thrower then throws the water on the pitched roof of the building.  The water runs off the roof into a rain gutter which drains into a barrel which is about 25-30 gallons in capacity, this water then runs into a small tube which fills a 1-gallon jug.  The timer ends when the jug is filled.

Tug of War : This is a game where Competitors (most often equal on both sides) must pull their opposing team across a line, into a puddle, etc. A team is meant to resist their competitor's effort to pull them across the line.

Water Barrel : Competitors must move a barrel across the opposing team's line using water pressure from a fire hose.

Obstacle Course : An obstacle course can consist of any combination of the events above or other tasks.

[ 2 ] Response Contest : There are several variations of this one but the premise is the same in all.  The Crew (4-6 team members) simulates receiving an alarm, responding to and handling the alarm.  The firefighters start out in street clothes and dress in full turnout gear (Helmet, Coat, and boots) board their fire engine and respond approximately 200 feet up the course to a portable water tank, the engine crew simultaneously stretches 100–150 feet of 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 -inch hose toward a target area as other crew members place hard suction hose to the intake on the engine and another member connects the 2 1/2" line to the discharge.  The pump operator must then draft water from the portable tank and discharge it through the 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 -inch hose to knock down a target (usually a beer keg or traffic cone with a ball on top)  This contest checks crew integrity, skill of the equipment operator, skill of the nozzle crew, and operation of the equipment.  When done by a well versed team it can be done in under a minute as was accomplished many times in the late 1980s and early 1990s at Greenfield Village SPAAMFAA musters in Michigan .
Some variations include stadium response where apparatus does not drive, another variation is the crew is lying on cots on an elevated platform and must slide down a pole.  One variation exempts the equipment operator from wearing gear however it must be on the truck.

First Water : The pumps on fire trucks don't help if there's not a skilled person operating the controls.  This race pits teams against the clock to see who can get a steady stream of water to the deluge gun (on the end of the hose) the quickest. The operator starts 10 feet from the pumper without the pump in gear, the operator must engage the pump, and pull a draft and have a working stream quickly.  The fastest time for this event wins, judging is usually broken up in classes for centrifugal, piston, and rotary gear pumps.  Another variant is Bracket pumping where the operator guesses how long it will take him to perform the same tasks, his score is the difference in seconds from his guess to his actual.

Waterball : Two teams of firefighters face off on a course 110 feet in length and the object is to push a 15" ball suspended from a cable to the opposing team's goal.  This is played using 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 -inch hose and each team has a lead hose team and a goaltender hoseline.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Indian Well State Park ^ "Page Title" .

^ "Waterball rules for fire department" .

www.fire.cds.com .

External links [ edit ] Burnsville, MN Fire Muster New England Muster Association CALIFORNIA FIREMEN'S MUSTER ASSOCIATION Great Lakes Spaamfaa New Marlborough(MA)Muster Team v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐9c4h7
Cached time: 20250812023534
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.345 seconds
Real time usage: 0.496 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 848/1000000
Revision size: 6536/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85945/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14102/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25129/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.212/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4248778/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  412.809      1 -total
 35.83%  147.892      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 25.64%  105.838      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 24.89%  102.737      1 Template:Reflist
 24.53%  101.265      2 Template:Navbox
 20.98%   86.610      2 Template:Cite_web
 20.39%   84.153      3 Template:Ambox
 17.32%   71.490      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.37%   42.823      1 Template:For
  4.09%   16.900      2 Template:Find_sources_mainspace Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:17642811:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023534 and revision id 1252049070. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Muster_(event)&oldid=1252049070 " Categories : Firefighting in the United States Firefighting competitions Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with topics of unclear notability from September 2024 All articles with topics of unclear notability Wikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 19 October 2024, at 14:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Muster (event) Add languages Add topic

