Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 3.1 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Otto Brunfels 23 languages Asturianu Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German botanist and theologian (1488–1534) Otto Brunfels Portrait by Hans Baldung , c. 1534 Born 1488 near Mainz , Electorate of Mainz Died 23 November 1534 Bern , Swiss Confederacy Education University of Mainz Church Lutheran Writings Catalogi virorum illustrium Herbarum vivae eicones Otto Brunfels (also known as Brunsfels or Braunfels ) (believed to be born in 1488 – 23 November 1534) was a German theologian and botanist .

Carl von Linné listed him among the "Fathers of Botany".

Life [ edit ] After studying theology and philosophy at the University of Mainz , Brunfels entered a Carthusian monastery in Mainz and later resettled to another Carthusian monastery at Königshofen near Strasbourg . In Strasbourg he got in contact with a learned lawyer Nikolaus Gerbel (they met in person in 1519). Gerbel drew Brunfels' attention to the healing powers of plants and thus gave the impetus to the further botanical investigations.

"Christwurz" ( Helleborus niger ) from Herbarum vivae eicones (1530–1536) After the conversion to Protestantism (supported by Franz von Sickingen and Ulrich von Hutten ), upon the insistence of the Dean of Frankfurt Johann Indagine, Brunfels became a minister at Steinau an der Straße (1521) and later, in Neuenburg am Rhein. After that he served for eight years as the head of a Carmelite school in Strasbourg . In the list of most important heretics published by the order of the Emperor by the University of Leuven (1550), Brunfels was listed first.

In one of his works he defended Ulrich von Hutten against Erasmus of Rotterdam and published the manuscripts from the Jan Hus heritage. Brunfels' Catalogi virorum illustrium 1527 is considered to be the first book on the history of evangelical Church.

After his friend Ulrich von Hutten had died (1523), Brunfels' religious views brought him into a controversy with Martin Luther and Huldrych Zwingli . Later on he began to study medicine at the University of Basel , ( MD 1532). In 1532 Brunfels became a city physician ( Stadtarzt ) in Bern , where he stayed till the end of his life.

Besides of his numerous theological works, Brunfels published treatises on pedagogics , Arabic language , pharmaceutics , entomology [ 1 ] and botany . He is often called a father of botany , because, in his botanical writings, he relied not so much on the ancient authors as on his own observations and described plants according to the latter. In his Herbarum vivae eicones (1530 and 1536, in three parts) and Contrafayt Kräuterbuch (1532–1537, in two parts), the German plants he himself found during his botanical studies are represented with woodcuts (by Hans Weiditz ) under their German vernacular names. However, Duane Isely attributes much of Brunfels' popularity to Weiditz, whose woodcuts set a new standard technically, and were done from life, rather being copied from previous works. Brunfels also introduced information about German plants not found in Dioscorides , and described them independently of their medical values, although the descriptions are often poorly written.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] A plant genus Brunfelsia (Solanaceae) is named after him.

The standard author abbreviation Brunfels is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name .

[ 6 ] Works [ edit ] Othonis Brvnfelsii Pro Vlricho Hutteno defuncto ad Erasmi Roter. Spongiam Responsio (1523) Processus consistorialis Martyrii Io. Huss (1524); German edition: Geistl. Bluthandel Iohannis Hussz zu Constenz (1524 or 1525) Pandectarum Veteris et Novi Testamenti (1527) Catalogi virorum illustrium veteris et novi testamenti (1527) Catechesis puerorum in fide, in literis et in moribus (1529) Herbarum vivae eicones , 3 Bde. (1530–36) Catalogus illustrium medicorum seu de primis medicinae scriptoribus (1530) Iatron medicamentorum simplicium (1533) Contrafayt Kreüterbuch (mit naturgetreuen Abb. v. Hans Weiditz) , 2 Vols., (1532–1537) Onomastikon medicinae, continens omnia nomina herbarum, fruticum etc.

(1534) Epitome medices, summam totius medicinae complectens (1540) In Dioscoridis historiam plantarum certissima adaptatio (1543) Von allerhandt apotheckischen Confectionen, Lattwergen, Oel, Pillulen, Träncken, Trociscen, Zucker scheiblein, Salben unnd Pflastern etc. : wie, wenn und warzu man jeses brauchen soll .

Gülfferich, Frankfurt am Main (1552) Sources [ edit ] Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (1975). "Braunfels (Brunfels), Otto (Otho)". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 1. Hamm: Bautz. cols. 735–736.

ISBN 3-88309-013-1 .

Isely, Duane (2002).

One Hundred and One Botanists .

West Lafayette, Indiana : Purdue University Press . pp.

17– 19.

ISBN 978-1-55753-283-1 .

OCLC 947193619 . Retrieved 2018-11-27 .

Jahn, Ilse, ed.

Geschichte der Biologie.

Spektrum 2000 Mägdefrau, Karl.

Geschichte der Botanik.

Fischer, Stuttgart 1973, S. 20–36.

Meyers Konversationslexikon 1888–1889 Notes [ edit ] ^ "Groll, E. K. Biografien der Entomologen der Welt : Datenbank" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Agnes Arber .

Herbals. Their origin and evolution. A chapter in the history of botany 1470–1670.

University Press, Cambridge 1912. (S. 47–69: The Herbal in Germany) ^ Gerhard Baader.

Mittelalter und Neuzeit im Werk von Otto Brunfels.

In: Medizinhistorisches Journal, Band 13 (1978), S. 186–203.

^ Walther Rytz.

Pflanzenaquarelle des Hans Weiditz aus dem Jahre 1529. Die Originale zu den Holzschnitten im Brunfels’schen Kräuterbuch.

Haupt, Bern 1936.

^ Ferdinand Wilhelm Emil Roth.

Otto Brunfels 1489–1534. Ein deutscher Botaniker .

In: Botanische Zeitung , 58 (1900), S. 191–232.

^ International Plant Names Index .

Brunfels .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Otto Brunfels .

Otto Brunfels in the German National Library catalogue University of Oklahoma Libraries: images of works by and portraits of Brunfels Kräuterbuch 1532 – 1537 Herbarum vivae eicones I, 1530 – III, 1536 A selection of high-resolution scans of pages with botanical illustrations from Brunfels' 1530 Herbarium – from the Linda Hall Library v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics International Plant Names Index People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Otto_Brunfels&oldid=1257159425 " Categories : 1488 births 1534 deaths Carthusians Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz alumni 16th-century German Protestant theologians German Lutheran theologians 16th-century German Lutheran clergy 16th-century German botanists German entomologists German Protestant Reformers German male non-fiction writers 16th-century German male writers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text Botanists with author abbreviations CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 November 2024, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Otto Brunfels 23 languages Add topic

