Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Philosophical work 3 Personal life 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alva Noë 6 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1964) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Alva Noë" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alva Noë Occupation(s) Philosopher , cognitive scientist Education Education Columbia University (BA) University of Oxford (BPhil) Harvard University (PhD) Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic phenomenology Institutions University of California, Berkeley University of California, Santa Cruz Main interests Cognitive science , philosophy of mind , analytic phenomenology Notable ideas Sensorimotor profile Website www .alvanoe .com Alva Noë ( / ˈ æ l v ə ˈ n oʊ .

eɪ / ; [ 1 ] born 1964) is an American philosopher. He is Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Berkeley . The focus of his work is the theory of perception and consciousness. In addition to these problems in cognitive science and the philosophy of mind , he is interested in analytic phenomenology , the theory of art , Ludwig Wittgenstein , enactivism , and the origins of analytic philosophy .

Education [ edit ] Noë received his B.A. from Columbia University .

[ 2 ] He also holds a B.Phil.

from the University of Oxford and a Ph.D.

from Harvard University .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Noë joined the University of California, Berkeley Department of Philosophy as an associate professor in 2003, where he was a member of the UC Berkeley Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, serving as a core faculty member for the Program in Cognitive Science and the Center for New Media. During 2011–2012, he was Distinguished Professor of Philosophy at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York .

Before coming to University of California, Berkeley, Noë was an assistant professor of philosophy at University of California, Santa Cruz . He has been a Post-doctoral Research Associate of the Center for Cognitive Studies at Tufts University, a visiting scholar at the Department of Logic and Philosophy of Science at University of California,  Irvine and at the Institut Jean-Nicod (CNRS/EN/EHESS) in Paris, a McDonnell-Pew Visiting Fellow at the Oxford Center for Cognitive Neuroscience, and a visiting scholar at the Center for Subjectivity Research at the University of Copenhagen. Noë has been a recipient of a UC President's Fellowship in the Humanities and an ACLS/Ryskamp Fellowship, and in 2007–2008 was a research fellow at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin .

Noë is the author of the books Strange Tools (2015), [ 3 ] Varieties of Presence (2012), [ 4 ] Out of Our Heads (2009) [ 5 ] and Action In Perception ( MIT Press , 2004).

[ 6 ] He is the co-editor of Vision and Mind: Selected Readings in the Philosophy of Perception (MIT Press, 2002) and the author of Is the Visual World a Grand Illusion?

(Imprint Academic, 2002).  In Action In Perception , Noë puts forth the notion of the sensorimotor profile.

Externalism about the mind and mental content is a pervasive theme in his work.

Personal life [ edit ] Noë is the son of the architect, sculptor and restaurateur Hans Noë , the former proprietor of the Fanelli Cafe .

[ 7 ] His mother Judith Baldwin is a ceramicist. His brother Sasha is a sculptor and has taken over running the Fanelli Cafe.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Strange Tools: Art and Human Nature on YouTube ^ "The Art of Knowing Ourselves: Humans and Their Strange Tools" .

Columbia College Today . 2016-09-28 . Retrieved 2022-05-30 .

^ Noë, Alva (2015).

Strange Tools: Art and Human Nature . Hill and Wang.

ISBN 978-0809089178 .

^ Noë, Alva (2012).

Varieties of Presence . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674062146 .

^ Noë, Alva (2010).

Out of Our Heads: Why You Are Not Your Brain, and Other Lessons from the Biology of Consciousness . Hill and Wang.

ISBN 978-0809016488 .

^ Noë, Alva (2004).

Action in perception . Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-14088-1 .

^ a b Heinrich, Will (21 May 2025).

"Hans Noë, Architect, Sculptor and Proprietor of a Famed Bar, Dies at 96" .

New York Times . Retrieved 27 May 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Interview with Noë on NYC radio Why You Are Not Your Brain? A Conversation on Consciousness with Alva Noe, Ph.D.

, Bridging the Gaps: A Portal for Curious Minds Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Artists MusicBrainz FID People DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alva_Noë&oldid=1293293633 " Categories : 1964 births Living people American philosophers of mind American cognitive scientists CUNY Graduate Center faculty University of California, Santa Cruz faculty University of California, Berkeley faculty Harvard University alumni Alumni of the University of Oxford Columbia College (New York) alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from November 2017 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from November 2017 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 22:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alva Noë 6 languages Add topic

