Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Flora and fauna 3 Recreation 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gila Wilderness 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 33°14′25″N 108°16′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.24028°N 108.28083°W ﻿ / 33.24028; -108.28083 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wilderness area in New Mexico, United States Gila Wilderness IUCN category Ib ( wilderness area ) Show map of the United States Show map of New Mexico Location Catron / Grant counties, New Mexico , United States Nearest city Silver City, New Mexico Coordinates 33°14′25″N 108°16′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.24028°N 108.28083°W ﻿ / 33.24028; -108.28083 Area 558,014 acres (225,820 ha) Established 1924 Governing body United States Forest Service Gila Wilderness was designated the world's first wilderness area on June 3, 1924.

[ 1 ] Along with Aldo Leopold Wilderness and Blue Range Wilderness , the 558,014 acre (225,820 ha) (872 sq. mi.) wilderness is part of New Mexico's Gila National Forest . The wilderness is approximately 27 miles (43 km) from north to south and 39 miles (63 km) east to west.

[ 2 ] U.S. Wilderness Areas do not allow motorized or mechanized vehicles, including bicycles. Camping, hunting, and fishing are allowed with proper permit, but no roads, buildings, logging, or mining are permitted. Wilderness areas within National Forests and Bureau of Land Management areas allow hunting in season.

The Gila Wilderness is located in southwest New Mexico, north of Silver City and east of Reserve . It contains the West Fork, Middle Fork and much of the East Fork of the Gila River ; riverside elevations of around 4,850 feet (1,480 m) are the lowest in the wilderness. The Mogollon Mountains traverse an arc across the wilderness. The tallest peak within this range, Whitewater Baldy at 10,895 ft (3,321 m), is in the northwest part of the wilderness along with several other summits more than 10,000 ft (3,048 m) high. At the northeast corner is prominent Black Mountain rising to 9,287 ft (2,831 m).

[ 3 ] The Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument is adjacent to the wilderness.

[ 4 ] The Gila Wilderness is the largest designated wilderness area in New Mexico.

A map of Wilderness Areas in Gila National Forest, including the Gila Wilderness History [ edit ] The Mimbres people, a subgroup of the Mogollon were active between 1000 and 1130 in the Gila Wilderness area, leaving cliff dwellings, ruins and other evidence of their culture. The Chiricahua band of Apache came into the area between 1200 and 1600.

[ 2 ] Because of their fierce protectiveness, the area remained undeveloped into the 1870s.

[ 5 ] In 1922, Aldo Leopold , a United States Forest Service supervisor of the Carson National Forest proposed that the headwaters area of the Gila River should be preserved by an administrative process of excluding roads and denying use permits. Through his efforts, this area became recognized in 1924 as the first wilderness area in the National Forest System.

[ 6 ] Gila became the first congressionally designated wilderness [ 2 ] of the National Wilderness Preservation System when the Wilderness Act was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1964.

Flora and fauna [ edit ] Vegetation in the Gila Wilderness consists of a spruce - fir and quaking aspen forest above 9,000 feet (2,732 m), ponderosa pine forest between 6,500 feet (1,981) and 9,000 (2,732 m), and pinyon - juniper woodland and desert vegetation below 6,500 feet and on dry southern slopes. Brushy areas, grassland, and recently burned forests are also common.

[ 7 ] Within this generalized outline, a variety of Arizona Mountains forest ecosystems are found in the wilderness, mostly characteristic of a transition zone between the Chihuahuan Desert and flora typical of the Rocky Mountains . The wilderness includes mesquite , Apache pine and is the northernmost home of the Chihuahua pine .

[ 8 ] Gila contains one of the world's largest and healthiest ponderosa pine forests.

[ 9 ] Arizona sycamore , walnut , maple , ash , cottonwood , alder and willow trees are found along rivers and in canyons.

[ 2 ] Gila is home of predators such as the bobcat and cougar .

Mule deer , white-tailed deer and pronghorn are all found in the wilderness. Other mammals include the black bear , collared peccary , gray fox and white-nosed coati . The critically endangered Mexican wolf was reintroduced to the wilderness in 1988 with eleven captive-raised individuals. Most died or were killed and more were released the following year.

[ 10 ] As of 2006, four packs have established themselves within Gila.

[ 11 ] Because of conflicts with livestock owners, the federal predator control program has killed or removed several animals.

[ 12 ] Bighorn sheep were common throughout the region until about 1900 when they became locally extinct through hunting. Rocky Mountain bighorn sheep were reintroduced to the Gila Wilderness after 1958 from a growing herd of Canadian releases in the Sandia Mountains .

[ 13 ] Elk were reintroduced by the New Mexico Department of Game and Fish in 1954 with sixteen animals from Yellowstone National Park .

[ 14 ] Game birds include wild turkey and dusky grouse ; birds of prey include common black hawk , zone-tailed hawk , goshawk , osprey and bald eagle ; American dippers are found in mountain streams.

[ 8 ] The wilderness is home to the largest population of near threatened spotted owls , which prefer Douglas-fir or white fir stands and can be found in ponderosa pine forests with a well-developed Gambel oak understory .

[ 15 ] Reptiles such as the Arizona coral snake and Gila monster are rarely present; [ 16 ] common snakes include the black-tailed rattlesnake , rock rattlesnake , and Sonora mountain kingsnake .

Brown trout , rainbow trout , catfish and bass are found in rivers and streams.

[ 2 ] The threatened Gila trout is present in Iron, McKenna and Spruce Creeks. It prefers sufficiently deep water, such as American beaver ponds, which provide hiding places and can withstand both floods and drought.

[ 17 ] Four packs of Mexican wolves roam the wilderness.

The threatened Gila trout is found in the wilderness.

A beaver dam spans a section of the Middle Fork of the Gila River.

Recreation [ edit ] The Gila River winds its way through the Wilderness.

The U.S. Forest Service describes the climate of the Wilderness area as "four gentle seasons".

[ 18 ] The lower elevations below 7,000 feet (2,100 m) are accessible all year with heavy winter snow uncommon. Elevation moderates the high summer temperatures of the surrounding Chihuahua Desert . May and June are the hottest and dryest months. Many trails are relatively easy, following stream valleys bordered by cliffs or crossing flat-topped mesas. Water is often scarce due to frequent droughts. Summer temperatures can near 100 degrees F (37 °C), and the size and isolation of the wilderness increases the hazards of visiting. A hiker was found alive in 2007 after being lost 40 days in the Gila Wilderness, setting a new state record for the number of days for a lost person to be found alive. It is common for hikers to become lost in the vast expanse of the Gila; some are never found.

[ 19 ] Riders in the Gila Wilderness, 1922 The Gila Wilderness provides opportunities for fishing, hunting, backpacking, horseback riding and camping. It has hundreds of miles of hiking and horseback trails starting at over fifty easily accessible trailheads .

[ 2 ] A visitor center near the Gila cliff dwellings is about two hours north of Silver City, New Mexico on State Route 15. Near here, at an elevation of 5,689 feet (1,734 m), trails radiate up the Middle Fork of the Gila River (41 miles [68 km] long) and the West Fork (34.5 miles [55 km] long) and downstream following the Gila River for 32.5 miles (51 km).

[ 20 ] One of the best-known trails in the Wilderness is the "Catwalk", a one-mile trail suspended above a rushing stream in a gorge only a few feet wide. The Crest Trail, 12 miles long, passes through impressive sub-alpine forests in the highest portions of the Gila Mountains with elevations from 9,132 feet (2,783 m) to 10,770 feet (3,280 m).

[ 21 ] Many hot springs are found within the wilderness. Cliff dwellings border stream valleys, especially along the Middle Fork of the Gila River. Rafting the Gila River is popular in the spring when water levels in the river are high due to snowmelt in the higher mountains. Because it is a wilderness, visitors must minimize their impact on the natural environment by observing the Leave No Trace principles.

An alternate to the official Continental Divide Trail (CDT) follows the canyon of the Gila River through the wilderness and has been voted one of the favorite sections of the CDT.

[ 22 ] The Gila Wilderness is separated from the sizable Aldo Leopold Wilderness by only a gravel road and a few scattered pieces of private property. Aldo Leopold offers additional long-distance hiking and backpacking opportunities.

A panoramic view west from the foothills just north of the Catwalks trailhead, December 31, 2008 References [ edit ] ^ Gila Wilderness at wilderness.net.

^ a b c d e f Wilderness up close Archived 2007-02-12 at the Wayback Machine at the National Park Service ^ "Gila National Forest map" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2006 . Retrieved January 9, 2007 .

^ Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument at the National Park Service.

^ Gila Cliff Dwellings at the National Park Service.

^ Aldo Leopold at the US Forest Service.

^ Cunningham, Bill and Burke, Polly.

Hiking New Mexico's Aldo Leopold Wilderness.

Helena, MT: A Falcon Guide, 2002, p. 4 ^ a b Gila Wilderness at New Mexico Wilderness Alliance.

^ "Arizona Mountains forests" .

Terrestrial Ecoregions . World Wildlife Fund.

^ Guided tours to help gray wolf’s come-back Archived 2007-06-11 at the Wayback Machine at Commission for Environmental Cooperation.

^ "Mexican Wolf Monthly Report: December 2006" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2006 . Retrieved January 18, 2007 .

^ Federal Government Kills Another Endangered Mexican Gray Wolf .

Center for Biological Diversity .

^ Bighorn rooted in state's history.

^ Interstate Swaps and Purchases Aid Game Restoration Program at U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

^ Mexican Spotted Owl Recovery Program Archived 2008-05-23 at the Wayback Machine at U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

^ National Park Service: Gila Cliff Dwellings: Reptiles.

^ Gila Trout at Center for Biological Diversity.

^ "Gila National Forest." https://www.fs.usda.gov/generalinfo/gila/recretation/generalinfo/?groupid=4081&recid=1958 , accessed 18 Apr 2012 ^ Hiker sets state record while enduring cold, snow Archived 2011-07-13 at the Wayback Machine at Las Cruces Sun-News.

^ Murray, John A.

The Gila Wilderness.

Albuquerque: U of NM Press, 1988, pp. 113-125 ^ Murray, pp 77-81 ^ "The Continental Divide Trail Thru-Hiker Survey (2019)" .

Halfway Anywhere . January 8, 2020 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Vascular Plants of the Gila Wilderness Media related to Gila Wilderness at Wikimedia Commons v t e Topics of Catron County, New Mexico Natural features Aspen Mountain Jordan Hot Springs Middle Fork Hot Springs Mogollon-Datil volcanic field Mogollon Mountains Plains of San Agustin /former Lake San Agustín Red Hill volcanic field San Francisco River Turkey Creek Hot Springs Whitewater Baldy Protected areas Blue Range Wilderness Catwalk National Recreation Trail Gila National Forest Gila Wilderness Whitewater Canyon National Forest Recreation Area National Register of Historic Places listings Bearwallow Park Bearwallow Mountain Lookout Cabins and Shed Black Mountain Black Mountain Lookout Cabin Ake Site El Caso Lake El Caso Lookout Complex Bat Cave Mangas Mountain Lookout Complex Mogollon Historic District Socorro Mines Mining Company Mill, Fannie Hill Mogollon Baldy Lookout Cabin Red Hill Mogollon Pueblo Zuñi Salt Lake Historic people Apache Chiricahua Cochise Elfego Baca Butch Cassidy James C. Cooney Goyaałé (Geronimo) Tom Ketchum Mangas Coloradas Mimbres Culture Mogollon Culture Victorio Wild Bunch Historic places and events Alma Massacre Cooney's Tomb Battle of Tularosa Frisco shootout Gila Cliff Dwellings The Lightning Field v t e Protected areas of New Mexico National Conservation Areas El Malpais Fort Stanton–Snowy River Cave National Fish Hatcheries Mora Southwestern National Forests Apache–Sitgreaves Carson Cibola Coronado Gila Lincoln Santa Fe National Grasslands Kiowa National Historical Parks Chaco Culture Manhattan Project Pecos National Monuments Aztec Ruins Bandelier Capulin Volcano El Malpais El Morro Fort Union Gila Cliff Dwellings Kasha-Katuwe Tent Rocks Organ Mountains–Desert Peaks Petroglyph Prehistoric Trackways Rio Grande del Norte Salinas Pueblo Missions National Parks Carlsbad Caverns White Sands National Preserves Valles Caldera National Recreation Areas Jemez National Trails Butterfield Overland El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro Continental Divide Old Spanish Santa Fe National Wild and Scenic Rivers Jemez River (East Fork) Pecos River Rio Chama National Wildlife Refuges Bitter Lake Bosque del Apache Grulla Las Vegas Maxwell Rio Mora San Andres Sevilleta Valle de Oro Other Federal National Historic Landmarks National Natural Landmarks National Register of Historic Places Wilderness Areas State Parks Bluewater Lake Bottomless Lakes Brantley Lake Caballo Lake Cerrillos Hills Cimarron Canyon City of Rocks Clayton Lake Conchas Lake Coyote Creek Eagle Nest Lake El Vado Lake Elephant Butte Lake Fenton Lake Heron Lake Hyde Memorial Leasburg Dam Living Desert Zoo and Gardens Manzano Mountains Mesilla Valley Bosque Morphy Lake Navajo Lake Oasis Oliver Lee Memorial Pancho Villa Percha Dam Rio Grande Nature Center Rockhound Santa Rosa Lake Storrie Lake Sugarite Canyon Sumner Lake Ute Lake Villanueva New Mexico Department of Energy, Minerals, and Natural Resources Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gila_Wilderness&oldid=1297841601 " Categories : IUCN Category Ib Wilderness areas of New Mexico Gila River Mogollon culture Protected areas of Grant County, New Mexico Protected areas of Catron County, New Mexico Gila National Forest 1924 establishments in New Mexico Protected areas established in 1924 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 21:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gila Wilderness 1 language Add topic

