Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sealed sources Toggle Sealed sources subsection 1.1 Categorisation of sealed sources 2 Calibration sources 3 Unsealed sources 4 Disposal 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Radioactive source 8 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch 한국어 Íslenska 日本語 Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Radionuclide emitting ionizing radiation A new sealed cesium-137 radiation source as it appears in its final state A radioactive source is a known quantity of a radionuclide which emits ionizing radiation , typically one or more of the radiation types gamma rays , alpha particles , beta particles , and neutron radiation .

Sources can be used for irradiation , where the radiation performs a significant ionising function on a target material, or as a radiation metrology source, which is used for the calibration of radiometric process and radiation protection instrumentation. They are also used for industrial process measurements, such as thickness gauging in the paper and steel industries. Sources can be sealed in a container (highly penetrating radiation) or deposited on a surface (weakly penetrating radiation), or they can be in a fluid.

As an irradiation source they are used in medicine for radiation therapy and in industry for such as industrial radiography , food irradiation , sterilization , vermin disinfestation, and irradiation crosslinking of PVC.

Radionuclides are chosen according to the type and character of the radiation they emit, intensity of emission, and the half-life of their decay. Common source radionuclides include cobalt-60 , [ 1 ] iridium-192 , [ 2 ] and strontium-90 .

[ 3 ] The SI measurement quantity of source activity is the Becquerel , though the historical unit Curies is still in partial use, such as in the US, despite their NIST strongly advising the use of the SI unit.

[ 4 ] The SI unit for health purposes is mandatory in the EU .

An irradiation source typically lasts for between 5 and 15 years before its activity drops below useful levels.

[ 5 ] However sources with long half-life radionuclides when utilised as calibration sources can be used for much longer.

A cutaway diagram of a radioactive source used for teletherapy ( external beam radiotherapy ): A key to the lettering can be found on the file page Sealed sources [ edit ] Many radioactive sources are sealed, meaning they are permanently either completely contained in a capsule or firmly bonded solid to a surface. Capsules are usually made of stainless steel , titanium , platinum or another inert metal .

[ 5 ] The use of sealed sources removes almost all risk of dispersion of radioactive material into the environment due to mishandling, [ 6 ] but the container is not intended to attenuate radiation, so further shielding is required for radiation protection.

[ 7 ] Sealed sources are used in almost all applications where the source does not need to be chemically or physically included in a liquid or gas.

Categorisation of sealed sources [ edit ] 2007 ISO radioactivity danger symbol intended for IAEA Category 1, 2 and 3 sources defined as dangerous sources capable of causing death or serious injury.

[ 8 ] Source: [ 9 ] Sealed sources are categorised by the IAEA according to their activity in relation to a minimum dangerous source (where a dangerous source is one that could cause significant injury to humans). The ratio used is A/D, where A is the activity of the source and D is the minimum dangerous activity.

Category A/D 1 ≥1000 2 10–1000 3 1–10 4 0.01–1 5 <0.01 Note that sources with sufficiently low radioactive output (such as those used in Smoke detectors ) as to not cause harm to humans are not categorised.

Calibration sources [ edit ] Hand-held large area alpha scintillation probe under calibration using a plate source Calibration sources are used primarily for the calibration of radiometric instrumentation, which is used on process monitoring or in radiological protection.

Capsule sources, where the radiation effectively emits from a point, are used for beta, gamma and X-ray instrument calibration. High level sources are normally used in a calibration cell: a room with thick walls to protect the operator and the provision of remote operation of the source exposure.

The plate source is in common use for the calibration of radioactive contamination instruments. This has a known amount of radioactive material fixed to its surface, such as an alpha and/or beta emitter, to allow the calibration of large area radiation detectors used for contamination surveys and personnel monitoring. Such measurements are typically counts per unit time received by the detector, such as counts per minute or counts per second.

Unlike the capsule source, the plate source emitting material must be on the surface to prevent attenuation by a container or self-shielding due to the material itself. This is particularly important with alpha particles which are easily stopped by a small mass. The Bragg curve shows the attenuation effect in free air.

Unsealed sources [ edit ] Unsealed sources are sources that are not in a permanently sealed container, and are used extensively for medical purposes.

[ 10 ] They are used when the source needs to be dissolved in a liquid for injection into a patient or ingestion by the patient. Unsealed sources are also used in industry in a similar manner for leak detection as a Radioactive tracer .

Disposal [ edit ] Disposal of expired radioactive sources presents similar challenges to the disposal of other nuclear waste , although to a lesser degree. Spent low level sources will sometimes be sufficiently inactive that they are suitable for disposal via normal waste disposal methods — usually landfill. Other disposal methods are similar to those for higher-level radioactive waste, using various depths of borehole depending on the activity of the waste.

[ 5 ] A notorious incident of neglect in disposing of a high level source was the Goiânia accident , which resulted in several fatalities. The Tammiku radioactive material theft involved the accidental theft of caesium-137 material in Tammiku, Estonia , in 1994 .

See also [ edit ] Common beta emitters Commonly used gamma-emitting isotopes Geiger counter Ionizing radiation Neutron source References [ edit ] ^ "C-188 Cobalt-60 Source" . Nordion Inc . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ "Iridium-192" . Isoflex . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ "Radioactive sources: isotopes and availability" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2019 . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ "NIST Guide to the SI, Chapter 5 (paragraph 5.2)" . NIST . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ a b c Disposal Options for Disused Radioactive Sources (PDF) . International Atomic Energy Agency. 2005.

ISBN 92-0-100305-6 .

ISSN 0074-1914 .

^ "Implementation of the Control of High-activity Sealed Radioactive Sources and Orphan Sources (HASS) directive for nuclear licensed sites" . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ "Disused Sealed Source Management" . International Atomic Energy Agency . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ IAEA news release Feb 2007 ^ Radiation protection and safety of radiation sources : International basic safety standards (PDF) . Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency. 2014.

ISBN 978-92-0-135310-8 .

ISSN 1020-525X .

^ "Radiation Protection Glossary" . Archived from the original on 5 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

v t e Radiation (physics and health) Main articles Non-ionizing radiation Acoustic radiation force Infrared Light Starlight Sunlight Microwave Radio waves Ultraviolet Ionizing radiation Radioactive decay Cluster decay Background radiation Alpha particle Beta particle Gamma ray Cosmic ray Neutron radiation Nuclear fission Nuclear fusion Nuclear reactors Nuclear weapons Particle accelerators Radioactive materials X-ray Earth's energy budget Electromagnetic radiation Synchrotron radiation Thermal radiation Black-body radiation Particle radiation Gravitational radiation Cosmic background radiation Cherenkov radiation Askaryan radiation Bremsstrahlung Unruh radiation Dark radiation Radiation exposure Radiation and health Radiation syndrome acute chronic Health physics Dosimetry Electromagnetic radiation and health Laser safety Lasers and aviation safety Medical radiography Radiation protection Radiation therapy Radiation damage Radioactivity in the life sciences Radioactive contamination Radiobiology Biological dose units and quantities Wireless device radiation and health Wireless electronic devices and health Radiation heat-transfer Linear energy transfer Radiation incidents List of civilian radiation accidents 1996 Costa Rica accident 1987 Goiânia accident 1984 Moroccan accident 1990 Zaragoza accident Related articles Half-life Nuclear physics Radioactive source Radiation hardening See also the categories Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection v t e Radiation protection Main articles Background radiation Dosimetry Health physics Ionizing radiation Internal dosimetry Radioactive contamination Radioactive sources Radiobiology Measurement quantities and units Absorbed dose Becquerel Committed dose Computed tomography dose index Counts per minute Effective dose Equivalent dose Gray Mean glandular dose Monitor unit Rad Roentgen Rem Sievert Instruments and measurement techniques Airborne radioactive particulate monitoring Dosimeter Geiger counter Ion chamber Scintillation counter Proportional counter Radiation monitoring Semiconductor detector Survey meter Whole-body counting Protection techniques Lead shielding Glovebox Potassium iodide Radon mitigation Respirators Organisations Euratom HPS (USA) IAEA ICRU ICRP IRPA SRP (UK) UNSCEAR Regulation IRR (UK) NRC (USA) ONR (UK) Radiation Protection Convention, 1960 Radiation effects Acute radiation syndrome Radiation-induced cancer See also the categories Medical physics , Radiation effects , Radioactivity , Radiobiology , and Radiation protection Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radioactive_source&oldid=1301936032 " Categories : Nuclear materials Radioactivity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radioactive source 8 languages Add topic

