Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The skeleton Toggle The skeleton subsection 1.1 Terminology 1.2 Basic structure 1.3 Contemporary graphical conventions 2 Implicit carbon and hydrogen atoms 3 Explicit heteroatoms and hydrogen atoms 4 Pseudoelement symbols Toggle Pseudoelement symbols subsection 4.1 General symbols 4.2 Alkyl groups 4.3 Aromatic and unsaturated substituents 4.4 Functional groups 4.5 Sulfonyl/sulfonate groups 4.6 Protecting groups 5 Multiple bonds 6 Benzene rings 7 Stereochemistry 8 Hydrogen bonds 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Skeletal formula 22 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Македонски 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Representation method in chemistry "Skeletal structure" redirects here. For other uses, see Skeleton .

The skeletal formula of the antidepressant drug escitalopram , featuring skeletal representations of heteroatoms , a triple bond , phenyl groups and stereochemistry The skeletal formula , line-angle formula , bond-line formula or shorthand formula of an organic compound is a type of minimalist structural formula representing a molecule 's atoms , bonds and some details of its geometry . The lines in a skeletal formula represent bonds between carbon atoms, unless  labelled with another element.

[ 1 ] Labels are optional for carbon atoms, and the hydrogen atoms attached to them.

An early form of this representation was first developed by organic chemist August Kekulé , while the modern form is closely related to and influenced by the Lewis structure of molecules and their valence electrons. Hence they are sometimes termed Kekulé structures [ a ] or Lewis–Kekulé structures .  Skeletal formulas have become ubiquitous in organic chemistry , partly because they are relatively quick and simple to draw, and also because the curved arrow notation used for discussions of reaction mechanisms and electron delocalization can be readily superimposed.

Several other ways of depicting chemical structures are also commonly used in organic chemistry (though less frequently than skeletal formulae).  For example, conformational structures look similar to skeletal formulae and are used to depict the approximate positions of atoms in 3D space, as a perspective drawing.  Other types of representation, such as Newman projection , Haworth projection or Fischer projection , also look somewhat similar to skeletal formulae. However, there are slight differences in the conventions used, and the reader needs to be aware of them in order to understand the structural details encoded in the depiction. While skeletal and conformational structures are also used in organometallic and inorganic chemistry , the conventions employed also differ somewhat.

The skeleton [ edit ] Terminology [ edit ] The skeletal structure of an organic compound is the series of atoms bonded together that form the essential structure of the compound. The skeleton can consist of chains, branches and/or rings of bonded atoms. Skeletal atoms other than carbon or hydrogen are called heteroatoms .

[ 2 ] The skeleton has hydrogen and/or various substituents bonded to its atoms. Hydrogen is the most common non-carbon atom that is bonded to carbon and, for simplicity, is not explicitly drawn. In addition, carbon atoms are not generally labelled as such directly (i.e. with "C"), whereas heteroatoms are always explicitly noted as such ("N" for nitrogen , "O" for oxygen , etc.) Heteroatoms and other groups of atoms that give rise to relatively high rates of chemical reactivity, or introduce specific and interesting characteristics in the spectra of compounds are called functional groups , as they give the molecule a function. Heteroatoms and functional groups are collectively called "substituents", as they are considered to be a substitute for the hydrogen atom that would be present in the parent hydrocarbon of the organic compound.

Basic structure [ edit ] As in Lewis structures, covalent bonds are indicated by line segments, with a doubled or tripled line segment indicating double or triple bonding , respectively.  Likewise, skeletal formulae indicate formal charges associated with each atom, with lone pairs usually being optional (see below ) .  In fact, skeletal formulae can be thought of as abbreviated Lewis structures that observe the following simplifications: Carbon atoms are represented by the vertices (intersections or termini) of line segments.  For clarity, methyl groups are often explicitly written out as Me or CH 3 , while (hetero) cumulene carbons are frequently represented by a heavy center dot .

Hydrogen atoms attached to carbon are implied.  An unlabeled vertex is understood to represent a carbon attached to the number of hydrogens required to satisfy the octet rule , while a vertex labeled with a formal charge and/or nonbonding electron(s) is understood to have the number of hydrogen atoms required to give the carbon atom these indicated properties.  Optionally, acetylenic and formyl hydrogens can be shown explicitly for the sake of clarity.

Hydrogen atoms attached to a heteroatom are shown explicitly. The heteroatom and hydrogen atoms attached thereto are usually shown as a single group (e.g., OH, NH 2 ) without explicitly showing the hydrogen–heteroatom bond.  Heteroatoms with simple alkyl or aryl substituents, like methoxy (OMe) or dimethylamino (NMe 2 ), are sometimes shown in the same way, by analogy.

Lone pairs on carbene carbons must be indicated explicitly while lone pairs in other cases are optional and are shown only for emphasis.  In contrast, formal charges and unpaired electrons on main-group elements are always explicitly shown.

In the standard depiction of a molecule, the canonical form (resonance structure) with the greatest contribution is drawn.  However, the skeletal formula is understood to represent the "real molecule" –  that is, the weighted average of all contributing canonical forms.  Thus, in cases where two or more canonical forms contribute with equal weight (e.g., in benzene, or a carboxylate anion) and one of the canonical forms is selected arbitrarily, the skeletal formula is understood to depict the true structure, containing equivalent bonds of fractional order, even though the delocalized bonds are depicted as nonequivalent single and double bonds.

Contemporary graphical conventions [ edit ] Since skeletal structures were introduced in the latter half of the 19th century, their appearance has undergone considerable evolution. The graphical conventions in use today date to the 1980s. Thanks to the adoption of the ChemDraw software package as a de facto industry standard (by American Chemical Society , Royal Society of Chemistry , and Gesellschaft Deutscher Chemiker publications, for instance), these conventions have been nearly universal in the chemical literature since the late 1990s. A few minor conventional variations, especially with respect to the use of stereobonds, continue to exist as a result of differing US, UK and European practice, or as a matter of personal preference.

[ 3 ] As another minor variation between authors, formal charges can be shown with the plus or minus sign in a circle (⊕, ⊖) or without the circle. The set of conventions that are followed by most authors is given below, along with illustrative examples.

Bonds between sp 2 or sp 3 hybridized carbon or heteroatoms are conventionally represented using 120° angles whenever possible, with the longest chain of atoms following a zigzag pattern unless interrupted by a cis double bond. Unless all four substituents are explicit, this is true even when stereochemistry is being depicted using wedged or dashed bonds ( see below ).

[ b ] If all four substituents to a tetrahedral carbon are explicitly shown, bonds to the two in-plane substituents still meet at 120°; the other two substituents, however, are usually shown with wedged and dashed bonds (to depict stereochemistry) and subtend a smaller angle of 60–90°.

The linear geometry at sp hybridized atoms is normally depicted by line segments meeting at 180°. Where this involves two double bonds meeting (an allene or cumulene ), the bonds are separated by a dot.

Carbo- and heterocycles (3- to 8-membered) are generally represented as regular polygons; larger ring sizes tend to be represented by concave polygons.

[ c ] Atoms in a group are ordered so that the bond emanates from the atom that is directly attached to the skeleton. For example, the nitro group NO 2 is denoted —NO 2 or O 2 N— , depending on the placement of the bond. In contrast, the isomeric nitrite group is denoted —ONO or ONO— .

[ d ] Implicit carbon and hydrogen atoms [ edit ] For example, the skeletal formula of hexane (top) is shown below. The carbon atom labeled C 1 appears to have only one bond, so there must also be three hydrogens bonded to it, in order to make its total number of bonds four.  The carbon atom labelled C 3 has two bonds to other carbons and is therefore bonded to two hydrogen atoms as well. A Lewis structure (middle) and ball-and-stick model (bottom) of the actual molecular structure of hexane, as determined by X-ray crystallography , are shown for comparison.

The skeletal formula of hexane, with carbons number one and three labelled The Lewis structure of hexane, for reference The 3d ball representation of hexane, with carbon (black) and hydrogen (white) shown explicitly.

It does not matter which end of the chain one starts numbering from, as long as consistency is maintained when drawing diagrams. The condensed formula or the IUPAC name will confirm the orientation. Some molecules will become familiar regardless of the orientation.

Explicit heteroatoms and hydrogen atoms [ edit ] All atoms that are not carbon or hydrogen are signified by their chemical symbol , for instance Cl for chlorine , O for oxygen , Na for sodium , and so forth. In the context of organic chemistry, these atoms are commonly known as heteroatoms (the prefix hetero- comes from Greek ἕτερος héteros, meaning "other").

Any hydrogen atoms bonded to heteroatoms are drawn explicitly. In ethanol , C 2 H 5 OH, for instance, the hydrogen atom bonded to oxygen is denoted by the symbol H, whereas the hydrogen atoms which are bonded to carbon atoms are not shown directly.

Lines representing heteroatom-hydrogen bonds are usually omitted for clarity and compactness, so a functional group like the hydroxyl group is most often written −OH instead of −O−H. These bonds are sometimes drawn out in full in order to accentuate their presence when they participate in reaction mechanisms .

Shown below for comparison are a skeletal formula (top), its Lewis structure (middle) and its ball-and-stick model (bottom) of the actual 3D structure of the ethanol molecule in the gas phase, as determined by microwave spectroscopy .

Pseudoelement symbols [ edit ] There are also symbols that appear to be chemical element symbols , but represent certain very common substituents or indicate an unspecified member of a group of elements. These are called pseudoelement symbols or organic elements and are treated like univalent "elements" in skeletal formulae.

[ 4 ] A list of common pseudoelement symbols: General symbols [ edit ] X for any ( pseudo ) halogen atom (in the related MLXZ notation , X represents a one-electron donor ligand) L or L n for a ligand or ligands (in the related MLXZ notation, L represents a two-electron donor ligand) M or Met for any metal atom ([M] is used to indicate a ligated metal, ML n , when the identities of the ligands are unknown or irrelevant) E or El for any electrophile (in some contexts, E is also used to indicate any p-block element) Nu for any nucleophile Z for conjugating electron-withdrawing groups (in the related MLXZ notation, Z represents a zero-electron donor ligand; in unrelated usage, Z is also an abbreviation for the carboxybenzyl group .) D for deuterium ( 2 H) T for tritium ( 3 H) Alkyl groups [ edit ] R for any alkyl group or even any organyl group (Alk can be used to unambiguously indicate an alkyl group) Me for the methyl group Et for the ethyl group Pr, n -Pr, or n Pr for the ( normal ) propyl group ( Pr is also the symbol for the element praseodymium .  However, since the propyl group is monovalent, while praseodymium is nearly always trivalent, ambiguity rarely, if ever, arises in practice.

) i -Pr or i Pr for the isopropyl group All for the allyl group (uncommon) Bu, n -Bu or n Bu for the ( normal ) butyl group i -Bu or i Bu ( i often italicized) for the isobutyl group s -Bu or s Bu for the secondary butyl group t -Bu or t Bu for the tertiary butyl group Pn for the pentyl group ( or Am for the synonymous amyl group, although Am is also the symbol for americium .

) Np or Neo for the neopentyl group ( Warning: Organometallic chemists often use Np for the related neophyl group, PhMe 2 C–. Np is also the symbol for the element neptunium .

) Cy or Chx for the cyclohexyl group Ad for the 1- adamantyl group Tr or Trt for the trityl group Aromatic and unsaturated substituents [ edit ] Ar for any aromatic substituent (Ar is also the symbol for the element argon .  However, argon is inert under all usual conditions encountered in organic chemistry, so the use of Ar to represent an aryl substituent never causes confusion.) Het for any heteroaromatic substituent Bn or Bzl for the benzyl group ( not to be confused with Bz for benzoyl group; However, old literature may use Bz for benzyl group.

) Dipp for the 2,6-diisopropylphenyl group Mes for the mesityl group Ph, Φ, or φ for the phenyl group ( the use of phi for phenyl has been in decline ) Tol for the tolyl group, usually the para isomer Is or Tipp for the 2,4,6-triisopropylphenyl group ( the former symbol is derived from the synonym isityl ) An for the anisyl group, usually the para isomer ( An is also the symbol for a generic actinoid element .  However, since the anisyl group is monovalent, while the actinides are usually divalent, trivalent, or even higher valency, ambiguity rarely, if ever, arises in practice.

) Cp for the cyclopentadienyl group ( Cp was the symbol for cassiopeium, a former name for lutetium ) Cp* for the pentamethylcyclopentadienyl group Vi for the vinyl group (uncommon) Functional groups [ edit ] Ac for the acetyl group (Ac is also the symbol for the element actinium . However, actinium is almost never encountered in organic chemistry, so the use of Ac to represent the acetyl group never causes confusion) ; Bz for the benzoyl group; OBz is the benzoate group Piv for the pivalyl ( t -butylcarbonyl) group; OPiv is the pivalate group Bt for the 1-benzotriazolyl group Im for the 1-imidazolyl group NPhth for the phthalimide-1-yl group Sulfonyl/sulfonate groups [ edit ] Sulfonate esters are often leaving groups in nucleophilic substitution reactions.

See the articles on sulfonyl and sulfonate groups for further information.

Bs for the brosyl ( p -bromobenzenesulfonyl) group; OBs is the brosylate group Ms for the mesyl (methanesulfonyl) group; OMs is the mesylate group Ns for the nosyl ( p -nitrobenzenesulfonyl) group (Ns was the chemical symbol for nielsbohrium, but that was renamed bohrium , Bh) ; ONs is the nosylate group Tf for the triflyl (trifluoromethanesulfonyl) group; OTf is the triflate group Nf for the nonaflyl (nonafluorobutanesulfonyl) group, CF 3 (CF 2 ) 3 SO 2 ; ONf is the nonaflate group Ts for tosyl ( p- toluenesulfonyl) group (Ts is also the symbol for the element tennessine . However, tennessine is too unstable to ever be encountered in organic chemistry, so the use of Ts to represent tosyl never causes confusion) ; OTs is the tosylate group Protecting groups [ edit ] A protecting group or protective group is introduced into a molecule by chemical modification of a functional group to obtain chemoselectivity in a subsequent chemical reaction, facilitating multistep organic synthesis.

Boc for the t- butoxycarbonyl group Cbz or Z for the carboxybenzyl group Fmoc for the fluorenylmethoxycarbonyl group Alloc for the allyloxycarbonyl group Troc for the trichloroethoxycarbonyl group TMS, TBDMS, TES, TBDPS, TIPS, ... for various silyl ether groups PMB for the 4-methoxybenzyl group MOM for the methoxymethyl group THP for the 2-tetrahydropyranyl group Multiple bonds [ edit ] Two atoms can be bonded by sharing more than one pair of electrons. The common bonds to carbon are single, double and triple bonds. Single bonds are most common and are represented by a single, solid line between two atoms in a skeletal formula. Double bonds are denoted by two parallel lines, and triple bonds are shown by three parallel lines.

In more advanced theories of bonding, non- integer values of bond order exist. In these cases, a combination of solid and dashed lines indicate the integer and non-integer parts of the bond order, respectively.

Examples of multiple bonds in skeletal formulae [ e ] Hex-3-ene has an internal carbon–carbon double bond Hex-1-ene has a terminal double bond Hex-3-yne has an internal carbon–carbon triple bond Hex-1-yne has a terminal triple bond Benzene rings [ edit ] Thiele style: unified circle Kekulé style: alternating double bonds Represenatations of aromatic benzene ring In recent years, benzene is generally depicted as a hexagon with alternating single and double bonds, much like the structure Kekulé originally proposed in 1872.  As mentioned above, the alternating single and double bonds of "1,3,5-cyclohexatriene" are understood to be a drawing of one of the two equivalent canonical forms of benzene (the one explicitly shown and the one with the opposite pattern of formal single and double bonds), in which all carbon–carbon bonds are of equivalent length and have a bond order of exactly 1.5. For aryl rings in general, the two analogous canonical forms are almost always the primary contributors to the structure, but they are nonequivalent, so one structure may make a slightly greater contribution than the other, and bond orders may differ somewhat from 1.5.

An alternate representation that emphasizes this delocalization uses a circle, drawn inside the hexagon of single bonds, to represent the delocalized pi orbital .  This style, based on one proposed by Johannes Thiele , used to be very common in introductory organic chemistry textbooks and is still frequently used in informal settings.  However, because this depiction does not keep track of electron pairs and is unable to show the precise movement of electrons, it has largely been superseded by the Kekuléan depiction in pedagogical and formal academic contexts.

[ f ] Stereochemistry [ edit ] Different depictions of chemical bonds in skeletal formulas Stereochemistry is conveniently denoted in skeletal formulae: [ 5 ] Ball-and-stick model of ( R )-2-chloro-2-fluoropentane Skeletal formula of ( R )-2-chloro-2-fluoropentane Skeletal formula of ( S )-2-chloro-2-fluoropentane Skeletal formula of amphetamine , indicating a mixture of two stereoisomers: ( R )- and ( S )- The relevant chemical bonds can be depicted in several ways: Solid lines represent bonds in the plane of the paper or screen.

Solid wedges represent bonds that point out of the plane of the paper or screen, towards the observer.

Hashed wedges or dashed lines (thick or thin) represent bonds that point into the plane of the paper or screen, away from the observer.

[ g ] Wavy lines represent either unknown stereochemistry or a mixture of the two possible stereoisomers at that point.

An obsolescent [ h ] depiction of hydrogen stereochemistry that used to be common in steroid chemistry is the use of a filled circle centered on a vertex (sometimes called H-dot/H-dash/H-circle, respectively) for an upward pointing hydrogen atom and two hash marks next to vertex or a hollow circle for a downward pointing hydrogen atom.

A small filled circle represented an upward pointing hydrogen, while two hash marks represented a downward pointing one.

An early use of this notation can be traced back to Richard Kuhn who in 1932 used solid thick lines and dotted lines in a publication. The modern solid and hashed wedges were introduced in the 1940s by Giulio Natta to represent the structure of high polymers , and extensively popularised in the 1959 textbook Organic Chemistry by Donald J. Cram and George S. Hammond .

[ 6 ] Skeletal formulae can depict cis and trans isomers of alkenes. Wavy single bonds are the standard way to represent unknown or unspecified stereochemistry or a mixture of isomers (as with tetrahedral stereocenters). A crossed double-bond has been used sometimes; it is no longer considered an acceptable style for general use but may still be required by computer software.

[ 5 ] Alkene stereochemistry Hydrogen bonds [ edit ] Dashed lines (green) to show hydrogen bonding in acetic acid .

Hydrogen bonds are generally denoted by dotted or dashed lines.  In other contexts, dashed lines may also represent partially formed or broken bonds in a transition state .

Notes [ edit ] ^ This term is ambiguous, because "Kekulé structure" also refers to Kekulé's famous proposal of a hexagon of alternating single and double bonds for the structure of benzene.

^ To prevent a 'kink' from emerging and causing a structure to take up too much vertical space on a page, the IUPAC (Brecher, 2008, p. 352) makes an exception for long chain cis -olefins (such as oleic acid ), allowing the cis double bond within them to be depicted with 150° angles, so that the zigzags on either side of the double bond can propagate horizontally.

^ Smaller rings may also be drawn as concave to show stereochemistry (such as the conformations of cyclohexane ) or polycyclic molecules that cannot be drawn 'flat' without significant distortion (such as tropane and adamantane ).

^ In cases where the atom has bonds coming from both the left and right (such as a secondary amine NH in the middle of a chain), some authors allow the group's formula to be stacked vertically whereas others draw an explicit vertical bond within the group.

^ In this gallery, double bonds have been shown in red and triple bonds in blue. This was added for clarity – multiple bonds are not normally coloured in skeletal formulae.

^ For instance, the acclaimed 1959 textbook by Morrison and Boyd (6th edition, 1992) uses the Thiele notation as its standard depiction of the aryl ring, while the 2001 textbook by Clayden, Greeves, Warren, and Wothers (2nd edition, 2012) uses the Kekulé notation throughout and warns students to avoid using the Thiele notation when writing mechanisms (p. 144, 2nd ed.).

^ American and European chemists use slightly different conventions for a hashed bond.  Whereas most American chemists draw hashed bonds with short hash marks close to the stereocenter and long hash marks further away (in analogy to wedged bonds), most European chemists start with long hash marks close to the stereocenter that gradually become shorter moving away (in analogy to perspective drawing).  In the past, the IUPAC has suggested the use of a hashed bond with hash marks of equal length throughout as a compromise but now prefers the American-style hashed bonds (Brecher, 2006, p. 1905).

Some chemists use a thick bond and dotted bond (or hashed bond with equal length hashes) to depict relative stereochemistry and a wedged bond and hashed bond with unequal hashes to depict absolute stereochemistry ; most others do not make this distinction.

^ The IUPAC now strongly deprecates this notation.

References [ edit ] ^ IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology (5 ed.). Research Triangle Park, NC: International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. 2025.

doi : 10.1351/goldbook.08208 .

^ IUPAC Recommendations 1999, Revised Section F: Replacement of Skeletal Atoms ^ Brecher, Jonathan (2008).

"Graphical representation standards for chemical structure diagrams (IUPAC Recommendations 2008)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

80 (2): 277– 410.

doi : 10.1351/pac200880020277 .

hdl : 10092/2052 .

ISSN 1365-3075 .

^ Clayden, Jonathan ; Greeves, Nick; Warren, Stuart ; Wothers, Peter (2001).

Organic Chemistry (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-19-850346-0 .

^ a b Brecher, Jonathan (2006).

"Graphical representation of stereochemical configuration (IUPAC Recommendations 2006)" (PDF) .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

78 (10): 1897– 1970.

doi : 10.1351/pac200678101897 .

S2CID 97528124 .

^ Jensen, William B.

(2013). "The Historical Origins of Stereochemical Line and Wedge Symbolism".

Journal of Chemical Education .

90 (5): 676– 677.

Bibcode : 2013JChEd..90..676J .

doi : 10.1021/ed200177u .

External links [ edit ] Drawing organic molecules from chemguide.co.uk v t e Molecular visualization Chemical formulas Non-structural formulas Empirical formula Molecular formula Structural formulas Lewis structure Condensed formula Skeletal formula Molecular models Ball-and-stick model Space-filling model CPK coloring Other ways Molecular graph SMILES InChl v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐xhvrc
Cached time: 20250812000826
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.451 seconds
Real time usage: 0.602 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1879/1000000
Revision size: 28781/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 74349/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4833/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56558/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.260/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5611816/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  464.468      1 -total
 26.92%  125.017      2 Template:Reflist
 19.66%   91.294      4 Template:Navbox
 18.58%   86.309      2 Template:Cite_book
 17.69%   82.170      1 Template:Molecular_visualization
 14.97%   69.553      1 Template:Short_description
 10.07%   46.782      1 Template:Gallery
  8.99%   41.736      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.59%   35.243      1 Template:Redirect
  4.27%   19.831      1 Template:Multiple_image Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:625232:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000826 and revision id 1283391771. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skeletal_formula&oldid=1283391771 " Categories : Organic chemistry Chemical formulas Chemical structures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skeletal formula 22 languages Add topic

