Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Connotations 2 Hindu texts and philosophy 3 Avatars 4 Buddhism 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Vayu 49 languages Alemannisch العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bosanski Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk nynorsk ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Qırımtatarca Русский संस्कृतम् Simple English Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu god of the wind For other uses, see Vayu (disambiguation) .

Vāyu God of Air , Wind , and Breath Member of the Pancha Bhuta and Dikpala Vayu on his Vahana .

Other names Anila (अनिल) Pávana (पवन) Vyāna (व्यान) Vāta (वात) Tanūna (तनून) Mukhyaprāṇa (मुख्यप्राण) Bhīma (भीम) Maruta (मारुत) Devanagari वायु Sanskrit transliteration Vāyu Affiliation Deva Abode Vayu Loka, Satya Loka Mantra Om Vayave Namaha Weapon Mace (weapon of Mukhyaprana Vayu) Goad (weapon of Dikpala Vayu) Vayavyastra (Vayu's astra ) Mount Chariot drawn by Horses , Gazelle Genealogy Parents Vishvapurusha (according to the Rigveda ) [ 1 ] Vishnu and Lakshmi (according to Madhva sect ) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Consort A daughter of Tvashta (according to the Rigveda ) [ 5 ] Svasti (according to the Devi Bhagavata Purana ) [ 1 ] [ 6 ] Bharati (according to Madhva sect ) [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Children Mudā Apsaras (daughters) [ 1 ] Hanuman (son) Bhima (son) Equivalents Indo-European H₂weh₁yú Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Vayu ( Sanskrit : वायु , romanized : Vāyu , lit.

'Wind/Air'; Sanskrit pronunciation: [ʋaːju] ), also known as Vata ( Sanskrit : वात , romanized : Vāta , lit.

'Wind/Air') and Pavana ( Sanskrit : पवन , romanized : Pávana , lit.

'Purifier'), [ 9 ] is the Hindu god of the winds as well as the divine messenger of the gods. In the Vedic scriptures , Vayu is an important deity and is closely associated with Indra , the king of gods. He is mentioned to be born from the breath of Supreme Being Vishvapurusha and also the first one to drink Soma .

[ 10 ] The Upanishads praise him as Prana or 'life breath of the world'. In the later Hindu scriptures, he is described as a dikpala (one of the guardians of the direction), who looks over the north-west direction.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The Hindu epics describe him as the father of the god Hanuman and Bhima .

[ 13 ] The followers of the 13th-century saint Madhva believe their guru as an incarnation of Vāyu.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] They worship the wind deity as Mukhyaprana ( Sanskrit : मुख्यप्राण , romanized : Mukhyaprāṇa , lit.

'Chief Prana ') and consider him as the son of the god Vishnu .

Connotations [ edit ] The word for air ( vāyu ) or wind ( pavana ) is one of the classical elements in Hinduism . The Sanskrit word Vāta literally means ' blown '; Vāyu , ' blower ' and Prāna , ' breathing ' (viz. the breath of life, cf. the * an - in animate ). Hence, the primary referent of the word is the 'deity of life', who is sometimes for clarity referred to as Mukhya-Vāyu (the chief Vayu) or Mukhya Prāna (the chief of life force or vital force).

[ 17 ] Sometimes the word vāyu , which is more generally used in the sense of the physical air or wind, is used as a synonym for prāna .

[ 18 ] Vāta, an additional name for the deity Vayu, is the root of vātāvaranam , the Sanskrit and Hindi term for 'atmosphere'.

[ 19 ] Hindu texts and philosophy [ edit ] Kushan ruler Kanishka I with deity Oado (Vayu-Vata) on the reverse. Circa 120-150 CE In the Rigveda , Vayu is associated with the winds, with the Maruts being described as being born from Vayu's belly. Vayu is also the first god to receive soma in the ritual, and then he and Indra share their first drink.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] In the hymns, Vayu is 'described as having "exceptional beauty" and moving noisily in his shining coach, driven by two or forty-nine or one-thousand white and purple horses. A white banner is his main attribute'.

[ 9 ] Like the other atmospheric deities, he is a 'fighter and destroyer', 'powerful and heroic'.

[ 22 ] In the Upanishads , there are numerous statements and illustrations of the greatness of Vayu. The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad says that the gods who control bodily functions once engaged in a contest to determine who among them is the greatest. When a deity such as that of vision would leave a man's body, that man would continue to live, albeit as a blind man and having regained the lost faculty once the errant deity returned to his post. One by one the deities all took their turns leaving the body, but the man continued to live on, though successively impaired in various ways.  Finally, when Mukhya Prāna started to leave the body, all the other deities started to be inexorably pulled off their posts by force, 'just as a powerful horse yanks off pegs in the ground to which he is bound'. This caused the other deities to realize that they can function only when empowered by Vayu, and can be overpowered by him easily. In another episode, Vayu is said to be the only deity not afflicted by demons of sin who were on the attack. This Vayu is "Mukhya Prana Vayu".

[ 23 ] The Chandogya Upanishad says that one cannot know Brahman except by knowing Vayu as the udgitha (the mantric syllable om ).

[ 24 ] Avatars [ edit ] Vayu sculpture, Gokarneshwor Mahadev Temple, Gokarna, Kathmandu American Indologist Philip Lutgendorf says, "According to Madhva whenever Vishnu incarnates on earth, Mukhya Prana/Vayu accompanies him and aids his work of preserving dharma. Hanuman the friend and helper of Rama in the Treta Yuga , the strongman Bhima in Mahabharata , set at the end of Dvapara Yuga and Madhva in the Kali Yuga . Moreover, since the deity himself does not appear on earth until the end of kali age, the incarnate Vayu/ Madhva serves during this period as the sole 'means' to bring souls to salvation".

[ 25 ] Vayu is also known as Pavana and Matharishwa.

In the Mahabharata , Bhima was the spiritual son of Vayu and played a major role in the Kurukshetra War . He utilised his huge power and skill with the mace for supporting Dharma.

The first avatar of Vayu is considered to be Hanuman . His stories are told in Ramayana . Since Hanuman is the spiritual son of Vayu he is also called Pavanaputra 'son of Pavana' and Vāyuputra. Today, Pavan is a fairly common Hindu name.

The second avatar of Vayu is Bhima , one of the Pandavas appearing in the epic the Mahabharata .

[ 26 ] Madhvacharya , is considered as the third avatar of Vayu. Madhva declared himself as an avatar of Vayu and showed the verses in Rigveda as a proof.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Author C. Ramakrishna Rao says, "Madhva explained the Balitha Sukta in the Rigveda as referring to the three forms of Vayu".

[ 30 ] Buddhism [ edit ] In East Asian Buddhism, Vayu is a dharmapāla and often classed as one of the Twelve Devas ( Japanese : 十二天 , romanized : Jūniten ) grouped together as directional guardians. He presides over the northwest direction.

[ 31 ] In Japan, he is called Fūten ( 風天 ). He is included with the other eleven devas, which include Taishakuten ( Śakra/Indra ), Katen ( Agni ), Enmaten ( Yama ), Rasetsuten ( Nirṛti / Rākṣasa ), Ishanaten ( Īśāna ), Bishamonten ( Vaiśravaṇa/Kubera ), Suiten ( Varuṇa ) Bonten ( Brahmā ), Jiten ( Pṛthivī ), Nitten ( Sūrya/Āditya ) and Gatten ( Candra ).

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Classical elements Hellenistic Air Water Aether Fire Earth Hinduism / Jainism / Buddhism Vayu Ap Akasha Agni Prithvi Chinese Wood ( 木 ) Water ( 水 ) Fire ( 火 ) Metal ( 金 ) Earth ( 土 ) Japanese Wind ( 風 ) Water ( 水 ) Void ( 空 ) Fire ( 火 ) Earth ( 地 ) European alchemy Air Water Fire Aether Earth Sulphur Mercury Salt v t e List of wind deities Maruts Rudras Rudra , the Vedic wind or storm God Vayu Purana Vayu-Vata Nusa Bayu Fūjin , Shinto Kami of winds Aeolus References [ edit ] ^ a b c Mani, Vettam (1975).

Puranic encyclopaedia : a comprehensive dictionary with special reference to the epic and Puranic literature . Robarts - University of Toronto. Delhi : Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-0-8426-0822-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Jeffrey R. Timm (1 January 1992).

Texts in Context: Traditional Hermeneutics in South Asia . SUNY Press. p. 113.

ISBN 9780791407967 .

^ Khagendranath Mitra (1952).

The Dynamics of Faith: Comparative Religion . University of Calcutta. p. 209.

Brahmā and Vāyu are the sons of Vishnu and Lakshmi.

^ Satyavrata Ramdas Patel (1980).

Hinduism, Religion and Way of Life . Associated Publishing House. p. 124.

ISBN 9780686997788 .

The Supreme Being, Vishnu or Nārāyana, is the personal first cause. He is the Intelligent Governor of the world and lives in Vaikuntha along with Lakshmi, His consort. He and His consort Lakshmi are real. Brahma and Vāyu are His two sons.

^ Muir, J. (6 June 2022).

Original Sanskrit Texts on the Origin and History of The People of India: Volume Fifth . BoD – Books on Demand.

ISBN 978-3-375-04617-0 .

^ www.wisdomlib.org (15 May 2013).

"On the description of Prakṛti [Chapter 1]" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 28 April 2024 .

^ Gaṇeśa Harī Khare; Madhukar Shripad Mate; G. T. Kulkarni (1974).

Studies in Indology and Medieval History: Prof. G. H. Khare Felicitation Volume . Joshi & Lokhande Prakashan. p. 244.

In Vayu and other Puranas, Vayudeva (different from Astadikpala Vayu), next to Brahma in grade, is also said to have five heads like Siva and Brahma and his consort is Bharatidevi.

^ M. V. Krishna Rao (1966).

Purandara and the Haridasa Movement . Karnatak University. p. 200.

^ a b Eva Rudy Jansen; Tony Langham (1993), The book of Hindu imagery: The Gods and their Symbols , Binkey Kok Publications, ISBN 978-90-74597-07-4 , God of the wind ... also known as Vata or Pavan ... exceptional beauty ... moves on noisily in his shining coach ... white banner ...

^ Jamison, Stephanie W.; Brereton, Joel P. (2014).

The Rigveda: The Earliest Religious Poetry of India . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-937018-4 .

^ Williams, George M. (27 March 2008).

Handbook of Hindu Mythology . Oup USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-533261-2 .

^ Chandra, Suresh (1998).

Encyclopaedia of Hindu Gods and Goddesses . Sarup & Sons.

ISBN 978-81-7625-039-9 .

^ Daniélou, Alain (December 1991).

The Myths and Gods of India: The Classic Work on Hindu Polytheism from the Princeton Bollingen Series . Inner Traditions / Bear & Co.

ISBN 9780892813544 .

^ Jeffery D. Long (9 September 2011).

Historical Dictionary of Hinduism . Scarecrow Press. p. 187.

ISBN 9780810879607 .

Born near Udipi in Karnataka, where he spent most of his life, Madhva is believed by his devotees to be the third incarnation or avatāra of Vāyu, the Vedic god of the wind (the first two incarnations being Hanuman and Bhīma).

^ Ravi Prakash (15 January 2022).

Religious Debates in Indian Philosophy . K.K. Publications. p. 176.

According to tradition, Madhvacarya is believed to be the third incarnation of Vayu (Mukhyaprana), after Hanuman and Bhima.

^ R. K. Madhukar (1 January 2014).

Gayatri: The Profound Prayer . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 90.

ISBN 978-8178-22467-1 .

Vayu is accorded the status of a deva, an important God in the ancient literature. Lord Hanuman, who is considered to be one of the avatars of Vayudeva, is described as Mukhyaprana.

^ Subodh Kapoor (2002).

Indian Encyclopaedia, Volume 1 . Genesis Publishing Pvt Ltd. p. 7839.

ISBN 9788177552577 .

Mukhya Prana - The chief vital air ^ Raju, P.T. (1954), "The concept of the spiritual in Indian thought", Philosophy East and West , 4 (3): 195– 213, doi : 10.2307/1397554 , JSTOR 1397554 .

^ Vijaya Ghose; Jaya Ramanathan; Renuka N. Khandekar (1992), Tirtha, the treasury of Indian expressions , CMC Limited, ISBN 978-81-900267-0-3 , ... God of the winds ... Another name for Vayu is Vata (hence the present Hindi term for 'atmosphere, 'vatavaran). Also known as Pavana (the purifier), Vayu is lauded in both the ...

^ Stephanie Jamison (2015).

The Rigveda –– Earliest Religious Poetry of India . Oxford University Press. p. 47.

ISBN 978-0190633394 .

^ Rigveda,Mandala 1,Hymn 2 ^ Sukumari Bhattacharji (1984), Literature in the Vedic age , K.P. Bagchi, ... The other atmospheric gods are his associates: Vayu-Vatah, Parjanya, the Rudras and the Maruts. All of them are fighters and destroyers, they are powerful and heroic ...

^ Shoun Hino; K. P. Jog (1995).

Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣadbhāṣya . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. p. 158.

ISBN 9788120812833 .

Vāyu indicates Mukhya Prāṇa.

^ Chandogya Upanishad, Adhyaya XVIII, Verse 4; http://www.swamij.com/upanishad-chandogya.htm ^ Lutgendorf 2007 , p. 67.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFLutgendorf2007 ( help ) ^ "The Mahabharata, Book 1: Adi Parva: Sambhava Parva: Section LXVII" .

^ History of the Dvaita School and Its literature , pg 173 ^ "Balittha Suktha -Text From Rig Veda" . raghavendramutt.org. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016.

^ Indian Philosophy & Culture, Volume 15 . The Institute. 1970. p. 24.

^ Chintagunta Ramakrishna Rao (1960).

Madhva and Brahma Tarka . Majestic Press. p. 9.

^ "Twelve Heavenly Deities (Devas)" .

Nara National Museum, Japan . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ "juuniten 十二天" .

JAANUS . Retrieved 23 January 2019 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Vanamali, V (2010).

Hanuman: The Devotion and Power of the Monkey God . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1594779145 .

Sholapurkar, G. R. (1992), Saints and Sages of India , Bharatiya Vidya Prakashan, ISBN 9788121700498 External links [ edit ] Media related to Vayu at Wikimedia Commons v t e Hindu deities and texts Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Ashvins Chandra Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kama Kartikeya Krishna Kubera Rama Shasta Surya Varuna Vayu Vishvakarma Yama more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Aditi Bhumi Chhaya Durga Ganga Gayatri Indrani Kali Mahadevi Mahavidya Matrikas Radha Rati Rohini Rukmini Sanjna Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Deity groups Adityas Apsaras Asuras Daitya Danavas Devatas Dikpalas Gandharvas Ganas Gramadevatas Kuladevatas Kinnaras Kimpurushas Maruts Navagraha Pitṛs Rakshasas Rudras Ribhus Sadhyas Vahanas Vasus Vidyadharas Yakshas / Yakshini Texts ( list ) Vedas Rig Sama Yajur Atharva Upanishads Puranas Ramayana Mahabharata Bhagavad Gita Yoga Sutras of Patanjali more Hinduism Hindu mythology Authority control databases : National United States NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fv4b
Cached time: 20250817043936
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.829 seconds
Real time usage: 0.980 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3592/1000000
Revision size: 17768/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 180770/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4932/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 137729/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.497/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18854971/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  769.201      1 -total
 29.54%  227.203      1 Template:Reflist
 21.16%  162.755     20 Template:Cite_book
 17.78%  136.775      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.31%  117.788      1 Template:Hinduism
 13.63%  104.852      5 Template:Langx
 10.27%   78.991      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  7.36%   56.638      1 Template:Short_description
  6.36%   48.918      1 Template:Infobox
  4.12%   31.654      1 Template:Hindu_Culture_and_Epics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:100589:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043936 and revision id 1300309244. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vayu&oldid=1300309244 " Categories : Characters in the Mahabharata Classical elements Hindu gods Lokapala Rigvedic deities Wind gods Hanuman Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2015 Use Indian English from December 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Pages with Sanskrit IPA Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vayu 49 languages Add topic

