Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pulsars and high-precision timing 2 Detection of gravitational waves 3 Telescopes 4 LEAP 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents European Pulsar Timing Array 4 languages فارسی Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Five-radio telescope collaboration to track stellar remnants' gravitational waves The EPTA logo.

The European Pulsar Timing Array ( EPTA ) is a European collaboration to combine five 100-m class radio-telescopes to observe an array of pulsars with the specific goal of detecting gravitational waves . It is one of several pulsar timing array projects in operation, and one of the four projects comprising the International Pulsar Timing Array , the others being the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array , the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves , and the Indian Pulsar Timing Array .

Pulsars and high-precision timing [ edit ] Pulsars are rapidly rotating, highly magnetised neutron stars that emit radio waves from their magnetic poles that are, due to the star's rotation, observed on Earth as a string of pulses. Due to the extremely high density of neutron stars, their rotation periods are very stable, hence the observed arrival time of the pulses are highly regular. These arrival times are called TOAs (time of arrival) and can be used to perform high-precision timing experiments.

The stability of the TOAs from most pulsars is limited due to the presence of red noise , also called "timing noise".

[ 1 ] However, there is a special class of pulsars, called millisecond pulsars (MSP), that are shown to suffer from little or no timing noise.

[ citation needed ] Keeping track of the TOAs of different MSPs over the sky allows for a high-precision timing experiment to detect gravitational waves .

Detection of gravitational waves [ edit ] Gravitational waves (GW) are small disturbances in space-time, caused by the motion of masses, if the third time derivative of the mass quadrupole moment is non-zero. These waves are very weak, such that only the strongest waves, caused by the rapid motion of dense stars or black-holes, have a chance of being detected. A pulsar timing array (PTA) uses an array of MSPs as the endpoints of a Galaxy-scale GW detector . It is sensitive to GWs with a frequency in the nanohertz regime, which corresponds to the regime where the stochastic GW background, caused by the coalescence of super-massive black holes in the early Universe, is predicted to exist.

[ citation needed ] This makes PTAs complementary to other GW detectors such as LIGO , VIRGO and LISA .

The EPTA is one component of a worldwide collaboration for detecting and measuring gravitational waves, the International Pulsar Timing Array , which also includes the North American Nanohertz Observatory for Gravitational Waves (NANOGrav) and the Parkes Pulsar Timing Array (PPTA).

Telescopes [ edit ] The EPTA uses five European telescopes. These are the Westerbork Synthesis Radio Telescope , the Effelsberg Radio Telescope , the Lovell Telescope , the Nançay Radio Telescope and the Sardinia Radio Telescope .

LEAP [ edit ] The LEAP logo.

Since 2009, the EPTA has made some progress thanks to a project European Research Council funded project known as the Large European Array for Pulsars (LEAP). The aim of this project is to coherently combine the five EPTA telescopes to synthesise the equivalent of a fully steerable 194-m dish.

[ 2 ] This will improve the accuracy with which the pulsar TOAs can be measured by an order of magnitude, essential for the first detection of gravitational waves within the next decade.

[ citation needed ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Z. Arzoumanian, D.J. Nice, J.H. Taylor, and S.E. Thorsett. " Timing behavior of 96 radio pulsars ." The Astrophysical Journal, volume 422, February 1994 (pages 671-680).

^ The Large European Array for Pulsars External links [ edit ] European Pulsar Timing Array v t e Gravitational-wave astronomy Gravitational wave Gravitational-wave observatory Detectors Resonant mass antennas Active NAUTILUS ( IGEC ) AURIGA ( IGEC ) MiniGRAIL Mario Schenberg Past EXPLORER ( IGEC ) ALLEGRO ( IGEC ) NIOBE ( IGEC ) Stanford gravitational wave detector ALTAIR GEOGRAV AGATA Weber bar Proposed TOBA Past proposals GRAIL (downsized to MiniGRAIL ) TIGA SFERA Graviton (downsized to Mario Schenberg ) Ground-based interferometers Active AIGO ( ACIGA ) CLIO Fermilab holometer GEO600 Advanced LIGO ( LIGO Scientific Collaboration ) KAGRA Advanced Virgo ( European Gravitational Observatory ) Past TAMA 300 TAMA 20, later known as LISM TENKO-100 Caltech 40m interferometer Planned INDIGO (LIGO-India) Proposed Cosmic Explorer Einstein Telescope Past proposals LIGO-Australia Space-based interferometers Planned LISA Proposed Big Bang Observer DECIGO TianQin Pulsar timing arrays EPTA IPTA NANOGrav PPTA Data analysis Einstein@Home PyCBC Zooniverse : Gravity Spy Observations Events List of observations First observation (GW150914) GW151226 GW170104 GW170608 GW170814 GW170817 (first neutron star merger ) GW190412 GW190521 (first-ever possible light from bh-bh merger) GW190814 (first-ever "mass gap" collision) GW200105 (first black hole - neutron star merger) Methods Direct detection Laser interferometers Resonant mass detectors Proposed: Atom interferometers Indirect detection B-modes of CMB Pulsar timing array Binary pulsar Theory General relativity Tests of general relativity Metric theories Graviton Effects / properties Polarization Spin-flip Redshift Travel with speed of light h strain Chirp signal ( chirp mass ) Carried energy Gravitational wave background Types / sources Stochastic Cosmic inflation - quantum fluctuation Phase transition Binary inspiral Supermassive black holes Stellar black holes Neutron stars EMRI Continuous Rotating neutron star Burst Supernova or from unknown sources Hypothesis Colliding cosmic string and other unknown sources Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Pulsar_Timing_Array&oldid=1220367251 " Categories : Astronomical instruments Astronomy in Europe Gravitational-wave telescopes Pulsars Radio telescopes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 This page was last edited on 23 April 2024, at 10:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Pulsar Timing Array 4 languages Add topic

