Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation Toggle Formation subsection 1.1 Hydrogen evaporation from giant planets 1.2 White dwarf remnants 2 Characteristics 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Helium planet 21 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Planet with helium-dominated atmosphere Helium planets would have a white or grey hue. (Artist's conception shown.) A helium planet is a planet with a helium -dominated atmosphere. This contrasts with ordinary gas giants such as Jupiter and Saturn , whose atmospheres consist primarily of hydrogen , with helium as a secondary component only. Helium planets might form in a variety of ways.

Gliese 436 b is a possible helium planet.

Formation [ edit ] There are several hypotheses for how a helium planet might form.

Hydrogen evaporation from giant planets [ edit ] Formation of a helium planet from a hot giant planet through atmospheric escape , possibly like Gliese 436 b .

A helium planet might form via hydrogen evaporation from a gaseous planet orbiting close to a star. The star will drive off lighter gases more effectively through evaporation than heavier gasses, and over time deplete the hydrogen, leaving a greater proportion of helium behind.

[ 1 ] A scenario for forming helium planets from regular giant planets involves an ice giant , in an orbit so close to its host star that the hydrogen effectively boils out of the atmosphere, evaporating from and escaping the gravitational hold of the planet. The planet's atmosphere will experience a large energy input and because light gases are more readily evaporated than heavier gases, the proportion of helium will steadily increase in the remaining atmosphere. Such a process will take some time to stabilize and completely drive out all the hydrogen, perhaps on the order of 10 billion years, depending on the precise physical conditions and the nature of the planet and the star.

Hot Neptunes are candidates for such a scenario.

The loss of hydrogen also leads to a depletion of methane in the atmosphere. On ice giants, methane naturally forms a cycle of melting, evaporation, breakdown and subsequent recombination and condensation. But as hydrogen gets depleted, a fraction of the carbon atoms will not be able to recombine with free hydrogen in the atmosphere and over time this will lead to an overall loss of methane. With time, the methane in the atmospheres of hot ice giants will also get depleted.

[ 1 ] White dwarf remnants [ edit ] A helium-rich planetary object may also form from a low-mass white dwarf , which gets depleted of hydrogen via mass transfer in a close binary system with a second, massive object like a neutron star .

One scenario involves an AM CVn type of symbiotic binary star composed of two helium-core white dwarfs surrounded by a circumbinary helium accretion disk formed during mass transfer from the less massive to the more massive white dwarf. After it loses most of its mass, the less massive white dwarf may approach planetary mass.

[ 2 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Helium planets are expected to be distinguishable from regular hydrogen-dominated planets by strong evidence of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Due to hydrogen depletion, the expected methane in the atmosphere cannot form because there is no hydrogen for the carbon to combine with, hence carbon combines with oxygen instead, forming CO and CO 2 . Due to the atmospheric composition, helium planets are expected to be white or grey in appearance.

[ 1 ] Such a signature can be found in Gliese 436 b, which has a predominance of carbon monoxide, and is hypothesized to be a helium planet.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Planet § Formation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Helium-Shrouded Planets May Be Common in Our Galaxy" . SpaceDaily. 16 June 2015 . Retrieved 3 August 2015 .

^ Seager, S.; M. Kuchner; C. Hier-Majumder; B. Militzer (2007). "Mass-Radius Relationships for Solid Exoplanets".

Astrophysical Journal .

669 (2): 1279– 1297.

arXiv : 0707.2895 .

Bibcode : 2007ApJ...669.1279S .

doi : 10.1086/521346 .

S2CID 8369390 .

External links [ edit ] Helium Atmospheres on Warm Neptune- and Sub-Neptune-Sized Exoplanets and Applications to GJ 436 b , Renyu Hu, Sara Seager, Yuk L. Yung, 9 May 2015 v t e Exoplanets Planet Definition IAU Planetary science Main topics Exoplanet Exoplanet orbital and physical parameters Methods of detecting exoplanets Planetary system Planet-hosting stars Sizes and types Terrestrial Carbon planet Catastrophically evaporating planet Coreless planet Desert planet Dwarf planet Hycean planet Ice planet Iron planet (Super-Mercury) Lava planet Ocean world Mega-Earth Steam world Sub-Earth Super-Earth Gaseous Cold Jupiter Eccentric Jupiter Mini-Neptune (Gas dwarf) Helium planet Hot Jupiter Hot Neptune Gas giant Ice giant Neptunian Jupiter analogue Super-Jupiter Super-Neptune Super-puff Ultra-hot Jupiter Ultra-hot Neptune Warm Jupiter Other types Blanet Brown dwarf Chthonian planet Circumbinary planet Circumtriple planet Disrupted planet Double planet Ecumenopolis Eyeball planet Giant planet Mesoplanet Planemo Planet/Brown dwarf boundary Planetesimal Protoplanet Pulsar planet Sub-brown dwarf Sub-Neptune Toroidal planet Ultra-cool dwarf Ultra-short period planet (USP) Formation and evolution Accretion Accretion disk Asteroid belt Circumplanetary disk Circumstellar disc Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Debris disk Detached object Disrupted planet Excretion disk Exozodiacal dust Extraterrestrial materials Extraterrestrial sample curation Giant-impact hypothesis Gravitational collapse Hills cloud Internal structure Interplanetary dust cloud Interplanetary medium Interplanetary space Interstellar cloud Interstellar dust Interstellar medium Interstellar space Kuiper belt List of interstellar and circumstellar molecules Merging stars Molecular cloud Nebular hypothesis Oort cloud Outer space Planetary migration Planetary system Planetesimal Planet formation Protoplanetary disk Radial drift Ring system Rubble pile Sample-return mission Scattered disc Star formation Systems Exocomet Interstellar Exomoon Tidally detached Rogue planet Jupiter-mass binary objects Orbits Retrograde Trojan Mean-motion resonances Titius–Bode law Host stars A B Binary star Brown dwarfs F/Yellow-white dwarfs G/Yellow dwarfs Herbig Ae/Be K/Orange dwarfs M/Red dwarfs Pulsar Red giant Subdwarf B Subgiant T Tauri White dwarfs Yellow giants Detection Astrometry Direct imaging list Microlensing list Polarimetry Timing list Radial velocity list Transit method list Transit-timing variation Habitability Astrobiology Astrooceanography Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Catalogues Nearby Habitable Systems Exoplanet Data Explorer Extrasolar Planets Encyclopaedia NASA Exoplanet Archive NASA Star and Exoplanet Database Open Exoplanet Catalogue Lists Exoplanetary systems Host stars Multiplanetary systems Stars with proto-planetary discs Exoplanets Discoveries Extremes Firsts Nearest Largest Heaviest Terrestrial candidates Kepler 1–500 501–1000 1001–1500 1501–2000 K2 Potentially habitable Proper names Discovered exoplanets by year before 2000 2000–2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Other Carl Sagan Institute Exoplanet naming convention Exoplanet phase curves Exoplanetary Circumstellar Environments and Disk Explorer Extragalactic planet Extrasolar planets in fiction Geodynamics of terrestrial exoplanets Neptunian desert Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Planets in globular clusters Small planet radius gap Sudarsky's gas giant classification Discoveries of exoplanets Search projects Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Helium_planet&oldid=1224420437 " Categories : Hypothetical planet types Helium Hydrogen Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 18 May 2024, at 09:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Helium planet 21 languages Add topic

