Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Training 2 Watchmaker as metaphor 3 In popular culture 4 Historical watchmakers 5 See also 6 Further reading 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Watchmaker 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artisan who makes and repairs watches For the 2011 Georgian film, see The Watchmaker .

For the theological argument, see watchmaker analogy .

A modern watchmaker at his workstation; he wears a magnifying loupe to more easily see the small parts of a watch A watchmaker's lathe in use to prepare a decorative watch component cut from copper A watchmaker is an artisan who makes and repairs watches . Since many watches are now factory-made, some modern watchmakers only repair watches. However, originally they were master craftsmen who built watches, including all their parts, by hand.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Modern watchmakers, when required to repair older watches, for which replacement parts may not be available, must have fabrication skills, and can typically manufacture replacements for many of the parts found in a watch. The term clockmaker refers to an equivalent occupation specializing in clocks .

Most practising professional watchmakers service current or recent production watches.  They seldom fabricate replacement parts. Instead they obtain and fit factory spare parts applicable to the watch brand being serviced. The majority of modern watchmakers, particularly in Switzerland and other countries in Europe , work directly for the watchmaking industry and may have completed a formal watchmaking degree at a technical school .

[ citation needed ] They also receive in-house "brand" training at the factory or service center where they are employed. However, some factory service centers have an approach that allows them to use 'non-watchmakers' (called "opérateurs") who perform only one aspect of the repair process. These highly skilled workers do not have a watchmaking degree or certificate, but are specifically trained 'in-house' as technicians to service a small number of components of the watch in a true 'assembly-line' fashion, (e.g., one type of worker will dismantle the watch movement from the case, another will polish the case and bracelet, another will install the dial and hands, etc.). If genuine watchmakers are employed in such environments, they are usually employed to service the watch movement.

Due to restrictions on genuine spare parts, an increasing minority of US watchmakers are becoming 'independent,' choosing not to work directly for the industry or at factory service centers.

Rolex , a leading Swiss watch brand, pre-qualifies independent watchmakers for spare parts access. Requirements may include a modern training certificate from a reputable school, a workshop that meets Rolex's cleanliness standards, modern equipment, or—for American watchmakers—membership in the American Watchmakers-Clockmakers Institute . The Omega brand has the same approach. However, the vast majority of modern Swiss brands do not sell parts to independent watchmakers, irrespective of the watchmaker's expertise, training, or credentials. This industry policy is thought to enable Swiss manufacturers to maintain tighter quality control of the after-sales service for its watch brands, produce high margins on after-sales services (two to four times what an independent watchmaker would ask), and reduce the availability of second-hand watchmaking parts on the used and fake market.

[ citation needed ] Training [ edit ] A watchmaker working on a Railroad watch A client and the watchmaker at work.

Havana , Cuba, 2017 Historically, in England, watchmakers would have to undergo a seven-year apprenticeship and then join a guild , such as the Worshipful Company of Clockmakers in London, before selling their first watch. In modern times, watchmakers undergo training courses such as the ones offered by the BHI , or one of the many other schools around the world following the WOSTEP style curriculum. Some US watchmaking schools of horology will teach not only the Wostep style, including the ETA range of movements, but also focus on the older watches that a modern watchmaker will encounter on a daily basis. In Denmark the apprenticeship lasts four years, with six terms at the Danish School of Watchmaking in Ringsted . The education covers both clocks and watches, as a watchmaker in Denmark is also a clockmaker. In France, there are three diplomas: the lowest is the Certificat d'aptitude professionnelle (CAP) in horology (in two years), then the "Brevet des Métiers d'Art" horology for another two-year course. And optionally, the Diplôme des métiers d'art / DMA Horlogerie (two years).

Watchmaker as metaphor [ edit ] Main article: Watchmaker analogy William Paley and others used the watchmaker in his famous analogy to imply the existence of God (the teleological argument ).

Richard Dawkins later applied this analogy in his book The Blind Watchmaker , arguing that evolution is blind in that it cannot look forward.

In popular culture [ edit ] Alan Moore , in his graphic novel Watchmen , uses the metaphor of the watchmaker as a central part of the backstory of his heroic character Dr. Manhattan .

In the NBC television series Heroes , the villain Sylar is a watchmaker by trade. His ability to know how watches work corresponds to his ability to gain new superpowers by examining the brains of people he has murdered.

In the scifi novel The Mote in God's Eye by Larry Niven , the Watchmakers are a small technologically intelligent sub-species of the Moties that will repair/improve things left for them (accompanied by food as payment).

In the 2015 major motion picture film Survivor directed by James McTeigue , one of the world's most wanted killers is played by Pierce Brosnan , who demonstrates just how devastating the precision skill sets of a watchmaker can be as he plays the role of 'Nash,' a professional killer who excels at bomb making and long-range shooting.

In the film 12 Angry Men , Juror 11 is a watchmaker. Like most of the jurors, his job reflects how he views the case, approaching the facts very methodically and keeping everything in order. It also reflects his status as a European immigrant, a fact commented on by Juror 12.

Historical watchmakers [ edit ] Jehan-Jacques Blancpain Stefan Anderson Ferdinand Berthoud Abraham Louis Breguet John Alker John Arnold Jean-Marc Vacheron George Daniels John Harrison Peter Henlein Christiaan Huygens Antide Janvier Jean-Antoine Lépine Thomas Mudge Nicolas Mathieu Rieussec Hubert Sarton [ fr ] Thomas Tompion Gérald Genta See also [ edit ] Chronometer watch Clockmaker Complication Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry FH History of timekeeping devices Marine chronometer National Association of Watch and Clock Collectors Perlée or pearl pattern List of most expensive watches sold at auction Further reading [ edit ] Fried, Henry B. (2013).

The Watch Repairer's Manual . Vermont: Echo Point Books & Media, LLC.

ISBN 978-1-6265-4998-2 .

References [ edit ] ^ Berthoud, Ferdinand; Auch, Jacob (2016).

How to Make a Verge Watch . p. 218.

Archived from the original on 2020-03-09 . Retrieved 2020-06-04 .

^ Vigniaux (2011).

Practical Watchmaking . p. 176.

Archived from the original on 2020-03-09 . Retrieved 2020-06-04 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Watchmakers .

Federation of the Swiss Watch Industry FH American Watchmakers-Clockmakers Institute British Horological Institute Institute of Swiss Watchmaking Archived 2011-08-09 at the Wayback Machine AFAHA Archived 2012-04-21 at the Wayback Machine - Association française des amateurs d'horlogerie ancienne ANCAHA - Association nationale des collectionneurs et amateurs d'horlogerie ancienne et d'art Association horlogerie comtoise Swiss watch industry denies 'Nokia moment' from new Apple Watch v t e Jewellery Forms Anklet Barrette Belly chain Belt buckle Bindi Bolo tie Bracelet Brooch Chain Chatelaine Collar pin Crown Cufflink Earring Ferronnière Lapel pin Necklace Neck ring Pectoral Pendant Permanent jewellery Ring Tiara Tie chain Tie clip Tie pin Toe ring Watch pocket strap Making People Bench jeweler Clockmaker Goldsmith Jewellery designer Lapidarist Silversmith Watchmaker Processes Carving Casting centrifugal lost-wax vacuum Enameling Engraving Filigree Foldforming Jewelry model Metal clay Plating Polishing Repoussé and chasing Soldering Stonesetting Wire sculpture Wire wrapped jewelry Tools Draw plate File Hammer Mandrel Pliers Materials Precious metals Gold Palladium Platinum Rhodium Silver Precious metal alloys Britannia silver Colored gold Crown gold Electrum Shakudō Shibuichi Sterling silver Argentium Tumbaga Base metals Brass Bronze Copper Mokume-gane Nickel silver (alpacca) : Niobium Pewter Pinchbeck Stainless steel Titanium Tungsten Mineral gemstones Agate Amazonite Amethyst Aventurine Beryl ( red ) Carnelian Chrysoberyl Chrysocolla Citrine Diamond Diopside Emerald Fluorite Garnet Howlite Jade Jasper Kyanite Labradorite Lapis lazuli Larimar Malachite Marcasite Moonstone Obsidian Onyx Opal Peridot Prasiolite Quartz ( smoky ) Ruby Sapphire Sodalite Spinel Sunstone Tanzanite Tiger's eye Topaz Tourmaline Turquoise Variscite Zircon Organic gemstones Abalone Amber Ammolite Copal Coral Black Precious Ivory Jet Nacre Operculum Pearl Tortoiseshell Other natural objects Bezoar Bog-wood Ebonite (vulcanite) Gutta-percha Hair Shell Spondylus shell Toadstone Terms Art jewelry Carat (mass) Carat (purity) Finding Fineness Related topics Body piercing Fashion Gemology Metalworking Phaleristics Wearable art Authority control databases National Germany 2 Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jgbc8
Cached time: 20250812005430
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.400 seconds
Real time usage: 0.570 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1692/1000000
Revision size: 9498/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 51235/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2643/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26360/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5779637/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  482.165      1 -total
 20.81%  100.353      3 Template:Cite_book
 16.49%   79.522      1 Template:Commonscat
 16.31%   78.630      3 Template:Navbox
 15.99%   77.107      1 Template:Jewellery
 15.82%   76.299      1 Template:Sister_project
 15.52%   74.855      1 Template:Side_box
 13.24%   63.826      1 Template:Short_description
 10.13%   48.851      2 Template:Cn
  8.49%   40.955      2 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:417622:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812005430 and revision id 1304597846. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Watchmaker&oldid=1304597846 " Categories : Watchmakers Crafts Watchmaking Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Commons category link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 01:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Watchmaker 36 languages Add topic

