Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 Writing 5 Further reading 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hermann Andreas Pistorius 2 languages Deutsch مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hermann Andreas Pistorius (8 April 1730 – 10 November 1798) was a German Protestant-Lutheran theologian and clergyman, philosopher, reviewer, translator and writer. During his lifetime he was regarded as "the most learned man on Rügen".

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pistorius was born in Bergen auf Rügen . The son of a Bergen deacon, he lost his father at an early age. His stepfather Brandanus Heinrich Gebhardi (1704–1784) promoted his scientific education. He attended school in Bergen, the Stralsund Gymnasium and the Collegium Carolinum in Braunschweig . Afterwards he studied at the universities of Greifswald and Göttingen . He then spent two years as a private scholar in Hamburg and Altona . During this time he was engaged in the translation of works by David Hume .

In Greifswald he obtained a magister degree in 1756. In 1757, he took over a position as Pastor substitutus in Schaprode . On 27 April 1759, he became pastor and provost in Poseritz , where he worked until the end of his life. With the pastors Lorenz Stenzler and Joh. Eberhard Christian Krüger, he formed a learned circle, which had good contacts to Ernst Moritz Arndt . The University of Greifswald granted him the title of Doctor of Theology in 1790. In 1798, he died in Bergen from pneumonia at age 68.

Career [ edit ] In addition to his extensive theological knowledge, Pistorius possessed excellent knowledge of languages. He was particularly interested in philosophical studies and addressed, among other matters, topics of interest to the German and English philosophers of his time. He took a moderate Skeptical position. He was neither a supporter of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , Christian Wolff , nor of Immanuel Kant . Following a visit to his brother-in-law Johann Joachim Spalding in Berlin in 1764 he became a member of the review journal Allgemeine deutsche Bibliothek [ de ] . In 33 years he wrote more than a thousand reviews , mainly of philosophical, but also of theological publications. Almost all of Kant's works belonged to this group.

[ 2 ] Known beyond the borders of Swedish Pomerania , Pistorius was mentioned in various descriptions of journeys to Rügen. His guests rarely judged him harshly, like Wilhelm von Humboldt , and mostly were enthusiastic like the Kosegarten pupil Karl Nernst or the Berlin Consistorial Councillor Johann Friedrich Zöllner.

[ citation needed ] Personal life [ edit ] Pistorius married Sophie Juliane Brunnemann, daughter of the Bergen provost Christian Anton Brunnemann (1716–1774). They had four children: Christian Pistorius (1765–1823), writer and translator Johann Philipp Pistorius (1767–1823), Pastor in Garz/Rügen , married to Charlotte Pistorius (1777–1850), poet Karl Ludwig Pistorius (1773–1844), 1798 lawyer at Wismarer Tribunal [ de ] , 1801–1809 Mayor of Grimmen , 1810–1833 District Court Secretary in Loitz Heinrich Julius Pistorius (1781–1861), lawyer, mayor of Wolgast Writing [ edit ] David Hume : Vermischte Schriften über die Handlung, die Manufacturen und über die andern Quellen des Reichthums und der Macht des Staates.

Translation from English, Grund und Holle, Hamburg and Leipzig 1754.

Joseph Priestley : Liturgie und Gebetsformeln zum öffentlichen Gottesdienst für Christen von allen Confessionen.

Translation from English, Nicolai, Berlin 1786.

Further reading [ edit ] Erich Gülzow : Heimatbriefe Ernst Moritz Arndts.

In Rügisch-Pommerscher Geschichtsverein (edit.): Pommersche Jahrbücher 3rd supplementary volume, Julius Abel, Greifswald 1919, p. 230 f.

Adolf Häckermann (1888). " Pistorius, Hermann Andreas ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 26. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

194– 196.

Bernward Gesang (edit.): Kants vergessener Rezensent. Die Kritik der theoretischen und praktischen Philosophie Kants in fünf frühen Rezensionen von Hermann Andreas Pistorius.

In: Kant-Forschungen.

vol. 18, Felix Meiner, 2007, ISBN 978-3-7873-1823-0 , p. XI ( numerised ).

Heinrich Döring : Die gelehrten Theologen Deutschlands im achtzehnten und neunzehnten Jahrhundert.

vol. 3, Wagner, Neustadt an der Orla 1833, p. 326–328 ( numerised ).

References [ edit ] ^ Erich Gülzow : Heimatbriefe Ernst Moritz Arndts.

p. 5.

^ Bernward Gesang: Kants vergessener Rezensent.

p. XI f.

External links [ edit ] Literature by and about Hermann Andreas Pistorius in the German National Library catalogue Literature about Hermann Andreas Pistorius in the State Bibliography ( Landesbibliographie ) of Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Portals : Philosophy Germany Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hermann_Andreas_Pistorius&oldid=1302284770 " Categories : 18th-century German Lutheran clergy 18th-century German philosophers English–German translators 1730 births 1798 deaths People from Bergen auf Rügen 18th-century German translators Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 CS1 German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 12:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hermann Andreas Pistorius 2 languages Add topic

