Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 18th century 2.2 19th century 2.3 20th century 2.3.1 New conservatives 2.3.2 Goldwater movement and its aftermath 3 Leading 20th and 21st century traditionalist figures Toggle Leading 20th and 21st century traditionalist figures subsection 3.1 Other influences 4 Organizations 5 Journals, periodicals and reviews 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Traditionalist conservatism in the United States 3 languages العربية کوردی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical form of conservatism in the United States This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article or section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may lack focus or may be about more than one topic . In particular, it is unclear what traditionalist conservatism is, where the term comes from and how it is connected to the disparate subjects mentioned.

Please help improve this article , possibly by splitting the article or organising a disambiguation page . There might be further discussion about this on the talk page .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Traditionalist conservatism in the United States is a political and social philosophy and variant of conservatism . It has been influenced by thinkers such as John Adams and Russell Kirk .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Definitions [ edit ] The 2010 book The Dilemmas of American Conservatism , edited by Kenneth L. Deutsch and Ethan Fishman, has one paragraph about traditional conservatism. It says it is a variation of conservatism that is negative to American individualism , American inability to recognize the importance of social bonds and strong anti-authoritarian tradition of the United States. According to Deutsch and Fishman, traditional conservatives derive their views from Aristotle and Edmund Burke . They place emphasis on the rule of law as a means for liberty, leading by example in the fostering of reason and the existence of a transcendent morality. These views are only shared by a small minority of the American conservative movement and are exemplified by Russell Kirk , John H. Hallowell and Richard M. Weaver .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] 18th century [ edit ] In terms of "classical conservatism", [ definition needed ] the Federalists had no connection with European-style aristocracy, monarchy or established religion. Historian John P. Diggins has said: Thanks to the framers, American conservatism began on a genuinely lofty plane. James Madison, Alexander Hamilton, John Marshall, John Jay, James Wilson, and, above all, John Adams aspired to create a republic in which the values so precious to conservatives  might flourish: harmony, stability, virtue, reverence, veneration, loyalty, self-discipline, and moderation. This was classical conservatism in its most authentic expression.

[ 4 ] Something akin to Burkean traditionalism [ definition needed ] [ relevant?

] was transported to the American colonies through the policies and principles of the Federalist Party and its leadership as embodied by John Adams and Alexander Hamilton . Federalists strongly opposed the excesses and instability of the French Revolution, defended traditional Christian morality and supported a new "natural aristocracy" based on "property, education, family status, and sense of ethical responsibility".

[ 5 ] John Adams was one of the earliest defenders of a traditional social order in Revolutionary America. In his Defence of the Constitution (1787), Adams attacked the ideas of radicals like Thomas Paine , who advocated for a unicameral legislature (Adams deemed it too democratic). His translation of Discourses on Davila (1790), which also contained his own commentary, was an examination of "human motivation in politics". Adams believed that human motivation inevitably led to dangerous impulses where the government would need to sometimes intervene.

[ 6 ] The leader of the Federalist Party was Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of the Treasury and co-author of The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) which was then and to this day remains a major interpretation of the new 1789 Constitution. Hamilton was critical of both Jeffersonian classical liberalism and the radical ideas coming out of the French Revolution. He rejected laissez-faire economics and favored a strong central government.

[ 7 ] 19th century [ edit ] In the era after the Revolutionary Generation, the Whig Party had an approach that resembled Burkean conservatism, [ definition needed ] [ relevant?

] although Whigs rarely cited Burke. Whig statesmen led the charge for tradition and custom against the prevailing democratic ethos of the Jacksonian Era. Standing for hierarchy and organic society, in many ways their concepts of the Union paralleled Benjamin Disraeli 's "One Nation Conservatism".

Along with Henry Clay, the most noteworthy Whig statesman was Boston's Daniel Webster . A firm Unionist, his most famous speech was his "Second Reply to Hayne" (1829) where he criticized the argument from Southerners such as John C. Calhoun that the states had a right to nullify federal laws they deemed unconstitutional.

[ relevant?

] [ 8 ] Webster rarely mentioned Burke but he occasionally followed similar lines of thought.

[ 9 ] Webster's intellectual and political heir was Rufus Choate , who admired Burke.

[ relevant?

] [ 10 ] Choate was a part of the emerging legal culture in New England , centered on the newly formed Harvard Law School . He believed that lawyers were preservers and conservers of the Constitution and that it was the duty of the educated to govern political institutions. Choate's most famous address was "The Position and Functions of the American Bar, as an Element of Conservatism in the State" (1845).

[ relevant?

] [ 11 ] Two figures in the Northern antebellum period were what Emory University professor Patrick Allitt referred to as the "Guardians of Civilization": George Ticknor and Edward Everett .

[ relevant?

] George Ticknor , a Dartmouth -educated academic at Harvard, was the chief purveyor of humane learning in the Boston area. A founder of the Boston Public Library and the scion of an old Federalist family, Ticknor educated his students in Romance languages and the works of Dante and Cervantes at home while promoting America abroad to his many international friends, including Lord Byron and Talleyrand.

[ relevant?

] [ 12 ] Like Ticknor, Edward Everett was educated at the same German university (Goettigen) and advocated for the U.S. to follow same virtues as the ancient Greeks and eventually went into politics as a Whig. A firm Unionist (like his friend Daniel Webster ), Everett deplored the Jacksonian Democracy that swept the nation. A famed orator in his own right, he supported Lincoln against Southern secession.

[ relevant?

] [ 13 ] American Catholic journalist and political theorist (and former political and religious radical) Orestes Brownson is best known for writing The American Republic , an 1865 treatise examining how America fulfills Catholic tradition and Western Civilization. Brownson was critical of both the Northern abolitionists and the Southern secessionists and was himself a solid Unionist.

[ relevant?

] [ 14 ] 20th century [ edit ] In the 20th century, traditionalist conservatism on both sides of the Atlantic centered on two publications: The Bookman and its successor, The American Review . Owned and edited by the eccentric Seward Collins , these journals published the writings of the British Distributists, the New Humanists, the Southern Agrarians, T. S. Eliot , Christopher Dawson , et al . Eventually, Collins drifted towards support of fascism and as a result lost the support of many of his traditionalist backers. Despite the decline of the journal due to Collins' increasingly radical political views, The American Review left a profound mark on the history of traditionalist conservatism.

[ 15 ] Another intellectual branch of early-20th-century traditionalist conservatism was known as the New Humanism . Led by Harvard University professor Irving Babbitt and Princeton University professor Paul Elmer More , the New Humanism was a literary and social criticism movement that opposed both romanticism and naturalism. Beginning in the late 19th century, the New Humanism defended artistic standards and "first principles" (Babbitt's phrase). Reaching an apogee in 1930, Babbitt and More published a variety of books including Babbitt's Literature and the American College (1908), Rousseau and Romanticism (1919) and Democracy and Leadership (1924) and More's Shelburne Essays (1904–1921).

[ 16 ] One other group of traditionalist conservatives were the Southern Agrarians . Originally a group of Vanderbilt University poets and writers known as "the Fugitives", they included John Crowe Ransom , Allen Tate , Donald Davidson and Robert Penn Warren . Adhering to strict literary standards (Warren and traditionalist scholar Cleanth Brooks later formulated a form of literary criticism known as the New Criticism), in 1930 some of the Fugitives joined other traditionalist Southern writers to publish I'll Take My Stand , which applied standards sympathetic to local particularism and the agrarian way of life to politics and economics. Condemning northern industrialism and commercialism, the "twelve southerners" who contributed to the book echoed earlier arguments made by the distributists. A few years after the publication of I'll Take My Stand , some of the Southern Agrarians were joined by Hilaire Belloc and Herbert Agar in the publication of a new collection of essays entitled Who Owns America: A New Declaration of Independence .

New conservatives [ edit ] After World War II , the first stirrings of a "traditionalist movement" took place and among those who launched this movement (and in effect the larger Conservative Movement in America) was University of Chicago professor Richard M. Weaver . Weaver's Ideas Have Consequences (1948) chronicled the steady erosion of Western cultural values since the Middle Ages .

[ 17 ] In 1949, another professor, Peter Viereck echoed the writings of Weaver with his Conservatism Revisited , which examined the conservative thought of Prince Klemens Metternich .

After Weaver and Viereck a flowering of conservative scholarship occurred starting with the publication of 1953's The New Science of Politics by Eric Voegelin , 1953's The Quest for Community by Robert A. Nisbet and 1955's Conservatism in America by Clinton Rossiter . However, the book that defined the traditionalist school was 1953's The Conservative Mind , written by Russell Kirk , which gave a detailed analysis of the intellectual pedigree of Anglo-American traditionalist conservatism .

[ 18 ] When these thinkers appeared on the academic scene they became known for rebuking the progressive worldview inherent in an America comfortable with New Deal economics, a burgeoning military–industrial complex and a consumerist and commercialized citizenry. These conservative scholars and writers garnered the attention of the popular press of the time and before long they were collectively referred to as "the New Conservatives". Among this group were not only Weaver, Viereck, Voegelin, Nisbet, Rossiter and Kirk, but other lesser known thinkers such as John Blum, Daniel Boorstin , McGeorge Bundy, Thomas Cook, Raymond English, John Hallowell, Anthony Harrigan, August Heckscher, Milton Hindus, Klemens von Klemperer, Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , Richard Leopold, S. A. Lukacs, Malcolm Moos, Eliseo Vivas, Geoffrey Wagner, Chad Walsh and Francis Wilson, [ 19 ] as well as Arthur Bestor, Mel Bradford , C. P. Ives, Stanley Jaki , John Lukacs , Forrest McDonald , Thomas Molnar , Gerhard Neimeyer, James V. Schall, S.J., Peter J. Stanlis , Stephen J. Tonsor and Frederick Wilhelmsen.

[ 20 ] Russell Kirk The acknowledged leader of the New Conservatives was independent scholar, writer, critic and man of letters Russell Kirk . Kirk was a key figure of the conservative movement: he was a friend to William F. Buckley, Jr.

, a columnist for National Review , an editor and a syndicated columnist, as well as a historian and horror fiction writer. His most famous work was 1953's The Conservative Mind: From Burke to Santayana , later republished as The Conservative Mind: From Burke to Eliot . Kirk's writings and legacy are interwoven with the history of traditionalist conservatism. He was influential at The Heritage Foundation , the Intercollegiate Studies Institute , and other conservative think tanks, especially the Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal .

The Conservative Mind was written by Kirk as a doctoral dissertation while he was a student at the St. Andrews University in Scotland . Previously the author of a biography of American conservative John Randolph of Roanoke , Kirk's The Conservative Mind had laid out six "canons of conservative thought" in the book, including: Belief that a divine intent rules society as well as conscience... Political problems, at bottom, are religious and moral problems.

Affection for the proliferating variety and mystery of traditional life, as distinguished from the narrowing uniformity and egalitarian and utilitarian aims of most radical systems.

Conviction that civilized society requires orders and classes...

Persuasion that property and freedom are inseparably connected, and that economic leveling is not economic progress...

Faith in prescription and distrust of "sophisters and calculators." Man must put a control upon his will and his appetite.... Tradition and sound prejudice provide checks upon man's anarchic impulse.

Recognition that change and reform are not identical...

[ 21 ] The political scientist M. Morton Auerbach criticized the notion of the New Conservatives as conservatives in his 1959 book The Conservative Illusion . Auerbach argued that the views and intellectual history of the movement were disconnected from conservatism, and instead can be traced to Plato , Augustine of Hippo and Edmund Burke .

[ 22 ] Goldwater movement and its aftermath [ edit ] Former Senator Barry Goldwater U.S. Senator Barry Goldwater gained national attention by way of The Conscience of a Conservative , a book ghostwritten for him by L. Brent Bozell Jr.

( William F. Buckley, Jr.

's Catholic traditionalist brother-in-law). The book advocated a conservative vision in keeping with Buckley's National Review and propelled Goldwater to challenge Vice President Richard Nixon , without success, for the 1960 Republican presidential nomination.

[ 23 ] In 1964, Goldwater returned to challenge the Eastern Establishment, which since the 1930s had controlled the Republican Party . In a brutal campaign where he was maligned by liberal Republican primary rivals (Rockefeller, Romney, Scranton, etc.), the press, the Democrats and President Lyndon B. Johnson , Goldwater again found allies among conservatives, including the traditionalists.

Russell Kirk championed Goldwater's cause as the maturation of the New Right in American politics. Kirk advocated for Goldwater in his syndicated columns and campaigned for him in the primaries.

[ 24 ] Goldwater's subsequent defeat would result in the New Right regrouping and finding a new figurehead in the late 1970s: Ronald Reagan .

Fundamental differences developed between libertarians and traditional conservatives. Libertarians wanted the free market to be unregulated as possible while traditional conservatives believed that big business, if unconstrained, could impoverish national life and threaten freedom.

[ 25 ] Libertarians also believed that a strong state would threaten freedom while traditional conservatives regarded a strong state, one which is properly constructed to ensure that not too much power accumulated in any one branch, was necessary to ensure freedom.

[ 25 ] Leading 20th and 21st century traditionalist figures [ edit ] This section possibly contains original synthesis .

Source material should verifiably mention and relate to the main topic.

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Traditionalist conservatism has been considered by some [ who?

] to have been overshadowed by the economic conservatives by the early 21st century.

[ 26 ] Former Tennessee Republican Senator Fred Thompson , former Michigan Republican Senator Spencer Abraham and former Illinois Democratic Senator Paul Simon have all been influenced by traditionalist conservative Russell Kirk .

[ 27 ] Thompson gave an interview about Kirk's influence on the Russell Kirk Center's blog.

[ 28 ] Among the U.S. Congressmen influenced by Kirk are former Illinois Republican Congressman Henry Hyde [ 27 ] and Michigan Republican Congressmen Thaddeus McCotter and Dave Camp , the latter two of whom visited the Russell Kirk Center in 2009. In 2010, then-Congressman Mike Pence acknowledged Kirk as a major influence.

[ 29 ] Former Michigan Republican Governor John Engler is a close personal friend of the Kirk family [ 27 ] and also serves as a trustee of the Wilbur Foundation, [ 30 ] which funds programs at the Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal in Mecosta, Michigan. Engler gave a speech at The Heritage Foundation on Kirk which is available from the Russell Kirk Center's blog.

[ 31 ] Other influences [ edit ] Traditionalist conservative influences on those who emerged in the 1940s and 1950s as "the New Conservatives" included Bernard Iddings Bell , Gordon Keith Chalmers , Grenville Clark , Peter Drucker , Will Herberg , and Ross J. S. Hoffman .

[ 32 ] Organizations [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Intercollegiate Studies Institute Philadelphia Society Howard Center for Family, Religion and Society National Humanities Institute Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal Journals, periodicals and reviews [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Modern Age: A Quarterly Review Touchstone Magazine The University Bookman The Political Science Reviewer The Chesterton Review Image: A Journal of the Arts and Religion See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Conservatism in the United States Traditionalist conservatism Traditional Values Coalition References [ edit ] ^ John P. Diggins (1994).

Up from Communism . Columbia UP. p. 390.

ISBN 9780231084895 .

^ Birzer, Bradley J. (2015).

Russell Kirk: American Conservative . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-8131-6618-6 .

JSTOR j.ctt17573hb .

^ Deutsch & Fishman 2010 , p. 2.

^ John P. Diggins (1994).

Up from Communism . Columbia UP. p. 390.

ISBN 9780231084895 .

^ Viereck, p. 89 ^ Patrick Allitt, The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History (Yale University Press, 2009) p. 12 ^ Frohnen, pp. 369–70.

^ Frohnen, pp. 906–08.

^ Craig R. Smith (2005).

Daniel Webster and the Oratory of Civil Religion . University of Missouri Press. p.

45 .

ISBN 9780826264299 .

^ Rufus Choate (2002).

The Political Writings of Rufus Choate . Regnery Gateway. p. 6.

ISBN 9780895261540 .

^ Muller, Jerry Z., ed.

Conservatism: An Anthology of Social and Political Thought from David Hume to the Present (Princeton University, 1997) pp. 152–66.

^ Allitt, Patrick. (2009) The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History. New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 62–63.

^ Allitt, Patrick. (2009) The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History. New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 63–64.

^ Allitt, Patrick. (2009) The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History. New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 83–86.

^ Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 76–77.

^ Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 621–22.

^ Nash, George H. (1976, 2006) The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America since 1945 . Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 30–36.

^ Dunn, Charles W. (2003) The Conservative Tradition in America , Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, p. 10.

^ Viereck, Peter (1956, 2006) Conservative Thinkers from John Adams to Winston Churchill . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishing, p. 107.

^ Nash, George H. (1976, 2006) The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America since 1945 . Wilmington, DE: ISI Books, pp. 50–55, 68–73.

^ Kirk, Russell (1953) The Conservative Mind: From Burke to Eliot . Washington, D.C.:Regnery, pp. 7–8.

^ Auerbach, M. Morton (1959).

The Conservative Illusion . New York: Columbia University Press .

doi : 10.7312/auer93248 .

ISBN 978-0-231-89275-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Allitt, Patrick. (2009) The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, p. 188.

^ Kirk, Russell. (1995) The Sword of Imagination: Memoirs of a Half-Century of Literary Conflict . Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.

, pp. 285–288.

^ a b Bogus 2011 , p. 16.

^ Brooks, David (September 24, 2012).

"The Conservative Mind" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 23, 2024 .

^ a b c Person, James E. Jr.

Russell Kirk: A Critical Biography of a Conservative Mind . Lanham, MD: Madison Books, p. 217.

^ "Senator Fred Thompson « Russell Kirk, man of letters" .

^ "Permanent Things" .

Archived November 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ the grant foundation grants org at wilburfoundation.org ^ "Michigan Governor John Engler speaks at the Heritage Foundation « Russell Kirk, man of letters" .

^ Viereck, Peter (1956, 2006) Conservative Thinkers from John Adams to Winston Churchill . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, p. 107.

Bibliography [ edit ] Aberbach, Joel D.; Peele, Gillian (2011). "Conservative Tensions and the Republican Future".

Crisis of Conservatism?: The Republican Party, the Conservative Movement, and American Politics After Bush . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-199-83136-4 .

Bogus, Carl T. (2011).

Buckley: William F. Buckley Jr. and the Rise of American Conservatism . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-596-91580-0 .

Deutsch, Kenneth L.; Fishman, Ethan (2010).

The Dilemmas of American Conservatism . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-813-13962-3 .

v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐2bk85
Cached time: 20250815221630
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.873 seconds
Real time usage: 1.098 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6200/1000000
Revision size: 24368/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 277091/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20808/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81910/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.493/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21070098/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  802.447      1 -total
 21.72%  174.260      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 14.91%  119.636      1 Template:Reflist
 14.07%  112.924      1 Template:Conservatism_footer
 12.87%  103.301      9 Template:Cite_book
 12.37%   99.273      2 Template:Navbox
 12.00%   96.326      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer
 10.77%   86.391      8 Template:Lang
  9.35%   74.997      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  8.36%   67.058     13 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:55751786:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221630 and revision id 1299614911. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Traditionalist_conservatism_in_the_United_States&oldid=1299614911 " Categories : Conservatism in the United States Aristotle Edmund Burke Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from August 2024 Wikipedia articles lacking focus from August 2024 All Wikipedia articles lacking focus Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2024 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from August 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 12:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Traditionalist conservatism in the United States 3 languages Add topic

