Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works and influence 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Denis Fonvizin 42 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian playwright and writer (1745–1792) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Russian .

(November 2018) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Russian Wikipedia article at [[:ru:Фонвизин, Денис Иванович]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|ru|Фонвизин, Денис Иванович}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Denis Fonvizin Portrait, c.

1780s Born Denis Ivanovich Fonvizin ( 1745-04-14 ) 14 April 1745 Moscow , Russian Empire Died 12 December 1792 (1792-12-12) (aged 47) Saint Petersburg , Russian Empire Resting place Lazarevskoe Cemetery , Saint Petersburg Occupation Writer, playwright, translator Alma mater Imperial Moscow University Spouse Ekaterina Ivanovna Rogovikova (1774–1792) Denis Ivanovich Fonvizin ( Russian : Денис Иванович Фонвизин , IPA: [dʲɪˈnʲis ɪˈvanəvʲɪtɕ fɐnˈvʲizʲɪn] ; 14 April [ O.S.

3 April] 1745 – 12 December [ O.S.

1 December] 1792) was a Russian playwright and writer of the Russian Enlightenment . He was one of the founders of literary comedy in Russia. His main works are two satirical comedies—including The Minor , which mocks contemporary Russian gentry —which are still staged today.

Life [ edit ] Denis Fonvizin was born in Moscow into a noble Russian Orthodox family. He was the first of eight children.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] His mother Ekaterina Vasilievna Fonvizina (née Dmitrieva-Mamonova) (born 1718) belonged to the Smolensk Rurik branch on her father's side and to the Grushetsky family on her mother's side; she was a cousin-niece of Tsaritsa Agafya Grushetskaya and an aunt to Alexander Dmitriev-Mamonov , who was famously a lover of Catherine the Great .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] His father Ivan Fonvizin (1705–1785) started as an army officer, then served in the Collegium of Accounting , becoming a State Councillor in 1783.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] His ancestor Baron Berndt von Wiesen belonged to the Livonian Order , was captured during the Livonian War and became a naturalized Russian citizen; his descendants Russified , and the family name transformed over the years, but it was Ivan Andreevich who started writing it as Fonvizin.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Denis Fonvizin received a good education at the Imperial Moscow University and very early began writing and translating. He entered the civil service, becoming secretary to Count Nikita Panin , one of the great noblemen of Catherine the Great's reign. Because of Panin's protection, Fonvizin was able to write critical plays without fear of being arrested. In the late 1760s, he completed the first of his two famous comedies, The Brigadier-General .

A man of means, he was always a dilettante rather than a professional author, though he became prominent in literary and intellectual circles. In 1777–78 he traveled abroad, the principal aim of his journey being the medical faculty of Montpellier . He described his voyage in his Letters from France —one of the most elegant specimens of the prose of the period, and the most striking document of that anti-French nationalism which among the Russian elite of the time of Catherine went hand in hand with a complete dependence on French literary tastes.

In 1782 Fonvizin's second and best comedy The Minor appeared, which definitely classed him as the foremost of Russian playwrights. His last years were passed in constant suffering and traveling abroad for his health. He died in Saint Petersburg in 1792.

Works and influence [ edit ] Fonvizin's reputation rests almost entirely on his two comedies, which are beyond doubt the most popular Russian plays before Alexander Griboyedov 's Woe from Wit . They are both in prose and adhere to the canons of classical comedy . Fonvizin's principal model, however, was not Molière , but the great Dano-Norwegian playwright Ludvig Holberg , whom he read in German, and some of whose plays he had translated.

Both comedies are plays of social satire with definite axes to grind.

The Brigadier-General is a satire against the fashionable French semi-education of the petits-maîtres . It is full of excellent fun, and though less serious than The Minor , it is better constructed. But The Minor , though imperfect in dramatic construction, is a more remarkable work and justly considered Fonvizin's masterpiece.

The point of the satire in The Minor is directed against the brutish and selfish crudeness and barbarity of the uneducated country gentry. The central character, Mitrofanushka, is the accomplished type of vulgar and brutal selfishness, unredeemed by a single human feature—even his fondly doting mother gets nothing from him for her pains. The dialogue of these vicious characters (in contrast to the stilted language of the lovers and their virtuous uncles) is true to life and finely individualized; and they are all masterpieces of characterization—a worthy introduction to the great portrait gallery of Russian fiction.

As a measure of its popularity, several expressions from The Minor have been turned into proverbs, and many authors (amongst whom Alexander Pushkin ) regularly cite from this play, or at least hint to it by mentioning the characters' names.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Gary M. Hamburg (2016) .

Russia's Path toward Enlightenment: Faith, Politics, and Reason, 1500-1801 — New Haven: Yale University Press ISBN 978-0300113136 ^ a b Charles Arthur Moser (1979) . Denis Fonvizin. — Boston: Twayne Publishers, pp. 11—12 ISBN 978-0805764024 ^ a b Pyotr Petrov (1991) . The History of the Russian Nobility in Two Volumes. Volume 1. — Moscow : Sovremennik, pp. 309—310 ISBN 5-270-01515-3 ^ Velvet Book , XXX, p. 241 ^ Grushetsky coat of arms by All-Russian Armorials of Noble Houses of the Russian Empire. Part 2, June 30, 1798 (in Russian) ^ Von Wiesen coat of arms by All-Russian Armorials of Noble Houses of the Russian Empire. Part 3, January 19, 1799 (in Russian) ^ Fonvizin, Denis Ivanovich at the Brockhaus and Efron Encyclopedic Dictionary (in Russian) ^ Alexander Pushkin , The Captain's Daughter , Chapter 1 and motto of Chapter III.

^ Pushkin, The Tales of the Late Ivan Petrovich Belkin , motto ^ Pushkin, A Novel in Letters , Chapter VIII References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from D.S. Mirsky 's "A History of Russian Literature" (1926-27), a publication now in the public domain .

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Denis_Fonvizin&oldid=1301717299 " Categories : 1745 births 1792 deaths 18th-century dramatists and playwrights 18th-century poets from the Russian Empire 18th-century male writers from the Russian Empire 18th-century translators from the Russian Empire French–Russian translators Members of the Russian Academy Moscow State University alumni People of the Age of Enlightenment Civil servants of the Russian Empire Russian male dramatists and playwrights Male writers from the Russian Empire Translators from German Writers from Moscow Burials at Lazarevskoe Cemetery (Saint Petersburg) Dramatists and playwrights from the Russian Empire Russian satirical dramatists and playwrights Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Russian Wikipedia Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 09:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Denis Fonvizin 42 languages Add topic

