Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Major branches Toggle Major branches subsection 2.1 Denominationalism 2.2 Taxonomy 3 Historical schisms and divisions Toggle Historical schisms and divisions subsection 3.1 Antiquity 3.2 Middle Ages 3.3 Protestant Reformation (16th century) 3.4 Old and Liberal Catholic Churches (19th–20th centuries) 3.5 Eastern Christianity 3.6 Western Christianity 3.7 Christians with Jewish roots 4 Modern history Toggle Modern history subsection 4.1 Unitarianism 4.2 Restorationism 4.2.1 Second Great Awakening 4.2.2 Latter Day Saint movement 4.3 Spiritual Christianity 4.4 Other movements 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Christian denomination 36 languages العربية বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua עברית Kurdî Latviešu Македонски Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Protestant denominations ) Identifiable Christian body with common characteristics This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Branches of Christianity" redirects here. For the view that the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church includes different Christian denominations, see Branch theory .

"Christian confession" redirects here. For the acknowledgement of one's sins, see Confession (religion) § Christianity .

Part of a series on Christianity Jesus Christ Nativity Baptism Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Bible Foundations Old Testament New Testament Gospel Canon Church Creed New Covenant Theology God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Apologetics Baptism Christology History of theology Mission Salvation Universalism History Tradition Apostles Peter Paul Mary Early Christianity Church Fathers Constantine Councils Augustine Ignatius East–West Schism Crusades Aquinas Reformation Luther Denominations (full list) Nicene Catholic Latin Eastern Old Catholic Palmarian Catholic Independent Catholic Sedevacantism Eastern Orthodox Oriental Orthodox Church of the East Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Free Evangelical Lutheran Methodist Moravian [Hussite] Pentecostal Plymouth Brethren Quaker Reformed United Protestant Waldensian Non-denominational Christianity Restorationist Christadelphians Iglesia ni Cristo Irvingians Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saints The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Members Church of God International The New Church (Swedenborgian) Unitarians and Universalists Related topics Civilization Criticism Culture Ecumenism Glossary Index Liturgy Other religions Prayer Sermon Symbolism Worship Glossary Index Outline Christianity portal v t e A Christian denomination is a distinct religious body within Christianity that comprises all church congregations of the same kind, identifiable by traits such as a name, particular history, organization, leadership, theological doctrine , worship style and, sometimes, a founder. It is a secular and neutral term, generally used to denote any established Christian church. Unlike a cult or sect , a denomination is usually seen as part of the Christian religious mainstream. Most Christian denominations refer to themselves as churches , whereas some newer ones tend to interchangeably use the terms churches , assemblies , fellowships , etc. Divisions between one group and another are defined by authority and doctrine; issues such as the nature of Jesus , the authority of apostolic succession , biblical hermeneutics , theology , ecclesiology , eschatology , and papal primacy may separate one denomination from another. Groups of denominations—often sharing broadly similar beliefs, practices, and historical ties—are sometimes known as "branches of Christianity". These branches differ in many ways, especially through differences in practices and belief.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Individual denominations vary widely in the degree to which they recognize one another. Several groups say they are the direct and sole authentic successor of the church founded by Jesus Christ in the 1st century AD . Others, however, believe in denominationalism, where some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices. Because of this concept, some Christian bodies reject the term "denomination" to describe themselves, to avoid implying equivalence with other churches or denominations.

The Catholic Church , which has over 1.3 billion members or 50.1% of all Christians worldwide, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] does not view itself as a denomination, but as the original pre-denominational Church.

[ 10 ] The total Protestant population has reached around 1.047 billion in 2024, accounting for about 39.8% of all Christians.

[ 11 ] [ 8 ] [ 12 ] Sixteenth-century Protestants separated from the Catholic Church as a result of the Reformation , a movement against doctrines and practices which the Reformers perceived to be in violation of the Bible.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Together, Catholicism and Protestantism (with major traditions including Adventism , Anabaptism , Anglicanism , Baptists , Lutheranism , Methodism , Moravianism , Pentecostalism , Plymouth Brethren , Quakerism , Reformed , and Waldensianism ) compose Western Christianity .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Western Christian denominations prevail in Sub-Saharan Africa , Europe (excluding Eastern Europe), North America , Oceania and South America .

[ 18 ] The Eastern Orthodox Church , with an estimated 230 million adherents, [ 19 ] [ 12 ] [ 20 ] is the second-largest Christian body in the world and also considers itself the original pre-denominational Church. Orthodox Christians, 80% of whom are Eastern Orthodox and 20% Oriental Orthodox, make up about 11.9% of the global Christian population.

[ 19 ] The Eastern Orthodox Church is itself a communion of fully independent autocephalous churches (or "jurisdictions") that recognize each other, for the most part. Similarly, the Catholic Church is a communion of sui iuris churches, including 23 Eastern ones. The Eastern Orthodox Church, the 23 Eastern Catholic Churches , the Oriental Orthodox communion , the Assyrian Church of the East , the Ancient Church of the East , and the Eastern Lutheran Churches constitute Eastern Christianity . There are certain Eastern Protestant Christians that have adopted Protestant theology but have cultural and historical ties with other Eastern Christians. Eastern Christian denominations are represented mostly in Eastern Europe , North Asia , the Middle East , Northeast Africa , and India .

Christians have various doctrines about the Church (the body of the faithful that they believe Jesus Christ established) and about how the divine church corresponds to Christian denominations. The Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, Oriental Orthodox, Church of the East and Lutheran denominations, each hold that only their own specific organization faithfully represents the one holy catholic and apostolic Church , to the exclusion of all others. Certain denominational traditions teach that they were divinely instituted to propagate a certain doctrine or spiritual experience, for example the raising up of Methodism by God to propagate entire sanctification (the "second blessing"), [ 21 ] or the launch of Pentecostalism to bestow a supernatural empowerment evidenced by speaking in tongues on humanity.

[ 22 ] Restorationism emerged after the Second Great Awakening and collectively affirms belief in a Great Apostasy , thus promoting a belief in restoring what they see as primitive Christianity.

[ 23 ] It includes Mormons , Irvingians , Christadelphians , Swedenborgians , Jehovah's Witnesses , among others, although beliefs between these religions differ greatly.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Generally, members of the various denominations acknowledge each other as Christians, at least to the extent that they have mutually recognized baptisms and acknowledge historically orthodox views including the divinity of Jesus and doctrines of sin and salvation , even though doctrinal and ecclesiological obstacles hinder full communion between churches . Since the reforms surrounding the Second Vatican Council of 1962–1965, the Catholic Church has referred to Protestant churches as ecclesial communities , while reserving the term "church" for apostolic churches , including the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches, as well as the Ancient and Assyrian Churches of the East (see subsistit in and branch theory ) . But some non-denominational Christians do not follow any particular branch, [ 27 ] though they sometimes are regarded as Protestants.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Terminology [ edit ] See also: Christian Church § Related concepts Each group uses different terminology to discuss their beliefs. This section will discuss the definitions of several terms used throughout the article, before discussing the beliefs themselves in detail in following sections.

A denomination within Christianity can be defined as a "recognized autonomous branch of the Christian Church"; major synonyms include "religious group, sect, Church," etc.

[ Note 1 ] [ 32 ] "Church" as a synonym, refers to a "particular Christian organization with its own clergy, buildings, and distinctive doctrines"; [ 33 ] "church" can also more broadly be defined as the entire body of Christians, the " Christian Church ".

Some traditional and evangelical Protestants draw a distinction between membership in the universal church and fellowship within the local church. Becoming a believer in Christ makes one a member of the universal church; one then may join a fellowship of other local believers.

[ 34 ] Some evangelical groups describe themselves as interdenominational fellowships, partnering with local churches to strengthen evangelical efforts, usually targeting a particular group with specialized needs, such as students or ethnic groups.

[ 35 ] A related concept is denominationalism , the belief that some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices.

[ 36 ] (Conversely, "denominationalism" can also refer to "emphasizing of denominational differences to the point of being narrowly exclusive", similar to sectarianism .) [ 37 ] The views of Protestant leaders differ greatly from those of the leaders of the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church, the two largest Christian denominations. Each church makes mutually exclusive statements for itself to be the direct continuation of the church founded by Jesus Christ, from whom other denominations later broke away.

[ 10 ] These churches, and a few others, reject denominationalism. For the purpose of academic study of religion, the main families of Christianity are categorized as a denomination, that is, "an organized body of Christians." [ 38 ] Historically, Catholics would label members of certain Christian churches (also certain non-Christian religions) by the names of their founders, either actual or purported. Such supposed founders were referred to as heresiarchs . This was done even when the party thus labeled viewed itself as belonging to the one true church. This allowed the Catholic party to say that the other church was founded by the founder, while the Catholic church was founded by Christ. This was done intentionally in order to "produce the appearance of the fragmentation within Christianity" [ 39 ] – a problem which the Catholic side would then attempt to remedy on its own terms.

Although Catholics reject branch theory , Pope Benedict XVI and Pope John Paul II used the "two lungs" concept to relate Catholicism with Eastern Orthodoxy.

[ 40 ] Major branches [ edit ] World Christianity by tradition in 2024 as per World Christian Database [ 11 ] Catholic (48.6%) Protestant (39.8%) Orthodox, including Eastern and Oriental communions (11.1%) Other (0.50%) Worldwide Christians by denomination as of 2011 [update] [ 41 ] Catholic (50.1%) Protestant (36.7%) Orthodox, including Eastern and Oriental communions (11.9%) Other (1.30%) Christianity can be taxonomically divided into six main groups: the Church of the East , Oriental Orthodoxy , Eastern Orthodoxy , Catholicism , Protestantism , and Restorationism .

[ 23 ] [ 42 ] Protestantism includes many groups which do not share any ecclesiastical governance and have widely diverging beliefs and practices.

[ 16 ] Major Protestant branches include Adventism , Anabaptism , Anglicanism , Baptists , Lutheranism , Methodism , Moravianism , Quakerism , Pentecostalism , Plymouth Brethren , Reformed Christianity , and Waldensianism .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Reformed Christianity itself includes the Continental Reformed , Presbyterian , Evangelical Anglican , Congregationalist , and Reformed Baptist traditions.

[ 43 ] Anabaptist Christianity itself includes the Amish , Apostolic , Bruderhof , Hutterite , Mennonite , River Brethren , and Schwarzenau Brethren traditions.

[ 44 ] Within the Restorationist branch of Christianity, denominations include the Irvingians , Swedenborgians , Christadelphians , Latter Day Saints , Jehovah's Witnesses , La Luz del Mundo , and Iglesia ni Cristo .

[ 45 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Christianity has denominational families (or movements) and also has individual denominations (or communions). The difference between a denomination and a denominational family is sometimes unclear to outsiders. Some denominational families can be considered major branches. Groups that are members of a branch, while sharing historical ties and similar doctrines, are not necessarily in communion with one another.

There were some movements considered heresies by the early Church which do not exist today and are not generally referred to as denominations: examples include the Gnostics (who had believed in an esoteric dualism called gnosis ), the Ebionites (who denied the divinity of Jesus), and the Arians (who subordinated the Son to the Father by denying the pre-existence of Christ , thus placing Jesus as a created being), Bogomilism and the Bosnian Church . The greatest divisions in Christianity today, however, are between the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox, Catholics, and the various denominations formed during and after the Protestant Reformation .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] There also exists a number of non-Trinitarian groups.

Denominationalism [ edit ] Denominationalism is the belief that some or all Christian groups are legitimate churches of the same religion regardless of their distinguishing labels, beliefs, and practices.

[ 36 ] The idea was first articulated by Independents within the Puritan movement. They argued that differences among Christians were inevitable, but that separation based on these differences was not necessarily schism . Christians are obligated to practice their beliefs rather than remain within a church with which they disagree, but they must also recognize their imperfect knowledge and not condemn other Christians as apostate over unimportant matters.

[ 49 ] Some Christians view denominationalism as a regrettable fact. As of 2011, divisions are becoming less sharp, and there is increasing cooperation between denominations, which is known as ecumenism . Many denominations participate in the World Council of Churches .

[ 50 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] Major denominational families in Christianity: This box: view talk edit Western Christianity Eastern Christianity Protestantism Anabaptism Anglicanism Lutheranism Reformed (Latin Church) Catholic Church (Eastern Catholic Churches) Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox Churches Church of the East Schism (1552) Assyrian Church of the East Ancient Church of the East Protestant Reformation (16th century) Great Schism (11th century) Council of Ephesus (431) Council of Chalcedon (451) Early Christianity Great Church ( Full communion ) (Not shown are ante-Nicene , nontrinitarian , and restorationist denominations.) Historical schisms and divisions [ edit ] Christianity has not been a monolithic faith since the first century or Apostolic Age , though Christians were largely in communion with each other. Today there exist a large variety of groups that share a common history and tradition within and without mainstream Christianity. Christianity is the largest religion in the world (making up approximately one-third of the population) and the various divisions have commonalities and differences in tradition, theology , church government , doctrine, and language.

The largest schism or division in many classification schemes is between the families of Eastern and Western Christianity . After these two larger families come distinct branches of Christianity. Most classification schemes list Roman Catholicism, Protestantism , and Orthodox Christianity , with Orthodox Christianity being divided into Eastern Orthodoxy , Oriental Orthodoxy and the Church of the East . However Roman Catholicism is to be seen as a distinct denomination within Western Christianity.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Protestantism includes diverse groups such as Adventists , Anabaptists , Anglicans , Baptists , Congregationalists , Methodists (inclusive of the Holiness movement ), Moravians , Pentecostals , Presbyterians , Reformed , [ 51 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and Unitarians (depending on one's classification scheme) are all a part of the same family but have distinct doctrinal variations within each group— Lutherans see themselves not to be a part of the rest of what they call "Reformed Protestantism" due to radical differences in sacramental theology and historical approach to the Reformation itself (both Reformed and Lutherans see their reformation in the sixteenth century to be a 'reforming' of the Catholic Church, not a rejection of it entirely). From these come denominations, which in the West, have independence from the others in their doctrine.

The Catholic Church , due to its hierarchical structures, is not said to be made up of denominations, rather, it is a single denomination that include kinds of regional councils and individual congregations and church bodies, which do not officially differ from one another in doctrine.

Antiquity [ edit ] See also: Proto-orthodox Christianity The initial differences between the East and West traditions stem from socio-cultural and ethno-linguistic divisions in and between the Western Roman and Byzantine empires . Since the West (that is, Western Europe) spoke Latin as its lingua franca and the East (Eastern Europe, the Middle East, Asia, and northern Africa) largely used Aramaic and Koine Greek to transmit writings, theological developments were difficult to translate from one branch to the other. In the course of ecumenical councils (large gatherings of Christian leaders), some church bodies split from the larger family of Christianity. Many earlier heretical groups either died off for lack of followers or suppression by the early proto-orthodox Church at large (such as Apollinarians , Montanists , and Ebionites ).

Following the Council of Chalcedon in 451, the next large split came with the Syriac and Coptic churches dividing themselves, with some churches becoming today's Oriental Orthodox . The Armenian Apostolic Church , whose representatives were not able to attend the council did not accept new dogmas and now is also seen as an Oriental Orthodox church. In modern times, there have also been moves towards healing this split, with common Christological statements being made between Pope John Paul II and Syriac Patriarch Ignatius Zakka I Iwas , as well as between representatives of both Eastern and Oriental Orthodoxy.

There has been a statement that the Chalcedonian Creed restored Nestorianism, however this is refuted by maintaining the following distinctions associated with the person of Christ: two hypostases, two natures ( Nestorian ); one hypostasis, one nature ( Monophysite ); one hypostasis, two natures (Eastern Orthodox/Roman Catholic).

[ 53 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: East-West Schism The front door of All Saints' Church in Wittenberg , Germany, where Martin Luther nailed his Ninety-five Theses on 31st October 1517, sparking the Reformation In Western Christianity, a handful of geographically isolated movements preceded the spirit of the Protestant Reformation . The Cathars were a very strong movement in medieval southwestern France, but did not survive into modern times. In northern Italy and southeastern France , Peter Waldo founded the Waldensians in the 12th century. This movement has largely been absorbed by modern-day Protestant groups. In Bohemia , a movement in the early 15th century by Jan Hus called the Hussites defied Catholic dogma , creating the still-extant Moravian Church , a major Protestant denomination.

Although the church as a whole did not experience any major divisions for centuries afterward, the Eastern and Western groups drifted until the point where patriarchs from both families excommunicated one another in about 1054 in what is known as the Great Schism . The political and theological reasons for the schism are complex, but one major controversy was the inclusion and acceptance in the West of the filioque clause into the Nicene Creed , which the East viewed as erroneous. Another was the definition of papal primacy .

Both West and East agreed that the Patriarch of Rome was owed a " primacy of honour " by the other patriarchs (those of Alexandria , Antioch , Constantinople and Jerusalem ), but the West also contended that this primacy extended to jurisdiction, a position rejected by the Eastern patriarchs. Various attempts at dialogue between the two groups would occur, but it was only in the 1960s, under Pope Paul VI and Patriarch Athenagoras , that significant steps began to be made to mend the relationship between the two.

Protestant Reformation (16th century) [ edit ] Main article: Protestant Reformation The Protestant Reformation began with the posting of Martin Luther 's Ninety-Five Theses in Saxony on October 31, 1517, written as a set of grievances to reform the pre-Reformation Western Church.

Luther's writings , combined with the work of Swiss theologian Huldrych Zwingli and French theologian and politician John Calvin sought to reform existing problems in doctrine and practice. Due to the reactions of ecclesiastical office holders at the time of the reformers, these reformers separated from the Catholic Church, instigating a rift in Western Christianity .

In England , Henry VIII of England declared himself to be supreme head of the Church of England with the Act of Supremacy in 1534, founding the Church of England, repressing both Lutheran reformers and those loyal to the pope.

Thomas Cranmer as Archbishop of Canterbury introduced the Reformation, in a form compromising between the Calvinists and Lutherans.

Old and Liberal Catholic Churches (19th–20th centuries) [ edit ] The Old Catholic Church split from the Catholic Church in the 1870s because of the promulgation of the dogma of papal infallibility as promoted by the First Vatican Council of 1869–1870. The term 'Old Catholic' was first used in 1853 to describe the members of the See of Utrecht that were not under Papal authority. The Old Catholic movement grew in America but has not maintained ties with Utrecht, although talks are under way between independent Old Catholic bishops and Utrecht.

The Liberal Catholic Church started in 1916 via an Old Catholic bishop in London, bishop Matthew, who consecrated bishop James Wedgwood to the Episcopacy. This stream has in its relatively short existence known many splits, which operate worldwide under several names.

Eastern Christianity [ edit ] In the Eastern world, the largest body of believers in modern times is the Eastern Orthodox Church , sometimes imprecisely called "Greek Orthodox" because from the time of Christ through the Byzantine empire, Greek was its common language. However, the term " Greek Orthodox " actually refers to only one portion of the entire Eastern Orthodox Church. The Eastern Orthodox Church believes itself to be the continuation of the original Christian Church established by Jesus Christ , and the Apostles . The Orthodox and Catholics have been separated since the 11th century, following the East–West Schism , with each of them saying they represent the original pre-schism Church.

The Eastern Orthodox consider themselves to be spiritually one body, which is administratively grouped into several autocephalous jurisdictions (also commonly referred to as "churches", despite being parts of one Church). They do not recognize any single bishop as universal church leader, but rather each bishop governs only his own diocese . The Patriarch of Constantinople is known as the Ecumenical Patriarch, and holds the title " first among equals ", meaning only that if a great council is called, the patriarch sits as president of the council. He has no more power than any other bishop. Currently, the largest synod with the most members is the Russian Orthodox Church . Others include the ancient Patriarchates of Constantinople , Alexandria , Antioch and Jerusalem , the Georgian , Romanian , Serbian and Bulgarian Orthodox churches, and several smaller ones.

A 6th-century Nestorian church, St. John the Arab, in the Assyrian village of Geramon The second largest Eastern Christian communion is Oriental Orthodoxy , which is organized in a similar manner, with six national autocephalous groups and two autonomous bodies, although there are greater internal differences than among the Eastern Orthodox (especially in the diversity of rites being used). The six autocephalous Oriental Orthodox churches are the Coptic (Egyptian), Syriac , Armenian , Malankara (Indian), Ethiopian and Eritrean Orthodox churches. In the Aramaic-speaking areas of the Middle East , the Syriac Orthodox Church has long been dominant. Although the region of modern-day Ethiopia and Eritrea has had a strong body of believers since the infancy of Christianity, these regions only gained autocephaly in 1963 and 1994 respectively. The Oriental Orthodox are distinguished from the Eastern Orthodox by doctrinal differences concerning the union of human and divine natures in the person of Jesus Christ, and the two communions separated as a consequence of the Council of Chalcedon in the year 451, although there have been recent moves towards reconciliation. Since these groups are relatively obscure in the West, literature on them has sometimes included the Church of the East , which, like the Oriental Orthodox, originated in the 1st century A.D., but has not been in communion with them since before the Council of Ephesus of 431.

Largely aniconic , the Church of the East represents a third Eastern Christian tradition in its own right. In recent centuries, it has split into three Churches. The largest (since the early 20th century) is the Baghdad -based Chaldean Catholic Church formed from groups that entered communion with Rome at different times, beginning in 1552. The second-largest is what since 1976 [ 54 ] is officially called the Assyrian Church of the East and which from 1933 to 2015 was headquartered first in Cyprus and then in the United States , but whose present Catholicos-Patriarch, Gewargis III , elected in 2015, lives in Erbil , Iraq . The third is the Ancient Church of the East , distinct since 1964 and headed by Addai II Giwargis , resident in Baghdad.

There are also the Eastern Catholic Churches , most of which are counterparts of those listed above, sharing with them the same theological and liturgical traditions, but differing from them in that they recognize the Bishop of Rome as the universal head of the Church . They are fully part of the Catholic communion , on the same level juridically as the Latin Church . Most of their members do not describe themselves as " Roman Catholics ", a term they associate with membership of the Latin Church, and speak of themselves in relation to whichever Church they belong to: Maronites , Melkites , Ukrainian Catholics , Coptic Catholics , Chaldean Catholics , etc.

[ 55 ] And finally the smallest Eastern Christian group founded in early 20th century is Byzantine Rite Lutheranism where accept Byzantine Rite as Church's liturgy while retaining their Lutheran traditions like Ukrainian Lutheran Church . It is considered part of Eastern Protestant denominational movement.

Western Christianity [ edit ] Christian denominations in the English-speaking world International associations Interdenominational associations World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Denominational associations Friends World Committee for Consultation Mennonite World Conference Anglican Communion Baptist World Alliance World Convention of Churches of Christ Eastern Orthodox Church Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference International Lutheran Council Lutheran World Federation World Methodist Council Pentecostal World Conference International Conference of Reformed Churches Reformed Ecumenical Council World Communion of Reformed Churches World Reformed Fellowship Regional associations Africa All Africa Conference of Churches (AACC) Association of Evangelicals of Africa (AEA) All Africa Baptist Fellowship Africa Lutheran Communion Asia Christian Conference of Asia (CCA) Evangelical Fellowship of Asia Asia Pacific Baptist Federation Asia Lutheran Communion Caribbean Caribbean Conference of Churches (CCC) Evangelical Association of the Caribbean Caribbean Baptist Fellowship Europe Conference of European Churches (CEC) European Evangelical Alliance European Baptist Federation Pentecostal European Fellowship Middle East Middle East Council of Churches (MECC) Latin America Latin American Council of Churches (CLAI) Latin American Evangelical Fellowship (FIDE) Union of Baptists in Latin America North America North American Baptist Fellowship Assembly of Canonical Orthodox Bishops of the United States of America North American Presbyterian and Reformed Council Pacific Pacific Conference of Churches (PCC) Evangelical Fellowship of the South Pacific (EFSP) Asia Pacific Baptist Federation Australia Christian denominations in Australia Australian interchurch Australian Evangelical Alliance  • website National Council of Churches Catholic Catholic Church in Australia Anglican Anglican Church of Australia Holiness and Pietist Christian and Missionary Alliance Christian Outreach Centre Church of the Nazarene Salvation Army Seventh-day Adventist Church Historical Protestantism Australian Friends Australian Baptist Ministries Open Brethren Christian Reformed Churches of Australia Churches of Christ Fellowship of Congregational Churches Lutheran Church of Australia Presbyterian Church of Australia Uniting Church in Australia Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia Eastern Christian Antiochian Orthodox of Australia and New Z.

Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of Australia Serbian Orthodox of Australia and New Z.

Non-Chalcedonic Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia Pentecostal and related Australian Christian Churches (AOG) Christian City Church Intl.

CRC Churches International Revival Centres International Vineyard Churches Australia Worldwide Church of God Other LDS Church v t e Canada Christian denominations in Canada Canadian interchurch Canadian Council of Churches Assembly of Canonical Orthodox Bishops of the United States of America North Am. Presbyterian and Reformed Council Anabaptist and Friends Canadian Mennonite Brethren Churches Canadian Yearly Meeting (Quakers) Mennonite Church Canada Baptist and Stone-Campbell Association of Regular Baptist Churches Baptist General Conference of Canada Canadian Baptist Ministries Canadian Convention of Southern Baptists Fellowship of Evgcl. Baptist Churches, Canada North American Baptist Conference Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) Evangelical Christian Church in Canada Anglican and Catholic Anglican Church of Canada Anglican Church in North America Polish National Catholic Church Catholic Church in Canada Ukrainian Catholic, Winnipeg Holiness and Pietist Christian and Missionary Alliance, Canada Church of the Nazarene Evangelical Free Church of Canada Baptist General Conference of Canada The Salvation Army Wesleyan Church Lutheran Evangelical Lutheran Church in Canada Lutheran Church–Canada Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod Methodist British Methodist Episcopal Church Free Methodist Church in Canada United Church of Canada Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Antiochian Orthodox Archdiocese, N.Am.

Greek Orthodox Metropolis of Toronto Serbian Orthodox Eparchy of Canada Orthodox Church in America American-Canadian Macedonian Orthodox Diocese Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia Ukrainian Orthodox Church of Canada Armenian Apostolic Diocese of Am.

Coptic Orthodox Church in Canada Pentecostal Apostolic Church of Pentecost Canadian Assemblies of God Church of God of Prophecy Intl. Foursquare Gospel, Canada Intl. Pentecostal Holiness Church Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada Pentecostal Church of God United Pentecostal Church Intl.

Presbyterian and Reformed Canadian and American Reformed Churches Christian Reformed Church in North America L'Église réformée du Québec Presbyterian Church in Canada Presbyterian Church in America Reformed Church in America United Church of Canada Other Evangelical Orthodox Church Messianic Jewish Alliance of America Plymouth Brethren Seventh-day Adventist Church in Canada LDS Church Vineyard Canada Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Canada v t e Ireland Christian denominations in Ireland Church of Ireland (Anglican) Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland Catholic Church in Ireland Christian Churches Ireland Elim Pentecostal Church Presbyterian Church in Ireland Irish interchurch Irish Council of Churches Churches Together in Britain and Ireland Evangelical Alliance , UK v t e New Zealand Christian denominations in New Zealand New Zealand interchurch National Council of Churches Māori Council of Churches Catholic Catholic Church in New Zealand Anglican Anglican Church of New Zealand Holiness and Pietist Christian and Missionary Alliance Church of the Nazarene Salvation Army Seventh-day Adventist Church Historical Protestantism Baptist Union of New Zealand Open Brethren Fellowship of Congregational Churches Lutheran Church of Australia and New Zealand Methodist Church of New Zealand New Zealand Friends Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Wesleyan Methodist Church in New Zealand Eastern Christian Antiochian Orthodox of Australia and New Zealand Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of New Zealand Macedonian Orthodox Diocese of Australia and New Zealand Serbian Orthodox of Australia and New Zealand Non-Chalcedonic Coptic Orthodox Church in Australia and New Zealand Pentecostal and related Assemblies of God CRC Churches International Revival Centres International Vineyard Churches New Zealand Worldwide Church of God Other LDS Church v t e Nigeria Christian denominations in Nigeria Nigerian interchurch Christian Association of Nigeria Fellowship of Churches of Christ in Nigeria African initiated Cherubim and Seraphim Society Eternal Sacred Order of Cherubim and Seraphim Church of God Mission International Church of the Lord (Aladura) Anglican The African Church Church of Nigeria Anabaptist Church of the Brethren in Nigeria Baptist Mambila Baptist Convention of Nigeria Nigerian Baptist Convention Catholic Catholic Church in Nigeria Holiness and Methodist African Methodist Episcopal Church in Nigeria United Methodist Church of Nigeria Lutheran Lutheran Church of Christ in Nigeria Lutheran Church of Nigeria Pentecostal The Apostolic Church Nigeria Christ Apostolic Church Deeper Christian Life Ministry General Council of the Assemblies of God Nigeria Gospel Faith Mission International Church of the Foursquare Gospel The Lord's Chosen Charismatic Revival Movement New Apostolic Church in Nigeria Redeemed Christian Church of God Winners' Chapel Presbyterian and Reformed Christian Reformed Church of Nigeria Church of Christ in Nigeria Church of Christ in the Sudan Among the Tiv Evangelical Reformed Church of Christ N.K.S.T Presbyterian Church of Nigeria Reformed Church of Christ in Nigeria Other Protestant Churches of Christ in Nigeria Evangelical Church of West Africa QIC-United Evangelical Church Seventh-day Adventist Church in Nigeria Word of Faith Ministries v t e Papua New Guinea Christian denominations in Papua New Guinea v t e Papua New Guinean interchurch Papua New Guinea Council of Churches Anglican Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea Catholic Catholic Church in Papua New Guinea Lutheran Evangelical Lutheran Church of PNG Gutnius Lutheran Church Methodist and Presbyterian United Church Others Baptists Evangelical Alliance Iglesia ni Cristo Jehovah's Witnesses Members Church of God International Pentecostalism Salvation Army Seventh-day Adventist Church Tertiary Students Christian Fellowship v t e South Africa Christian denominations in South Africa South African interchurch South African Council of Churches Evangelical Alliance of South Africa Catholic Catholic Church in South Africa Anglican Anglican Church Reformed Evangelical Anglican Church Holiness and AIC Die Heilsleër Zion Christian Church Pentecostal Apostolic Faith Mission [ Assemblies of God ] Protestantism, Other Baptist Union Evangelical Lutheran Church LDS Church Methodist Church Reformed Dutch Reformed: NGK Dutch Reformed: NHK Evangelical Presbyterian Church Presbyterian Church of Africa Reformed Church in Africa Reformed Churches: GKSA United Congregational Church Uniting Presbyterian Church Uniting Reformed Church v t e United Kingdom Christian denominations in the United Kingdom v t e British interchurch Affinity (formerly British Evangelical Council) Churches Together in Britain and Ireland Evangelical Alliance Fellowship of Independent Evangelical Churches Churches Together in England Cytûn (Churches Together in Wales) Evangelical Movement of Wales Anglican Church of England Church of Ireland Scottish Episcopal Church Church in Wales Baptist Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland Baptist Union of Great Britain Baptist Union of Scotland Baptist Union of Wales Catholic Catholic Church in the United Kingdom Catholic Church in England and Wales Catholic Church in Ireland Catholic Church in Scotland Lutheran Lutheran Church in Great Britain Methodist and Holiness Methodist Church of Great Britain Methodist Church in Ireland Free Methodist Church Church of the Nazarene Salvation Army New Church Movement Newfrontiers Orthodox Archdiocese of Thyateira and Great Britain British Orthodox Church Pentecostal Assemblies of God Church of God in Christ Elim Pentecostal Church Presbyterian and Reformed Asso. Presbyterian Churches Church of Scotland Congregational Federation Evangelical Presbyterian Church Presbyterian Church in Ireland Presbyterian Church of Wales United Free Church of Scotland United Reformed Church Other Unitarian and Free Christian Churches LDS Church in England Quakers Seventh-day Adventist Church v t e United States Christian denominations in the United States American interchurch National Association of Evangelicals National Council of Churches Churches Uniting in Christ Anabaptist Church of the Brethren Mennonite Church USA Amish Anglican Anglican Church in North America Episcopal Church Baptist Alliance of Baptists American Baptist Association American Baptist Churches Baptist Bible Fellowship International Baptist Missionary Association of America Conservative Baptist Association of America Converge General Association of Regular Baptist Churches National Association of Free Will Baptists National Primitive Baptist Convention of the U.S.A.

North American Baptist Conference Southern Baptist Convention Holiness Baptist Churches Independent Baptist Churches African-American Baptist National Baptist Convention of America National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.

National Missionary Baptist Convention of America Progressive National Baptist Convention Catholic Catholic Church in the United States Eastern Christian Eastern Orthodox Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America Orthodox Church in America Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia Serbian Orthodox Church in USA American-Canadian Macedonian Orthodox Diocese Russian Orthodox Church Outside Russia Ukrainian Orthodox Church of the USA Oriental Orthodox Armenian Apostolic Church in USA Coptic Orthodox Church in USA Syriac Orthodox Church Orthodox Tewahedo ( Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church , Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church ) Eastern Protestant P'ent'ay Evangelical Orthodox Church Assyrian Evangelical Church Assyrian Pentecostal Church Mar Thoma Syrian Church Armenian Evangelical Church Eastern Catholic Lutheran Evangelical Lutheran Church in America Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod North American Lutheran Church Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod Methodist and Holiness African Methodist Episcopal Church African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church Christian Methodist Episcopal Church Christian and Missionary Alliance Church of God (Anderson, Indiana) Church of the Nazarene Free Methodist Church Global Methodist Church The Salvation Army United Methodist Church Wesleyan Church Pentecostal Holiness Pentecostal Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee) Church of God in Christ Church of God of Prophecy International Pentecostal Holiness Church Finished Work Pentecostal Assemblies of God Church on the Rock International Full Gospel Fellowship International Church of the Foursquare Gospel Pentecostal Church of God Oneness Pentecostal Pentecostal Assemblies of the World United Pentecostal Church Intl.

Presbyterian and Reformed Christian Reformed Church in North America Conservative Congregational Christian Conference Cumberland Presbyterian Church ECO: A Covenant Order of Evangelical Presbyterians Evangelical Presbyterian Church Korean Presbyterian Church in America International Council of Community Churches National Association of Congregational Christian Churches Presbyterian Church (USA) Presbyterian Church in America Reformed Church in America United Church of Christ Radical Pietist Evangelical Covenant Church Evangelical Free Church of America Converge Stone-Campbell Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) Christian churches and churches of Christ Churches of Christ International Churches of Christ Other LDS Church The Religious Society of Friends (Quakers) Community of Christ Grace Gospel Fellowship IFCA International Jehovah's Witnesses Messianic Jewish Alliance of America Plymouth Brethren Seventh-day Adventist Church Unitarian Universalist Christian Fellowship Vineyard USA v t e v t e The Latin portion of the Catholic Church , along with Protestantism , comprise the three major divisions of Christianity in the Western world. Catholics do not describe themselves as a denomination but rather as the original Church, from which all other branches broke off in schism . The Baptist , Methodist , and Lutheran churches are generally considered to be Protestant denominations, although strictly speaking, of these three, only the Lutherans took part in the official Protestation at Speyer after the decree of the Second Diet of Speyer mandated the burning of Luther's works and the end of the Protestant Reformation . Anglicanism is generally classified as Protestant, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 56 ] being originally seen as a via media , or middle way between Lutheranism and Reformed Christianity, and since the Oxford Movement of the 19th century, some Anglican writers of Anglo-Catholic churchmanship emphasize a more catholic understanding of the church and characterize it as being both Protestant and Catholic.

[ 57 ] A case is sometimes also made to regard Lutheranism in a similar way, considering the catholic character of its foundational documents (the Augsburg Confession and other documents contained in the Book of Concord ) and its existence prior to the Anglican, Anabaptist, and Reformed churches, from which nearly all other Protestant denominations derive.

[ 58 ] One central tenet of Catholicism (which is a common point between Catholic, Scandinavian Lutheran, Anglican, Moravian, Orthodox, and some other Churches), is its practice of apostolic succession . " Apostle " means "one who is sent out". Jesus commissioned the first twelve apostles , and they, in turn laid hands on subsequent church leaders to ordain (commission) them for ministry. In this manner, Catholics and Anglicans trace their ordained ministers all the way back to the original Twelve.

Catholics believe that the Pope has authority which can be traced directly to the apostle Peter whom they hold to be the original head of and first Pope of the Church . There are smaller churches, such as the Old Catholic Church which rejected the definition of Papal Infallibility at the First Vatican Council , as well as Evangelical Catholics and Anglo-Catholics , who are Lutherans and Anglicans that believe that Lutheranism and Anglicanism, respectively, are a continuation of historical Catholicism and who incorporate many Catholic beliefs and practices.

[ 58 ] The Catholic Church refers to itself simply by the terms Catholic and Catholicism (which mean universal).

Some Catholics, based on a strict interpretation of extra ecclesiam nulla salus ("Outside the Church, there is no salvation"), reject any notion those outside its communion could be regarded as part of any true Catholic Christian faith. This is called Feeneyism , which is considered a heresy by the Catholic Church, and was rejected by the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965).

[ 59 ] Catholicism has a hierarchical structure in which supreme authority for matters of faith and practice are the exclusive domain of the Pope, who sits on the Throne of Peter, and the bishops when acting in union with him.

Each Protestant movement has developed freely, and many have split over theological issues. For instance, a number of movements grew out of spiritual revivals , such as Pentecostalism . Doctrinal issues and matters of conscience have also divided Protestants. Still others formed out of administrative issues; Methodism branched off as its own group of denominations when the American Revolutionary War complicated the movement's ability to ordain ministers (it had begun as a movement within the Church of England). In Methodism's case, it has undergone a number of administrative schisms and mergers with other denominations (especially those associated with the holiness movement in the 20th century).

The Anabaptist tradition, made up of the Amish , Hutterites , and Mennonites , rejected the Roman Catholic and Lutheran doctrines of infant baptism ; this tradition is also noted for its belief in pacifism . Many Anabaptists do not see themselves as Protestant, but a separate tradition altogether.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Some denominations which arose alongside the Western Christian tradition consider themselves Christian, but neither Catholic nor wholly Protestant, such as the Religious Society of Friends (Quakers). Quakerism began as an evangelical Christian movement in 17th century England , eschewing priests and all formal Anglican or Catholic sacraments in their worship, including many of those practices that remained among the stridently Protestant Puritans such as baptism with water. They were known in America for helping with the Underground Railroad, and like the Mennonites, Quakers traditionally refrain from participation in war.

Many churches with roots in Restorationism reject being identified as Protestant or even as a denomination at all, as they use only the Bible and not creeds, and model the church after what they feel is the first-century church found in scripture; the Churches of Christ are one example; African Initiated Churches , like Kimbanguism , mostly fall within Protestantism, with varying degrees of syncretism. The measure of mutual acceptance between the denominations and movements varies, but is growing largely due to the ecumenical movement in the 20th century and overarching Christian bodies such as the World Council of Churches .

Christians with Jewish roots [ edit ] Main articles: Jewish Christian , Messianic Judaism , and Hebrew Christian movement Messianic Jews maintain a Jewish identity while accepting Jesus as the Messiah and the New Testament as authoritative. After the founding of the church, the disciples of Jesus generally retained their ethnic origins while accepting the Gospel message. The first church council was called in Jerusalem to address just this issue, and the deciding opinion was written by James the Just , the first bishop of Jerusalem and a pivotal figure in the Christian movement. The history of Messianic Judaism includes many movements and groups and defies any simple classification scheme.

The 19th century saw at least 250,000 Jews convert to Christianity according to existing records of various societies.

[ 62 ] Data from the Pew Research Center has it that, as of 2013, about 1.6 million adult American Jews identify themselves as Christians , most as Protestants .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] According to the same data, most of the Jews who identify themselves as some sort of Christian (1.6 million) were raised as Jews or are Jews by ancestry.

[ 64 ] Modern history [ edit ] Unitarianism [ edit ] Further information: Biblical Unitarianism Within Italy, Poland, Lithuania, Transylvania, Hungary and Romania Unitarian Churches emerged from the Reformed tradition in the 16th century.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] They adopted the Anabaptist doctrine of credobaptism .

[ 68 ] The Unitarian Church of Transylvania is an example of such a denomination that arose in this era and is represented in the Protestant Theological Institute of Cluj . Due to their rejection of the Athanasian Creed which contains the doctrine of the Trinity , many mainstream Christian Churches do not recognize Unitarians as Christians.

[ 69 ] Restorationism [ edit ] Second Great Awakening [ edit ] Main articles: Second Great Awakening , Restorationism , and Restoration Movement The Stone–Campbell Restoration Movement began on the American frontier during the Second Great Awakening (1790–1870) of the early 19th century. The movement sought to restore the church and "the unification of all Christians in a single body patterned after the church of the New Testament." [ 70 ] : 54 Members do not identify as Protestant but simply as Christian.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] : 213 The Restoration Movement developed from several independent efforts to return to apostolic Christianity , but two groups, which independently developed similar approaches to the Christian faith, were particularly important.

[ 74 ] : 27–32 The first, led by Barton W. Stone , began at Cane Ridge , Kentucky and called themselves simply as " Christians ". The second began in western Pennsylvania and Virginia (now West Virginia) and was led by Thomas Campbell and his son, Alexander Campbell ; they used the name " Disciples of Christ ". Both groups sought to restore the whole Christian church on the pattern set forth in the New Testament , and both believed that creeds kept Christianity divided. In 1832 they joined in fellowship with a handshake.

Among other things, they were united in the belief that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God ; that Christians should celebrate the Lord's Supper on the first day of each week ; and that baptism of adult believers by immersion in water is a necessary condition for salvation . Because the founders wanted to abandon all denominational labels, they used the biblical names for the followers of Jesus.

[ 75 ] : 27 Both groups promoted a return to the purposes of the 1st-century churches as described in the New Testament. One historian of the movement has argued that it was primarily a unity movement, with the restoration motif playing a subordinate role.

[ 76 ] : 8 The Restoration Movement has since divided into multiple separate groups. There are three main branches in the US: the Churches of Christ , the Christian churches and churches of Christ , and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) . Other U.S.-based groups affiliated with the movement are the International Churches of Christ and the International Christian Churches . Non-U.S. groups include the Churches of Christ in Australia , the Evangelical Christian Church in Canada , the Churches of Christ in Europe . The Plymouth Brethren are a similar though historically unrelated group which originated in the United Kingdom. Some churches, such as Churches of Christ or the Plymouth Brethren reject formal ties with other churches within the movement.

Other Christian groups originating during the Second Great Awakening including the Adventist movement , [ 77 ] the Jehovah's Witnesses , [ 78 ] and Christian Science , [ 79 ] founded within fifty years of one another, all consider themselves to be restorative of primitive Christianity and the early church. Some Baptist churches with Landmarkist views have similar beliefs concerning their connection with primitive Christianity.

[ 80 ] Latter Day Saint movement [ edit ] Main articles: Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism See also: List of denominations in the Latter Day Saint movement and Mormonism and Christianity Most Latter Day Saint denominations are derived from the Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints) established by Joseph Smith in 1830, which is categorized as a Restorationist denomination.

[ 24 ] The largest worldwide denomination is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , colloquially referred to as Mormonism . Various considerably smaller sects broke from this movement after its relocation to the Rocky Mountains in the mid-1800s. Several of these broke away over the abandonment of practicing plural marriage after the 1890 Manifesto . Most of the "Prairie Saint" denominations (see below) were established after Smith's death by the remnants of the Latter Day Saints who did not go west with Brigham Young . Many of these opposed some of the 1840s theological developments in favor of 1830s theological understandings and practices. Other denominations are defined by either a belief in Joseph Smith as a prophet or acceptance of the Book of Mormon as scripture .

Mormons generally consider themselves to be restorationist , believing that Smith, as prophet, seer, and revelator , restored the original and true Church of Christ to the earth. Some Latter Day Saint denominations are regarded by other Christians as being nontrinitarian or even non-Christian, but the Latter Day Saints are predominantly in disagreement with these statements. Latter Day Saints see themselves as believing in a Godhead comprising the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost as separate personages united in purpose. Latter Day Saints regard traditional definitions of the Trinity as aberrations of true doctrine and emblematic of the Great Apostasy [ 81 ] but they do not accept certain trinitarian definitions in the post-apostolic creeds , such as the Athanasian Creed .

Spiritual Christianity [ edit ] Spiritual Christianity , inclusive of the Molokans , Dukh-i-zhizniki , Doukhobors , and numerous tribal faiths, emerged in Russia, each containing a unique tradition.

[ 82 ] The Doukhobor have maintained close association with Mennonite Anabaptist Christians and Quaker Christians due to analogous religious practices; all of these groups are furthermore collectively considered to be peace churches due to their belief in pacifism .

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] Other movements [ edit ] Protestant denominations have shown a strong tendency towards diversification and fragmentation, giving rise to numerous churches and movements, especially in Anglo-American religious history, where the process is cast in terms of a series of " Great Awakenings ".

The most recent wave of diversification, known as the Fourth Great Awakening took place during the 1960s to 1980s and resulted in phenomena such as the Charismatic Movement , the Jesus movement , and a number of parachurch organizations based in Evangelicalism .

Many independent churches and movements consider themselves to be non-denominational , but may vary greatly in doctrine. Many of these, like the local churches movement, reflect the core teachings of traditional Christianity. Others however, such as The Way International , have been denounced as cults by the Christian anti-cult movement . Further, others may have similar doctrine to mainline churches but incorporate a multi-faith and ecumenical model such as the Interfaith-Ecumenical Church (IEC) that is based entirely in a virtual and international model.

Two movements, which are entirely unrelated in their founding, but share a common element of an additional Messiah (or incarnation of Christ) are the Unification Church and the Rastafari movement . These movements fall outside of traditional taxonomies of Christian groups, though both cite the Christian Bible as a basis for their beliefs.

Syncretism of Christian beliefs with local and tribal religions is a phenomenon that occurs throughout the world. An example of this is the Native American Church . The ceremonies of this group are strongly tied to the use of peyote . (Parallels may be drawn here with the Rastafari spiritual use of cannabis .) While traditions vary from tribe to tribe, they often include a belief in Jesus as a Native American cultural hero, an intercessor for man, or a spiritual guardian; belief in the Bible; and an association of Jesus with peyote.

There are also some Christians that reject organized religion altogether. Some Christian anarchists —often those of a Protestant background—believe that the original teachings of Jesus were corrupted by Roman statism (compare Early Christianity and State church of the Roman Empire ), and that earthly authority such as government, or indeed the established Church, do not and should not have power over them. Following " The Golden Rule ", many oppose the use of physical force in any circumstance, and advocate nonviolence . The Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy wrote The Kingdom of God Is Within You , [ 86 ] and was a Christian anarchist.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Christian tradition Great Church List of Christian denominations List of Christian denominations by number of members Notes [ edit ] ^ The Oxford Dictionary's full list of synonyms for "denomination" includes: "religious group, sect, Church, cult, movement, faith community, body, persuasion, religious persuasion, communion, order, fraternity, brotherhood, sisterhood, school; faith, creed, belief, religious belief, religion. rare: sodality." References [ edit ] ^ Ellwood, Robert S. (2008).

The Encyclopedia of World Religions .

Infobase Publishing . p. 115.

ISBN 978-1-4381-1038-7 .

^ Press, Altamira; Swatos, William H. (1998).

Encyclopedia of Religion and Society . Rowman Altamira. pp.

134– 136.

ISBN 978-0-7619-8956-1 .

^ Becchio, Bruno; Schadé, Johannes P. (2006).

Encyclopedia of World Religions . Foreign Media Group. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-60136-000-7 .

^ Richey, Russell E. (2013).

Denominationalism Illustrated and Explained .

Wipf and Stock Publishers . pp.

1– 9.

ISBN 978-1-61097-297-0 .

^ Publishing, Rose (2013).

Denominations Comparison . Rose Publishing Inc.

ISBN 978-1-59636-539-1 .

^ Rhodes, Ron (2015).

The Complete Guide to Christian Denominations: Understanding the History, Beliefs, and Differences . Harvest House Publishers. pp.

13– 22.

ISBN 978-0-7369-5292-7 .

^ Wootten, Pat (2002).

"Divisions and denominations" .

Christianity . Heinemann.

ISBN 978-0-435-33634-9 .

^ a b "Pewforum: Christianity (2010)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 August 2013 . Retrieved 14 May 2014 .

^ "Pubblicazione dell'Annuario Pontificio e dell'Annuario Statistico della Chiesa, 25.03.2020" [Publication of the Pontifical Yearbook and the Statistical Yearbook of the Church, 25.03.2020] (in Italian).

Holy See Press Office . 25 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2020 . Retrieved 12 May 2020 .

^ a b Olson, Roger E. (1999).

The story of Christian theology : twenty centuries of tradition & reform . Internet Archive. Downers Grove, Ill. : InterVarsity Press. p. 278.

ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0 .

^ a b "Status of Global Christianity, 2024, in the Context of 1900–2050" (PDF) . Center for the Study of Global Christianity, Gordon-Conwell Theological Seminary . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ a b "Status of Global Christianity, 2019, in the Context of 1900–2050" (PDF) . Center for Study of Global Christianity.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

^ Harvard Divinity School, The Religious Literacy Project.

"The Protestant Movement" .

rlp.hds.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 2020-07-28 . Retrieved 2020-05-31 .

^ "What Is Protestantism & Why Is it Important?" .

Christianity.com .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 31 May 2020 .

^ "The Reformation" .

HISTORY . 11 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2020 . Retrieved 31 May 2020 .

^ a b c d e Encyclopedia of World Religions .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2008.

ISBN 978-1-59339-491-2 .

Amid all this diversity, however, it is possible to define Protestantism formally as non-Roman Western Christianity and to divide most of Protestantism into four major confessions or confessional families – Lutheran, Anglican, Reformed, and Free Church.

^ a b c d Melton, J. Gordon (2005).

Encyclopedia of Protestantism . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8160-6983-5 .

Most narrowly, it denotes a movement that began within the Roman Catholic Church in Europe in the 16th century and the churches that come directly out of it. In this narrow sense, Protestantism would include the Lutheran, Reformed or Presbyterian, and Anglican (Church of England) churches, and by extension the churches of the British Puritan movement, which sought to bring the Church of England into the Reformed/Presbyterian camp. Most recently, scholars have argued quite effectively that the churches of the radical phase of the 16th-century Reformation, the Anabaptist and Mennonite groups, also belong within this more narrow usage.

^ "Western Christianity" .

www.philtar.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2017 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ a b "Orthodox Christianity in the 21st Century" .

Pew Research Center's Religion & Public Life Project . 8 November 2017.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2021 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

^ Fairchild, Mary.

"Christianity:Basics:Eastern Orthodox Church Denomination" . about.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2014 .

^ Davies, Rupert E.; George, A. Raymond; Rupp, Gordon (2017).

A History of the Methodist Church in Great Britain, Volume Three . Wipf & Stock Publishers. p. 225.

ISBN 978-1532630507 .

^ Yongnan, Jeon Ahn (21 May 2019).

Interpretation of Tongues and Prophecy in 1 Corinthians 12-14, with a Pentecostal Hermeneutics . Brill Academic Publishers. p. 9-10.

ISBN 978-90-04-39717-0 .

^ a b Riswold, Caryn D. (1 October 2009).

Feminism and Christianity: Questions and Answers in the Third Wave . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-62189-053-9 .

^ a b "The Restorationist denominations in Christianity" .

Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance . 2012. Archived from the original on 11 May 2008 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 .

^ a b Bloesch, Donald G. (2 December 2005).

The Holy Spirit: Works Gifts . InterVarsity Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-8308-2755-8 .

^ a b Spinks, Bryan D. (2 March 2017).

Reformation and Modern Rituals and Theologies of Baptism: From Luther to Contemporary Practices .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-351-90583-1 .

However, Swedenborg claimed to receive visions and revelations of heavenly things and a 'New Church', and the new church which was founded upon his writings was a Restorationist Church. The three nineteenth-century churches are all examples of Restorationist Churches, which believed they were refounding the Apostolic Church, and preparing for the Second Coming of Christ.

^ "Nondenominational & Independent Congregations" .

Hartford Institute for Religion Research . Hartford Seminary, Hartford Institute for Religion Research. 2015. Archived from the original on 2016-04-23 . Retrieved 2016-05-09 .

^ Shellnutt, Kate (20 July 2017).

"The Rise of the Nons: Protestants Keep Ditching Denominations" .

News & Reporting .

Archived from the original on 2020-05-20 . Retrieved 2020-05-23 .

^ "What Are Non-Denominational Churches? Meaning & Examples" .

Christianity.com .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ says, An Ethnographical Study of Saint Francis United Methodist Church-NCSU Studies in Religion (8 August 2017).

"What Does the Growth of Nondenominationalism Mean?" .

Facts & Trends .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ "Gallup: Non-denominational Protestants on the rise" .

Baptist Press . 21 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ "Denomination" . Oxford Dictionaries: English. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ "Church" . Oxford Dictionaries: English. Archived from the original on 17 November 2013 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ Gilbert, T. B.

"Church Membership and Church Fellowship. Is there a difference?" . Archived from the original on 20 April 2015 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ Hill, Alec (1 July 2003).

"Church" . Intervarsity Christian Fellowship. Archived from the original on 1 June 2015 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ a b Jackson, Wayne.

"Denominationalism – Permissible or Reprehensible?" . Christian Courier.

Archived from the original on 6 June 2015 . Retrieved 2 June 2015 .

^ "Denominationalism" . Merriam Webster Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 18 September 2015 . Retrieved 6 June 2015 .

^ Ballantine, Jeanne H.; Roberts, Keith A. (17 November 2008).

Our Social World: Introduction to Sociology . Pine Forge Press. p. 400.

ISBN 978-1-4129-6818-8 .

^ Buell, Denise Kimber (1999-04-04).

Making Christians: Clement of Alexandria and the Rhetoric of Legitimacy . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-05980-8 .

^ Modern culture runs risk of amnesia Archived 2019-04-11 at the Wayback Machine , from a speech given May 20th, 2010 ^ Pew-Templeton Global Religious Futures Project (December 2011).

Global Christianity: A Report on the Size and Distribution of the World's Christian Population (PDF) (Report). Pew Research Center. p. 10.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 1, 2021 . Retrieved May 28, 2021 .

^ Gao, Ronnie Chuang-Rang; Sawatsky, Kevin (7 February 2023).

"Motivations in Faith-Based Organizations" .

Houston Christian University . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

For example, Christianity comprises six major groups: Church of the East, Oriental Orthodoxy, Eastern Orthodoxy, Roman Catholicism, Protestantism and Restorationism.

Gao and Sawatsky refer to Ellwood, Robert S.

, The Encyclopedia of World Religions , New York: Infobase Publishing (2008) as their source for this taxonomy.

^ The New Encyclopaedia Britannica . Encyclopaedia Britannica. 1987. p.

244 .

ISBN 978-0-85229-443-7 .

^ Brewer, Brian C. (30 December 2021).

T&T Clark Handbook of Anabaptism . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 564.

ISBN 978-0-567-68950-4 .

^ Lewis, Paul W.; Mittelstadt, Martin William (27 April 2016).

What's So Liberal about the Liberal Arts?: Integrated Approaches to Christian Formation . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4982-3145-9 .

The Second Great Awakening (1790-1840) spurred a renewed interest in primitive Christianity. What is known as the Restoration Movement of the nineteenth century gave birth to an array of groups: Mormons (The Latter Day Saint Movement), the Churches of Christ, Adventists, and Jehovah's Witnesses. Though these groups demonstrate a breathtaking diversity on the continuum of Christianity they share an intense restorationist impulse. Picasso and Stravinsky reflect a primitivism that came to the fore around the turn of the twentieth century that more broadly has been characterized as a "retreat from the industrialized world." ^ Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche.

"The main differences between Catholics and Protestants | DW | 21.04.2019" .

DW.COM .

Archived from the original on 2020-05-23 . Retrieved 2020-05-23 .

^ Bunderson, Carl (30 June 2016).

"What Are the Differences Between Catholics and Eastern Orthodox Anyway?" .

National Catholic Register .

Archived from the original on 2020-07-28 . Retrieved 2020-05-23 .

^ Erickson, John H (2000).

"Beyond Dialogue: The Quest for Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Unity Today" . St Vladimir's Orthodox Theological Seminary. Archived from the original on 2018-11-14 . Retrieved 2020-05-23 – via Symposium on 1700th Anniversary of Christian Armenia.

^ Guenther, Bruce.

"Life in a Muddy World: Reflections on Denominationalism" . first published in Fall/Winter 2008 edition of In Touch Magazine. For reprint permission contact the Director of Public Relations at 1-800-251-6227. Fresno Pacific Biblical Seminary. Archived from the original on 10 March 2015.

^ "What is the World Council of Churches? – World Council of Churches" .

www.oikoumene.org . Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

^ a b McAuliffe, Garrett (2008).

Culturally Alert Counseling: A Comprehensive Introduction .

SAGE Publishing . p. 532.

ISBN 978-1-4129-1006-4 .

About one-third of the world's population is considered Christian and can be divided into three main branches: (1) Catholicism (the largest coherent group, representing over one billion baptized members); (2) Orthodox Christianity (including Eastern Orthodoxy and Oriental Orthodoxy); and (3) Protestantism (comprising many denominations and schools of thought, including Anglicanism, Reformed, Presbyterianism, Lutheranism, Methodism, Evangelicalism, and Pentecostalism).

^ Mirola, William; Monahan, Susanne C. (2016).

Religion Matters: What Sociology Teaches Us About Religion In Our World . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-34451-3 .

Orthodox Churches represent one of te three major branches of Christianity, along with Catholicism and Protestantism.

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Monophysites and Monophysitism" .

New Advent .

Archived from the original on 2023-05-19 . Retrieved 2023-05-10 .

^ Baum, Wilhelm; Winkler, Dietmar W. (8 December 2003).

Wilhelm Baum, Dietmar W. Winkler (editors), The Church of the East: A Concise History (Routledge 2003), p. 4 . Routledge.

ISBN 9781134430192 .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-20 . Retrieved 2018-10-19 .

^ Spencer, Robert (22 November 2011).

"We are Non-Roman Catholics" .

Crisis Magazine .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2016 . Retrieved 25 October 2016 .

^ Hanciles, Jehu J. (2019).

The Oxford History of Protestant Dissenting Traditions, Volume IV: The Twentieth Century: Traditions in a Global Context . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-251821-7 .

The designation Protestant includes Lutherans and Anglicans, although some Anglicans do not like the word. Methodism arrived in Asia both from Britain and via America, but with distinct traditions. Both owed a debt to Moravian Lutheranism, as did the Protestant missionary movement generally. Evangelicals have long included many Anglicans, and by 1967 Anglican evangelicalism was defining the movement in Britain.

^ Anglican and Episcopal History . Historical Society of the Episcopal Church. 2003. p. 15.

Others had made similar observations, Patrick McGrath commenting that the Church of England was not a middle way between Roman Catholic and Protestant, but "between different forms of Protestantism," and William Monter describing the Church of England as "a unique style of Protestantism, a via media between the Reformed and Lutheran traditions." MacCulloch has described Cranmer as seeking a middle way between Zurich and Wittenberg but elsewhere remarks that the Church of England was "nearer Zurich and Geneva than Wittenberg.

^ a b Ludwig, Alan (12 September 2016).

Luther's Catholic Reformation .

The Lutheran Witness .

When the Lutherans presented the Augsburg Confession before Emperor Charles V in 1530, they carefully showed that each article of faith and practice was true first of all to Holy Scripture, and then also to the teaching of the church fathers and the councils and even the canon law of the Church of Rome. They boldly claim, "This is about the Sum of our Doctrine, in which, as can be seen, there is nothing that varies from the Scriptures, or from the Church Catholic, or from the Church of Rome as known from its writers" (AC XXI Conclusion 1). The underlying thesis of the Augsburg Confession is that the faith as confessed by Luther and his followers is nothing new, but the true catholic faith, and that their churches represent the true catholic or universal church. In fact, it is actually the Church of Rome that has departed from the ancient faith and practice of the catholic church (see AC XXIII 13, XXVIII 72 and other places).

^ "Unitatis redintegratio" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2013 . Retrieved 10 May 2023 .

It remains true that all who have been justified by faith in Baptism are members of Christ's body, and have a right to be called Christian, and so are correctly accepted as brothers by the children of the Catholic Church.

^ Klaasen, Walter (2004).

"Anabaptism: Neither Catholic Nor Protestant" .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 15 May 2020 .

^ McGrath, William, The Anabaptists: Neither Catholic nor Protestant (PDF) , Hartville, Ohio, United States: The Fellowship Messenger, archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2016 ^ Gundry, Stanley N; Goldberg, Louis (2003).

How Jewish is Christianity?: 2 views on the Messianic movement . Zondervan. p. 24.

ISBN 9780310244905 .

^ Lipka, Michael (2013-10-02).

"How many Jews are there in the United States?" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on 2021-05-29 . Retrieved 2019-03-18 .

^ a b "A PORTRAIT OF JEWISH AMERICANS: Chapter 1: Population Estimates" .

Pew Research Center . October 2013.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-05 . Retrieved 2019-03-18 .

^ Maltz, Judy (2013-09-30).

"American-Jewish Population Rises to 6.8 Million" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 2017-11-29 . Retrieved 2019-03-18 .

^ Fahlbusch, Erwin; Bromiley, Geoffrey William; Lochman, Jan Milic; Mbiti, John; Pelikan, Jaroslav (14 February 2008).

The Encyclodedia of Christianity, Vol. 5 . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 603.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2417-2 .

^ J. Gordon Melton, Encyclopedia of Protestantism , 2005, p. 543: "Unitarianism – The word unitarian [italics] means one who believes in the oneness of God; historically it refers to those in the Christian community who rejected the doctrine of the Trinity (one God expressed in three persons). Non-Trinitarian Protestant churches emerged in the 16th century in ITALY, POLAND, and TRANSYLVANIA." ^ Bochenski, Michael I. (14 March 2013).

Transforming Faith Communities: A Comparative Study of Radical Christianity in Sixteenth-Century Anabaptism and Late Twentieth-Century Latin America . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-62189-597-8 .

^ Cameron, Archibald Alexander (1872).

Protestantism and Its Relation to the Moral, Intellectual and Spiritual Developments of Modern Times: A Lecture Delivered in the Baptist Chapel, Ottawa, on Sunday Evening, Jan. 21st, 1872 . Joseph Loveday. p. 12.

^ Rubel Shelly , I Just Want to Be a Christian , 20th Century Christian, Nashville, Tennessee 1984, ISBN 0-89098-021-7 ^ "The church of Jesus Christ is non-denominational. It is neither Catholic, Jewish nor Protestant. It was not founded in 'protest' of any institution, and it is not the product of the 'Restoration' or 'Reformation.' It is the product of the seed of the kingdom (Luke 8:11ff) grown in the hearts of men." V. E. Howard, What Is the Church of Christ?

4th Edition (Revised), 1971, page 29 ^ Batsell Barrett Baxter and Carroll Ellis, Neither Catholic, Protestant nor Jew , tract, Church of Christ (1960) ASIN: B00073CQPM. According to Richard Thomas Hughes in Reviving the Ancient Faith: The Story of Churches of Christ in America, Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1996 ( ISBN 0-8028-4086-8 , ISBN 978-0-8028-4086-8 ), this is "arguably the most widely distributed tract ever published by the Churches of Christ or anyone associated with that tradition." ^ Samuel S. Hill, Charles H. Lippy, Charles Reagan Wilson, Encyclopedia of Religion in the South , Mercer University Press , 2005, ( ISBN 0-86554-758-0 , ISBN 978-0-86554-758-2 ) 854 pages ^ Monroe E. Hawley, Redigging the Wells: Seeking Undenominational Christianity , Quality Publications, Abilene, Texas, 1976, ISBN 0-89137-512-0 (paper), ISBN 0-89137-513-9 (cloth) ^ McAlister, Lester G. and Tucker, William E. (1975), Journey in Faith: A History of the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) , St. Louis, MO: Chalice Press, ISBN 978-0-8272-1703-4 ^ Leroy Garrett, The Stone–Campbell Movement: The Story of the American Restoration Movement , College Press, 2002, ISBN 0-89900-909-3 , ISBN 978-0-89900-909-4 , 573 pages ^ Albin, Barry.

A Spiritual History of the Western Tradition . p. 124.

^ Van Voorst, Robert E. (2012).

RELG: World (with Religion CourseMate with eBook Printed Access Card) . Cengage Learning. p. 288.

ISBN 978-1-1117-2620-1 .

^ Eddy, Mary Baker.

Manual of the Mother Church . CSPS. p. 17.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 18 February 2020 .

^ Albanese, Catherine.

America: Religions and Religion .

Cengage Learning . p. 122.

^ "Articles of Faith, no. 1" . Archived from the original on 31 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 January 2014 .

^ Campbell, Ted A. (20 March 2000).

The Religion of the Heart .

Wipf and Stock Publishers . p. 138.

ISBN 978-1-57910-433-7 .

^ Fleming, John A.; Rowan, Michael J.; Chambers, James Albert (2004).

Folk Furniture of Canada's Doukhobors, Hutterites, Mennonites and Ukrainians .

University of Alberta . p.

4 .

ISBN 9780888644183 .

The English Quakers, who had made contact with the Doukhobors earlier, as well as the Philadelphia Society of Friends, also determined to help with their emigration from Russia to some other country—the only action which seemed possible.

^ Dyck, Cornelius J.; Martin, Dennis D.

The Mennonite Encyclopedia . Mennonite Brethren Publishing House. p. 107.

^ Fahlbusch, Erwin (14 February 2008).

The Encyclodedia of Christianity . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing. p. 208.

ISBN 9780802824172 .

The only contact with Mennonites was the period 1802–1841 when they lived in the Molotschna, where Johann Cornies (q.v.) rendered them considerable assistance.

^ Leo Tolstoy – The Kingdom of God is Within You Archived 2012-02-05 at the Wayback Machine . Kingdomnow.org. Retrieved on 2010-11-03.

Further reading [ edit ] Denominational links from the Ecumenism in Canada site v t e Christian denominations Major branches ( members ) Catholic Church Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Old Catholic Church Union of Utrecht Union of Scranton Mariavite Church Catholic Mariavite Church Independent Catholic See list Eastern Orthodox Constantinople Finnish Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russian Chinese Estonian (Moscow) Japanese Outside Russia Ukrainian (Moscow) Serbian Romanian Bulgarian Georgian Cyprus Greek Albanian Czech and Slovak Moldovan Bessarabian Ohrid Latvian OCA/American-Canadian Ukrainian Oriental Orth.

Coptic Ethiopian Tewahedo Armenian Apostolic Syriac Eritrean Tewahedo Malankara Anabaptist Mennonites Mennonite Church USA Canadian Mennonite Brethren Churches Mennonite Church Canada Amish Hutterites Schwarzenau Brethren Church of the Brethren Anglican Anglican Communion Church of England Anglican Church of Australia Anglican Church of Canada Anglican Church in New Zealand Church of Nigeria Scottish Episcopal Church Church of Ireland Episcopal Church (US) Church in Wales Continuing Anglican movement The African Church Anglican Church in North America Baptist Alliance of Baptists American Baptist Churches Association of Baptist Churches in Ireland Australian Baptist Ministries Baptist Bible Fellowship International Baptist Missionary Association of America Baptist Union of Great Britain Baptist Union of New Zealand Baptist Union of Scotland Baptist Union of Wales Canadian Baptist Ministries Canadian National Baptist Convention Conservative Baptist Association of America Converge General Association of Regular Baptist Churches Independent Baptist Churches Missionary Baptists National Association of Free Will Baptists National Primitive Baptist Convention, USA Nigerian Baptist Convention North American Baptist Conference National Baptist Convention of America National Baptist Convention, USA, Inc.

National Missionary Baptist Convention of America Progressive National Baptist Convention Southern Baptist Convention The Fellowship Holiness / Pietist Church of God (Anderson, Indiana) Evangelical Covenant Church Evangelical Free Church of America Church of the Nazarene The Salvation Army Wesleyan Church Wesleyan Holiness Church Wesleyan Methodist Church of Australia Lutheran World Federation Batak Christian Protestant Church Lutheran Church of Australia ELCA, America ELCC, Canada Lutheran Church in Great Britain Lutheran Church of Christ in Nigeria International Lutheran Council Lutheran Church–Canada Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod Confessional Evangelical Lutheran Conference Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod Global Confessional and Missional Lutheran Forum North American Lutheran Church Methodist World Methodist Council African Methodist Episcopal Church African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church Christian Methodist Episcopal Church United Methodist Church Methodist Church of New Zealand British Methodist Episcopal Church United Church of Canada Methodist Church of Great Britain Free Methodist Church Methodist Church in Ireland Pentecostal / Charismatic Assemblies of God China Gospel Fellowship Church of God (Cleveland, Tennessee) Church of God in Christ Church of God of Prophecy Church on the Rock International Fangcheng Fellowship Full Gospel Baptist Fellowship Hillsong Intl. Church of the Foursquare Gospel Intl. Pentecostal Holiness Church Pentecostal Church of God United Pentecostal Church Intl.

C3 Church Global CRC Churches Intl.

Grace Communion Intl.

Revival Centres Intl.

Apostolic Church of Pentecost Pentecostal Assemblies of Canada Redeemed Christian Church of God Apostolic Church Nigeria Gospel Faith Mission The Lord's Chosen Living Faith Church Worldwide Apostolic Faith Mission of South Africa Apostolic Church Elim Pentecostal Church Presbyterian / Reformed Christian Reformed Church in North America Conservative Congregational Christian Conference Cumberland Presbyterian Church Evangelical Presbyterian Church Korean Presbyterian Church in America International Council of Community Churches National Association of Congregational Christian Churches Presbyterian Church (USA) Presbyterian Church in America Reformed Church in America United Church of Christ Christian Reformed Churches of Australia Fellowship of Congregational Churches Presbyterian Church of Australia Uniting Church in Australia Canadian and American Reformed Churches L'Église réformée du Québec Presbyterian Church in Canada United Church of Canada Protestant Church in Indonesia Church of Jesus Christ in Madagascar Presbyterian Church of New Zealand Christian Reformed Church of Nigeria Church of Christ in Nations Church of Christ in the Sudan Among the Tiv Evangelical Reformed Church of Christ Presbyterian Church of Nigeria Reformed Church of Christ in Nigeria Asso. Presbyterian Churches, Scotland Church of Scotland Congregational Federation Evangelical Presbyterian Church Presbyterian Church in Ireland Presbyterian Church of Wales United Free Church of Scotland United Reformed Church United Church in Zambia Stone- Campbell Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) Evangelical Christian Church in Canada North American Christian Convention Churches of Christ Churches of Christ in Australia Other Protestant Adventist Advent Christian Church Seventh-day Adventist Church other Evangelical Christian and Missionary Alliance Evangelical Church Winning All QIC-United Evangelical Church Grace Gospel Fellowship IFCA International Messianic Jewish Alliance of America Neo-charismatic movement Newfrontiers Vineyard Plymouth Brethren Exclusive Open Quakers Conservative Friends Evangelical Friends Church International Friends General Conference Friends United Meeting Friends Church in Kenya Nestorian Assyrian Church of the East Ancient Church of the East Nontrinitarian Christadelphians Christian Science Iglesia ni Cristo Latter Day Saint movement Jehovah's Witnesses Swedenborgianism Unitarianism Unity Church Folk Christianity Celtic Folk Catholicism Folk Orthodoxy Mythology Movements African-initiated church Asceticism Atheism Dominionism Ecumenism Emerging church Evangelicalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Home church Independent sacramental movement Liberation theology Left / Right New Thought Nondenominationalism Pacifism Prosperity gospel Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Category v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Christian denomination at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_denomination&oldid=1306570742 " Categories : Christian denominations Types of Christian organization Christian terminology Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles needing additional references from March 2024 All articles needing additional references Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian denomination 36 languages Add topic

