Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Airport 3.2 Air base 3.3 Airstrip 3.4 Airpark 3.5 Altiport 3.6 Heliport 3.7 STOLport 3.8 Water aerodrome 4 By country Toggle By country subsection 4.1 Canada 4.2 Republic of Ireland 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Aerodrome 38 languages العربية Авар 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская भोजपुरी Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Airfield ) Location from which aircraft flight operations take place For other uses, see Aerodrome (disambiguation) .

"Airfield" redirects here. For the football stadium in Wales, see The Airfield .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Aerodrome" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Airport diagram for London Biggin Hill An aerodrome , airfield , or airstrip is a location from which aircraft flight operations take place, regardless of whether they involve air cargo , passengers, or neither, and regardless of whether it is for public or private use. Aerodromes include small general aviation airfields, large commercial airports, and military air bases .

The term airport may imply a certain stature (having satisfied certain certification criteria or regulatory requirements) that not all aerodromes may have achieved. That means that all airports are aerodromes, but not all aerodromes are airports. Usage of the term "aerodrome" (or "airfield") remains more common in Commonwealth English , and is conversely almost unknown in American English , where the term "airport" is applied almost exclusively.

A water aerodrome is an area of open water used regularly by seaplanes , floatplanes or amphibious aircraft for landing and taking off.

In formal terminology, as defined by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), an aerodrome is "a defined area on land or water (including any buildings, installations, and equipment) intended to be used either wholly or in part for the arrival, departure, and surface movement of aircraft." [ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word aerodrome derives from Ancient Greek ἀήρ (aḗr), air , and δρόμος (drómos), road or course , literally meaning air course . An ancient linguistic parallel is hippodrome (a stadium for horse racing and chariot racing ), derived from ἵππος (híppos), horse , and δρόμος (drómos), course . A modern linguistic parallel is velodrome , an arena for velocipedes . Αεροδρόμιο is the word for airport in Modern Greek, which transliterates as aerodromio.

In British military usage, the Royal Flying Corps in the First World War , and the Royal Air Force in the First and Second World Wars , used the term—it had the advantage that their French allies, on whose soil they were often based, and with whom they co-operated, used the cognate term aérodrome .

In Canada [ 2 ] and Australia, [ 3 ] aerodrome is a legal term of art for any area of land or water used for aircraft operation, regardless of facilities.

International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) documents use the term aerodrome , for example, in the Annex to the ICAO Convention about aerodromes, their physical characteristics, and their operation. However, the terms airfield or airport mostly superseded [ citation needed ] use of aerodrome after the Second World War, in colloquial language.

[ 4 ] [ original research?

] History [ edit ] An Airfield traffic pattern In the early days of aviation, when there were no paved runways and all landing fields were grass, a typical airfield might permit takeoffs and landings in only a couple of directions, much like today's airports, whereas an aerodrome was distinguished, by virtue of its much greater size, by its ability to handle landings and takeoffs in any direction. The ability to always take off and land directly into the wind, regardless of the wind's direction, was an important advantage in the earliest days of aviation when an aeroplane's performance in a crosswind takeoff or landing might be poor or even dangerous. The development of differential braking in aircraft, improved aircraft performance, utilisation of paved runways, and the fact that a circular aerodrome required much more space than did the "L" or triangle shaped airfield, eventually made the early aerodromes obsolete.

The unimproved airfield remains a phenomenon in military aspects. The DHC-4 Caribou served in the United States military in Vietnam (designated as the CV-2), landing on rough, unimproved airfields where the C-130 Hercules workhorse could not operate. Earlier, the Ju 52 and Fieseler Storch could do the same, one example of the latter taking off from the Führerbunker whilst completely surrounded by Soviet troops.

Types [ edit ] Airport [ edit ] Aerial view of Charles de Gaulle Airport , Paris Main article: Airport In colloquial use in certain environments, the terms airport and aerodrome are often interchanged. However, in general, the term airport may imply or confer a certain stature upon the aviation facility that other aerodromes may not have achieved. In some jurisdictions, airport is a legal term of art reserved exclusively for those aerodromes certified or licensed as airports by the relevant civil aviation authority after meeting specified certification criteria or regulatory requirements.

[ 5 ] Air base [ edit ] Main article: Air base An air base is an aerodrome with significant facilities to support aircraft and crew. The term is usually reserved for military bases, but also applies to civil seaplane bases. Some airbases, such as CFB Comox / Comox Airport , are classified as joint-use airports in that there are scheduled flights as well as military operations.

Airstrip [ edit ] An airstrip is a small aerodrome that consists only of a runway with perhaps fuelling equipment.

[ 6 ] They are generally in remote locations, e.g.

Airstrips in Tanzania . Many airstrips (now mostly abandoned) were built on the hundreds of islands in the Pacific Ocean during the Second World War. A few airstrips grew to become full-fledged airbases as the strategic or economic importance of a region increased over time.

An advanced landing ground was a temporary airstrip used by the Allies in the run-up to and during the invasion of Normandy , and these were built both in Britain, and on the continent.

Airpark [ edit ] Main article: Airpark An airpark is a small aerodrome that is built to be used by private aircraft serving a business or residential lot. A residential airpark (also spelled air park) is a "fly-in community" specifically designed around an airport where the residents own their privately owned aeroplanes which they park in their hangars , usually attached to the home or integrated into their home.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Altiport [ edit ] Tenzing-Hillary or Lukla Airport, Nepal Main article: Altiport An altiport is an aerodrome for small aircraft and helicopters , situated on or within mountainous terrain. Altiports are generally characterised by having a runway with an atypical slope to fit in the local topography. Ultimately, this slope helps aircraft decelerating when landing and assists acceleration during takeoff . High altitude results in less lift available to aircraft wings, which requires aircraft to achieve higher speed at takeoff and landing. Such airfields with unusual physical characteristics are frequent in regions such as the French Alps , [ 9 ] Himalayan regions, as well as Pacific islands .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Heliport [ edit ] Main article: Heliport A heliport is a aerodrome which has a helipad , suitable for use by helicopters , powered lift , and various types of vertical lift aircraft . Designated heliports typically contain one or more touchdown and liftoff areas and may also have limited facilities such as fuel or hangars. In some larger towns and cities, customs facilities may also be available.

[ 12 ] The broader term vertiport refers to take-off/landing sites for all aircraft landing vertically.

[ 13 ] STOLport [ edit ] Main article: STOLport A STOLport or STOLPORT was an airport designed with STOL (Short Take-Off and Landing) operations in mind, usually for an aircraft class of a certain weight and size. A STOLport usually has a short single runway, generally shorter than 1,500 m (5,000 ft). STOLports are only practicable by certain types of aircraft, especially smaller propeller aircraft, with performances that are compatible with the shorter runway length, steeper approach/departure paths, etc. at individual STOLports.

[ 14 ] Water aerodrome [ edit ] A diagram of the Hollis Seaplane Base located in Hollis, Alaska A water aerodrome or seaplane base is an area of open water used regularly by seaplanes , floatplanes and amphibious aircraft for landing and taking off. It may have a terminal building on land and/or a place where the plane can come to shore and dock like a boat to load and unload (for example, Yellowknife Water Aerodrome ). Some are co-located with a land based airport and are certified airports in their own right. These include Vancouver International Water Airport and Vancouver International Airport . Others, such as Vancouver Harbour Flight Centre have their own control tower, Vancouver Harbour Control Tower .

Initially following the invention of the seaplane, traditional boat docks were typically used as there was little need for purpose-built facilities. This would later change, however, as commercial seaplane operations proved financially viable, leading many companies, most notably Pan American Airways , to push for the construction of seaplane bases that were optimised for such use. These new seaplane bases often featured terminal buildings for passengers and cargo, concrete ramps for amphibious aircraft, and floating docks that connected to land. Seaplane bases would end up becoming very heavily utilised for commercial air traffic for a number of years, but they eventually fell out of favour as land based aircraft rose in prominence. Advances in aircraft technology following World War II resulted in the development of land based aircraft that were capable of travelling greater distances, thus relegating seaplane bases to secondary use by about the 1950s. Although their commercial use has generally fallen out of the mainstream, many seaplane bases in remote areas still have commercial service as a means of providing easier access. Other bases still exist for general aviation use as well.

[ 15 ] By country [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] The Canadian Aeronautical Information Manual says "...for the most part, all of Canada can be an aerodrome", however, there are also "registered aerodromes" and "certified airports". To become a registered aerodrome, the operator must maintain certain standards and keep the Minister of Transport informed of any changes. To be certified as an airport the aerodrome, which usually supports commercial operations, must meet safety standards.

[ 2 ] Nav Canada , the private company responsible for air traffic control services in Canada, publishes the Canada Flight Supplement , a directory of all registered Canadian land aerodromes, as well as the Canada Water Aerodrome Supplement (CWAS).

[ 16 ] Republic of Ireland [ edit ] Casement Aerodrome is the main military airport used by the Irish Air Corps . The term "aerodrome" is used for airports and airfields of lesser importance in Ireland, such as those at Abbeyshrule ; Bantry ; Birr ; Inisheer ; Inishmaan ; Inishmore ; Newcastle, County Wicklow ; and Trim .

Gallery [ edit ] Aerodromes Sunrise at Kyviškės Airfield in Vilnius , Lithuania Cotswold Airport in England Pulkovo Airport , near Saint Petersburg , Russia Yellowknife Water Aerodrome , Northwest Territories , Canada Soest-Bad Sassendorf Airfield near Soest, Germany Hahn Air Base , near Kirchberg , Rhein-Hunsrück-Kreis , Germany A private airstrip at what used to be RAF Knettishall See also [ edit ] Aviation portal Non-towered airport Spaceport Tabletop runway Wayport References [ edit ] ^ International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) Documents, Annex 14 to The Convention on International Civil Aviation (Chicago Convention), Volume I- Aerodrome Design and Operations under Definitions ^ a b "Transport Canada AIM - AGA 2.0 Aerodromes and Airports" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 November 2014.

^ Commonwealth Consolidated Acts ^ Compare airport, airfield and aerodrome at Google Books Ngram Viewer ^ Canada Flight Supplement . Effective 0901 Z 16 July 2020 to 0901Z 10 September 2020.

^ Wragg, David W. (1974).

A Dictionary of Aviation (1st American ed.). New York: Frederick Fell, Inc. p. 29.

ISBN 0-85045-163-9 .

^ Mendoza, Ana (28 August 2024).

"Airpark Communities: A Guide to Aviation Land" . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "Definition of 'airpark' " .

Collins English Dictionary . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ Flying Magazine , November 1975, page 5 ^ "Mountaintop Altiport: How a Tiny, Sloping Runway Provides Access to a Legendary Ski Resort" .

Flexjet . 3 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "Altiports: Enhancing Air Transport in Challenging Terrain" . HelicopterForYou. 6 November 2024 . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "Standard 325 - Heliports - Canadian Aviation Regulations (CARs)" .

tc.canada.ca .

Transport Canada . 25 September 2015.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2022 . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ "What is a Heliport?" . Globeair . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

^ National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine ; Transportation Research Board ; Airport Cooperative Research Program; Mallela, Jagannath; Wheeler, Paul; Le Bris, Gaël; Nguyen, Loup-Giang (2023).

Urban Air Mobility: An Airport Perspective .

Washington, D.C.

: The National Academies Press .

doi : 10.17226/26899 .

ISBN 978-0-309-49804-3 .

^ Practices in Preserving and Developing Public-Use Seaplane Bases . Washington, D.C.: The National Academies Press. 2015. p. 8.

doi : 10.17226/22148 .

ISBN 978-0-309-27187-5 .

^ CWAS description External links [ edit ] Look up aerodrome , airstrip , airfield , airport , or airdrome in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Commercial aviation Airlines Airline codes Airline holding companies Cargo airline Charter airlines Flag carriers Low-cost airlines Non-scheduled airline Passenger airlines Regional airlines Alliances Oneworld SkyTeam Star Alliance Value Alliance Vanilla Alliance U-FLY Alliance Trade groups International ACO ATAG IATA IATAN IFALPA ISTAT United States A4A RAA Europe A4E ASD ECA EBAA ERA ETWF Other regions AACO AAPA AFRAA RAAA Aircrew Pilot in command (Captain) First officer Second officer Third officer Relief crew Flight attendant Flight engineer Loadmaster Aircraft pilot Purser Dead mileage Airliner Travel class First class Business class Premium economy class Economy class Basic economy class Aircraft cabin Aircraft lavatory Aircraft seat map Airline meal Airline seat Buy on board Crew rest compartment In-flight entertainment Inflight smoking Galley Sickness bag Airport Aerodrome Airline hub Airport check-in Airport lounge Airport rail link Airport terminal Airside pass Airstair Boarding Domestic airport Gate International airport Jet bridge Low-cost carrier terminal Runway Transit hotel Customs / Immigration Arrival card Border control ( internal ) Departure card Passport Timatic Travel document Travel visa (Electronic) Environmental effects Hypermobility Environmental effects of aviation Law Air transport agreement Air route authority between the United States and China Bermuda Agreement (UK–US, 1946–1978) Bermuda II Agreement (UK–US, 1978–2008) Cross-strait charter Beijing Convention Cape Town Treaty Chicago Convention Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives European Common Aviation Area Flight permit Freedoms of the air EU–US Open Skies Agreement Hague Hijacking Convention Hague Protocol Montreal Convention Paris Convention of 1919 Rome Convention Sabotage Convention Tokyo Convention Warsaw Convention Intergovernmental organizations ICAO ECAC Eurocontrol EASA ENCASIA Baggage Bag tag Baggage allowance Baggage carousel Baggage cart Baggage reclaim Baggage handler Baggage handling system Baggage sizer Checked baggage Hand luggage Lost luggage ( WorldTracer ) Luggage lock Aviation safety Air rage Air traffic control Air traffic service Aircraft safety card Airport authority Airport crash tender Airport police Airport security Airspace class Area control center Brace position Civil aviation authority Control area Control zone Controlled airspace Evacuation slide Flight information region Flight information service Flight recorder Instrument flight rules Overwing exits Pre-flight safety demonstration Sky marshal Special use airspace Special visual flight rules Terminal control area Terminal control center Uncontrolled airspace Upper information region Visual flight rules Airline tickets Airline booking ploys Airline reservations system Airline ticket Airline timetable Bereavement flight Boarding pass Codeshare agreement Continent pass Electronic ticket Fare basis code Flight cancellation and delay Frequent-flyer program Government contract flight One-way travel Open-jaw ticket Overbooking ( Overselling ) Passenger name record Red-eye flight Round-the-world ticket Standby Tracking Travel agency Ground crew Aircraft maintenance technician Aircraft ground handling Baggage handler Flight dispatcher Miscellaneous Air cargo Air travel Aviation taxation and subsidies Mile high club Authority control databases National Germany Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐56bb8cf7d4‐xq8bq
Cached time: 20250812132149
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.605 seconds
Real time usage: 0.764 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1933/1000000
Revision size: 17675/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 74078/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2528/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69537/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.389/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8925263/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  624.146      1 -total
 23.88%  149.070      1 Template:Reflist
 16.31%  101.824      7 Template:Cite_web
 15.27%   95.337      1 Template:Commercial_air_travel
 14.92%   93.106      1 Template:Navbox
 10.55%   65.872      1 Template:Gallery
  9.35%   58.328      1 Template:Short_description
  8.42%   52.549      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.73%   48.240      1 Template:Ambox
  6.91%   43.133      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:344102:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812132149 and revision id 1305508953. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aerodrome&oldid=1305508953 " Category : Aerodromes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from May 2018 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aerodrome 38 languages Add topic

