Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rights and history 2 Examples 3 Comparative status 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Chase (land) 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of common land used for hunting in the United Kingdom Malvern Chase Chase is a term used in the United Kingdom to define a type of land reserved for hunting use by its owner.  Similarly, a Royal Chase is a type of Crown Estate by the same description, where the hunting rights are reserved for a member of the British Royal Family .

The term ‘chase’ is also used in Australia to describe some national parks.

Flinders Chase National Park is on Kangaroo Island in South Australia and Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park is in New South Wales.

Rights and history [ edit ] The Victoria County History describes a chase as: "like a forest, uninclosed , and only defined by metes [houses and farmsteads within] and bounds [hills, highways, watercourses etc]; [ 1 ] but it could be held by a subject. Offences committed therein were, as a rule, punishable by the common law and not by forest jurisdiction." [ 2 ] Chases are often identified by open clearings, soil type, and retaining additional heath rather than forests for hunting purposes.

Chases faced mass enclosure by Private (specifically local) Acts of Parliament . This type of privatization primarily occurred through the heyday between 1600 and 1850. Enclosure converted many chases from public to private lands to some extent.

[ 3 ] After these conversions, in many areas the private lands were converted for residential, commercial, industrial or transport infrastructure use. However, the chases listed (see examples ) remain largely undiminished by staying a Common, or by a gift to a public body whether to avoid inheritance tax or motivated by philanthropy .

[ 4 ] Examples [ edit ] Some examples of chases in England include Wyre Forest , which straddles Worcestershire and Shropshire , Malvern Chase in Worcestershire, Pensnett Chase near Dudley and Cranborne Chase spanning Hampshire, Dorset and Wiltshire.

Cannock Chase in Staffordshire had once been previously recognized during the Middle Ages as a Royal Forest ; [ 5 ] however, it has since been reverted to a chase and merged with Beaudesert , a property originally belonging to the Bishop of Lichfield .

[ 6 ] Comparative status [ edit ] Chases and Royal Chases are beneath the status of forests designations and Royal Forests, respectively.  Since the late Medieval Period, the word " forest " has come to mean any large woodland.  Virtually all of the National Parks , AONB forests or significant other forests have officers and laws that apply only to them.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Ancient woodland Hunting in the United Kingdom List of forests in the United Kingdom Medieval deer park Surveyor General of Woods, Forests, Parks, and Chases References [ edit ] ^ Coke, Sir Edward (1797).

The Fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England: Concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts . E. and R. Brooke.

^ Page, W.H.

, ed. (1911).

A History of the County of Middlesex .

Victoria County History . Vol. 2. pp.

223– 251.

^ "A Short History of Enclosure in Britain" .

The Land . Retrieved 4 January 2021 .

^ Chambers, J. D.; Mingay, G. E. (1982).

The Agricultural Revolution 1750–1850 (Reprinted ed.).

Batsford . pp.

95– 99.

^ Staffordshire Forest Pleas: Introduction, Staffordshire Historical Collections . Vol. 5. 1884. pp.

123– 135.

^ a b Richards, Bernard (1996), Beaudesert: The Staffordshire Seat of the Marquess of Anglesey v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chase_(land)&oldid=1248864327 " Category : Hunting and shooting in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 October 2024, at 21:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chase (land) 1 language Add topic

