Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sub-branches 2 Journals and literature 3 Historical evolution of the discipline 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Physical geography 83 languages العربية अवधी Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių मैथिली Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of processes and patterns in the natural environment This article is about the academic discipline. For the peer-reviewed journal, see Physical Geography (journal) .

"Physiography" redirects here. The term may also refer to Geomorphology .

NASA true-color image of the Earth's surface and atmosphere Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Physical geography (also known as physiography ) is one of the three main branches of geography .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Physical geography is the branch of natural science which deals with the processes and patterns in the natural environment such as the atmosphere , hydrosphere , biosphere , and geosphere . This focus is in contrast with the branch of human geography , which focuses on the built environment , and technical geography , which focuses on using, studying, and creating tools to obtain, analyze, interpret, and understand spatial information.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The three branches have significant overlap, however.

Sub-branches [ edit ] A natural arch Physical geography can be divided into several branches or related fields, as follows: Geomorphology [ 6 ] [ 7 ] is concerned with understanding the surface of the Earth and the processes by which it is shaped, both at the present as well as in the past. Geomorphology as a field has several sub-fields that deal with the specific landforms of various environments, e.g.

desert geomorphology and fluvial geomorphology; however, these sub-fields are united by the core processes which cause them, mainly tectonic or climatic processes. Geomorphology seeks to understand landform history and dynamics, and predict future changes through a combination of field observation, physical experiment, and numerical modeling ( Geomorphometry ). Early studies in geomorphology are the foundation for pedology, one of two main branches of soil science .

Meander formation Hydrology [ 6 ] [ 7 ] is predominantly concerned with the amounts and quality of water moving and accumulating on the land surface and in the soils and rocks near the surface and is typified by the hydrological cycle . Thus the field encompasses water in rivers , lakes , aquifers and to an extent glaciers , in which the field examines the process and dynamics involved in these bodies of water. Hydrology has historically had an important connection with engineering and has thus developed a largely quantitative method in its research; however, it does have an earth science side that embraces the systems approach. Similar to most fields of physical geography it has sub-fields that examine the specific bodies of water or their interaction with other spheres e.g.

limnology and ecohydrology .

Glaciology is the study of glaciers and ice sheets , or more commonly the cryosphere or ice and phenomena that involve ice. Glaciology groups the latter (ice sheets) as continental glaciers and the former (glaciers) as alpine glaciers. Although research in the areas is similar to research undertaken into both the dynamics of ice sheets and glaciers, the former tends to be concerned with the interaction of ice sheets with the present climate and the latter with the impact of glaciers on the landscape. Glaciology also has a vast array of sub-fields examining the factors and processes involved in ice sheets and glaciers e.g.

snow hydrology and glacial geology .

Biogeography [ 6 ] [ 7 ] is the science which deals with geographic patterns of species distribution and the processes that result in these patterns. Biogeography emerged as a field of study as a result of the work of Alfred Russel Wallace , although the field prior to the late twentieth century had largely been viewed as historic in its outlook and descriptive in its approach. The main stimulus for the field since its founding has been that of evolution , plate tectonics and the theory of island biogeography. The field can largely be divided into five sub-fields: island biogeography , paleobiogeography, phylogeography , zoogeography and phytogeography .

Climatology [ 6 ] [ 7 ] is the study of the climate , scientifically defined as weather conditions averaged over a long period of time. Climatology examines both the nature of micro (local) and macro (global) climates and the natural and anthropogenic influences on them. The field is also sub-divided largely into the climates of various regions and the study of specific phenomena or time periods e.g.

tropical cyclone rainfall climatology and paleoclimatology .

Soil geography deals with the distribution of soils across the terrain . This discipline, between geography and soil science, is fundamental to both physical geography and pedology .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Pedology is the study of soils in their natural environment. It deals with pedogenesis , soil morphology , soil classification . Soil geography studies the spatial distribution of soils as it relates to topography , climate (water, air, temperature), soil life (micro-organisms, plants, animals) and mineral materials within soils ( biogeochemical cycles ).

Palaeogeography [ 6 ] is a cross-disciplinary study that examines the preserved material in the stratigraphic record to determine the distribution of the continents through geologic time. Almost all the evidence for the positions of the continents comes from geology in the form of fossils or paleomagnetism . The use of these data has resulted in evidence for continental drift , plate tectonics , and supercontinents . This, in turn, has supported palaeogeographic theories such as the Wilson cycle .

Coastal geography is the study of the dynamic interface between the ocean and the land, incorporating both the physical geography (i.e. coastal geomorphology, geology, and oceanography) and the human geography of the coast. It involves an understanding of coastal weathering processes, particularly wave action, sediment movement and weathering, and also the ways in which humans interact with the coast. Coastal geography, although predominantly geomorphological in its research, is not just concerned with coastal landforms, but also the causes and influences of sea level change .

Oceanography [ 6 ] is the branch of physical geography that studies the Earth's oceans and seas. It covers a wide range of topics, including marine organisms and ecosystem dynamics ( biological oceanography ); ocean currents, waves, and geophysical fluid dynamics ( physical oceanography ); plate tectonics and the geology of the sea floor ( geological oceanography ); and fluxes of various chemical substances and physical properties within the ocean and across its boundaries ( chemical oceanography ). These diverse topics reflect multiple disciplines that oceanographers blend to further knowledge of the world ocean and understanding of processes within it.

Quaternary science [ 7 ] is an interdisciplinary field of study focusing on the Quaternary period, which encompasses the last 2.6 million years. The field studies the last ice age and the recent interstadial the Holocene and uses proxy evidence to reconstruct the past environments during this period to infer the climatic and environmental changes that have occurred.

Landscape ecology is a sub-discipline of ecology and geography that address how spatial variation in the landscape affects ecological processes such as the distribution and flow of energy, materials, and individuals in the environment (which, in turn, may influence the distribution of landscape "elements" themselves such as hedgerows). The field was largely funded by the German geographer Carl Troll . Landscape ecology typically deals with problems in an applied and holistic context. The main difference between biogeography and landscape ecology is that the latter is concerned with how flows or energy and material are changed and their impacts on the landscape whereas the former is concerned with the spatial patterns of species and chemical cycles.

Geomatics is the field of gathering, storing, processing, and delivering geographic information, or spatially referenced information. Geomatics includes geodesy (scientific discipline that deals with the measurement and representation of the earth, its gravitational field, and other geodynamic phenomena, such as crustal motion, oceanic tides, and polar motion), cartography , geographical information science (GIS) and remote sensing (the short or large-scale acquisition of information of an object or phenomenon, by the use of either recording or real-time sensing devices that are not in physical or intimate contact with the object).

Environmental geography is a branch of geography that analyzes the spatial aspects of interactions between humans and the natural world. The branch bridges the divide between human and physical geography and thus requires an understanding of the dynamics of geology, meteorology, hydrology, biogeography, and geomorphology, as well as the ways in which human societies conceptualize the environment. Although the branch was previously more visible in research than at present with theories such as environmental determinism linking society with the environment. It has largely become the domain of the study of environmental management or anthropogenic influences.

Journals and literature [ edit ] Main category: Geography Journals Physical geography and earth science journals communicate and document the results of research carried out in universities and various other research institutions. Most journals cover a specific field and publish the research within that field, however unlike human geographers, physical geographers tend to publish in inter-disciplinary journals rather than predominantly geography journal; the research is normally expressed in the form of a scientific paper . Additionally, textbooks, books, and magazines on geography communicate research to laypeople, although these tend to focus on environmental issues or cultural dilemmas. Examples of journals that publish articles from physical geographers include The Professional Geographer , Journal of Maps , Earth Surface Processes and Landforms , Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences , and Nature .

Historical evolution of the discipline [ edit ] Main article: History of geography From the birth of geography as a science during the Greek classical period and until the late nineteenth century with the birth of anthropogeography (human geography), geography was almost exclusively a natural science: the study of location and descriptive gazetteer of all places of the known world. Several works among the best known during this long period could be cited as an example, from Strabo ( Geography ), Eratosthenes ( Geographika ) or Dionysius Periegetes ( Periegesis Oiceumene ) in the Ancient Age. In more modern times, these works include the Alexander von Humboldt ( Kosmos ) in the nineteenth century, in which geography is regarded as a physical and natural science through the work Summa de Geografía of Martín Fernández de Enciso from the early sixteenth century, which indicated for the first time the New World.

During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, a controversy exported from geology, between supporters of James Hutton (uniformitarianism thesis) and Georges Cuvier (catastrophism) strongly influenced the field of geography, because geography at this time was a natural science.

Two historical events during the nineteenth century had a great effect on the further development of physical geography. The first was the European colonial expansion in Asia , Africa , Australia and even America in search of raw materials required by industries during the Industrial Revolution . This fostered the creation of geography departments in the universities of the colonial powers and the birth and development of national geographical societies, thus giving rise to the process identified by Horacio Capel as the institutionalization of geography.

The exploration of Siberia is an example. In the mid-eighteenth century, many geographers were sent to perform geographical surveys in the area of Arctic Siberia . Among these is who is considered the patriarch of Russian geography, Mikhail Lomonosov . In the mid-1750s Lomonosov began working in the Department of Geography, Academy of Sciences to conduct research in Siberia. They showed the organic origin of soil and developed a comprehensive law on the movement of the ice, thereby founding a new branch of geography: glaciology . In 1755 on his initiative was founded Moscow University where he promoted the study of geography and the training of geographers. In 1758 he was appointed director of the Department of Geography, Academy of Sciences, a post from which would develop a working methodology for geographical survey guided by the most important long expeditions and geographical studies in Russia.

The contributions of the Russian school became more frequent through his disciples, and in the nineteenth century we have great geographers such as Vasily Dokuchaev who performed works of great importance as a "principle of comprehensive analysis of the territory" and "Russian Chernozem ". In the latter, he introduced the geographical concept of soil, as distinct from a simple geological stratum, and thus found a new geographic area of study: pedology . Climatology also received a strong boost from the Russian school by Wladimir Köppen whose main contribution, climate classification, is still valid today. However, this great geographer also contributed to the paleogeography through his work "The climates of the geological past" which is considered the father of paleoclimatology . Russian geographers who made great contributions to the discipline in this period were: NM Sibirtsev , Pyotr Semyonov , K.D. Glinka , Neustrayev , among others.

The second important process is the theory of evolution by Darwin in mid-century (which decisively influenced the work of Friedrich Ratzel , who had academic training as a zoologist and was a follower of Darwin's ideas) which meant an important impetus in the development of Biogeography.

Another major event in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries took place in the United States .

William Morris Davis not only made important contributions to the establishment of discipline in his country but revolutionized the field to develop cycle of erosion theory which he proposed as a paradigm for geography in general, although in actually served as a paradigm for physical geography. His theory explained that mountains and other landforms are shaped by factors that are manifested cyclically. He explained that the cycle begins with the lifting of the relief by geological processes (faults, volcanism, tectonic upheaval, etc.). Factors such as rivers and runoff begin to create V-shaped valleys between the mountains (the stage called "youth"). During this first stage, the terrain is steeper and more irregular. Over time, the currents can carve wider valleys ("maturity") and then start to wind, towering hills only ("senescence"). Finally, everything comes to what is a plain flat plain at the lowest elevation possible (called "baseline") This plain was called by Davis' " peneplain " meaning "almost plain" Then river rejuvenation occurs and there is another mountain lift and the cycle continues.

Although Davis's theory is not entirely accurate, it was absolutely revolutionary and unique in its time and helped to modernize and create a geography subfield of geomorphology . Its implications prompted a myriad of research in various branches of physical geography. In the case of the Paleogeography, this theory provided a model for understanding the evolution of the landscape. For hydrology, glaciology, and climatology as a boost investigated as studying geographic factors shape the landscape and affect the cycle. The bulk of the work of William Morris Davis led to the development of a new branch of physical geography: Geomorphology whose contents until then did not differ from the rest of geography. Shortly after this branch would present a major development. Some of his disciples made significant contributions to various branches of physical geography such as Curtis Marbut and his invaluable legacy for Pedology, Mark Jefferson , Isaiah Bowman , among others.

See also [ edit ] Main article: Outline of geography § Physical geography Areography Atmosphere of Earth Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography Earth system science Environmental studies Geophysics Planetary science Physiographic regions of the world Selenography References [ edit ] ^ "1(b). Elements of Geography" .

www.physicalgeography.net .

^ Pidwirny, Michael; Jones, Scott (1999–2015).

"Physical Geography" .

^ Marsh, William M.; Kaufman, Martin M. (2013).

Physical Geography: Great Systems and Global Environments . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521764285 .

^ a b Dahlman, Carl; Renwick, William (2014).

Introduction to Geography: People, Places & Environment (6 ed.). Pearson.

ISBN 9780137504510 . Retrieved 28 August 2022 .

^ a b Haidu, Ionel (2016).

"What is Technical Geography" (PDF) .

Geographia Technica .

11 (1): 1– 5.

doi : 10.21163/GT_2016.111.01 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2022 .

^ a b c d e f "Physical Geography: Defining Physical Geography" .

Dartmouth College Library . Retrieved 2019-11-18 .

^ a b c d e "Physical Geography" .

University of Nevada, Reno .

^ "Subdisciplines of Geography" .

Civil Service India (PNG).

Soils Geography lies between Physical Geography and Pedology ^ Bridges, E. M. (1981). "Soil geography: a subject transformed".

Progress in Physical Geography: Earth and Environment .

5 (3): 398– 407.

Bibcode : 1981PrPG....5..398B .

doi : 10.1177/030913338100500303 .

S2CID 131268490 .

(Soil geography) is a branch of study which lies between geography and soil science and is to be found as a fundamental part of both subjects (Bridges and Davidson, 1981) ^ Degórski, Marek (2004).

"Geografia gleb jako dyscyplina flzycznogeograficzna" [Soil geography as a physical geography discipline] (PDF) .

Przeglad Geograficzny (in Polish).

76 . Warsaw: Institute of Geography and Spatial Organization PAS: 271– 288.

ISSN 0033-2143 – via RCIN.

soil geography may be defined as a scientific discipline - within both geography and soil science - that deals with the distribution of soils across the Earth's surface M. Degórski (January 2004).

"Soil geography as a physical geography discipline" .

ResearchGate .

External links [ edit ] Physiography by T.X. Huxley, 1878 , full text, physical geography of the Thames River Basin v t e Physical geography Atmospheric science / Meteorology Biogeography / Phytogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Soil science / Pedology / Edaphology Geobiology Geology Geomorphology Geostatistics Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Landscape ecology Quaternary science Category Portal Commons v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐rn2vf
Cached time: 20250812003354
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.428 seconds
Real time usage: 0.544 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2268/1000000
Revision size: 21637/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 104574/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2097/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 96910/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.265/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6273094/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  430.110      1 -total
 31.86%  137.045      1 Template:Reflist
 21.53%   92.607      6 Template:Cite_web
 17.08%   73.467      1 Template:Geography_sidebar
 16.66%   71.644      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.60%   62.817      1 Template:Short_description
 13.00%   55.908      5 Template:Navbox
 10.37%   44.613      1 Template:Physical_geography_topics
 10.27%   44.171      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.69%   33.066      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23263:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003354 and revision id 1290729490. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physical_geography&oldid=1290729490 " Categories : Physical geography Earth sciences Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Physical geography 83 languages Add topic

