Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Key dates of the Deutscher Werkbund 1.2 100th anniversary 2 Museum der Dinge 3 Members 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Deutscher Werkbund 28 languages Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Sardu Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Association of Craftsmen This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Deutscher Werkbund" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Building by Mies van der Rohe in the Weissenhof Estate (1927) 1914 exhibition poster "Weißenhof chair", by Mies van der Rohe with canework upholstery by Lilly Reich [ 1 ] (ca. 1927) The Deutscher Werkbund ( German: [ˈdɔʏtʃɐ ˈvɛʁkbʊnt] ; lit.

' German Association of Craftsmen ' ) is a German association of artists, architects, designers and industrialists established in 1907. The Werkbund became an important element in the development of modern architecture and industrial design, particularly in the later creation of the Bauhaus school of design. Its initial purpose was to establish a partnership of product manufacturers with design professionals to improve the competitiveness of German companies in global markets. The Werkbund was less an artistic movement than a state-sponsored effort to integrate traditional crafts and industrial mass production techniques, to put Germany on a competitive footing with England and the United States. Its motto Vom Sofakissen zum Städtebau (from sofa cushions to city-building) indicates its range of interest.

History [ edit ] The Deutscher Werkbund emerged when the architect Joseph Maria Olbrich left Vienna for Darmstadt , Germany, in 1899, to form an artists' colony at the invitation of Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse .

[ 2 ] The Werkbund was founded by Olbrich, Peter Behrens , Richard Riemerschmid , Bruno Paul and others in 1907 [ 2 ] in Munich at the instigation of Hermann Muthesius , existed through 1934, then re-established after World War II in 1950.  Muthesius was the author of the exhaustive three-volume "The English House" of 1905, a survey of the practical lessons of the English Arts and Crafts movement . Muthesius was seen as something of a cultural ambassador, or industrial spy, between Germany and England.

The organization originally included twelve architects and twelve business firms. The architects include Peter Behrens , Theodor Fischer (who served as its first president), Josef Hoffmann , Bruno Paul , Max Laeuger and Richard Riemerschmid . Other architects affiliated with the project include Heinrich Tessenow and the Belgian Henry van de Velde . By 1914, it had 1,870 members, including heads of museums.

[ 3 ] The Werkbund commissioned van de Velde to design a theater for the 1914 Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne . The exhibition was closed and the buildings dismantled ahead of schedule because of the outbreak of World War I.

Eliel Saarinen was made corresponding member of the Deutscher Werkbund in 1914 and was invited to participate in the 1914 Cologne exhibition. Among the Werkbund's more noted members was the architect Mies van der Rohe , who served as Architectural Director.

Key dates of the Deutscher Werkbund [ edit ] 1907, Establishment of the Werkbund in Munich 1910, Salon d'Automne , Paris 1914, Werkbund Exhibition , Cologne 1920, Lilly Reich becomes the first female Director 1924, Berlin exhibition 1927, Stuttgart exhibition (including the Weissenhof Estate ) 1929, Breslau exhibition 1934, Werkbund declare dissolution 1947, Reestablishment 100th anniversary [ edit ] The Verband Deutscher Industrie Designer (Association of German Industrial Designers, or VDID) and the Bund Deutscher Grafik-Designer (Federation of German Graphic Designers, or "BDG- Mitte ") held a joint meeting to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Deutscher Werkbund. A juried exhibition and opening was held on 14 March 2008.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Museum der Dinge [ edit ] The collections and archives (Werkbundarchiv) of the Werkbund are housed at the Museum der Dinge (Museum of Things) in Berlin . The museum is focused on design and objects used in everyday life in the 20th century up to the present. Among other exhibits, it includes a Frankfurt kitchen .

Members [ edit ] Konrad Adenauer Friedrich Adler Adolf Arndt Anker-Werke Delmenhorst Ferdinand Avenarius Otto Bartning Willi Baumeister Adolf Behne Hendrik Petrus Berlage Richard Berndl Johann Michael Bossard Raymund Brachmann Fritz August Breuhaus de Groot Bazon Brock Ulrich Böhme Max Burchartz Charles Crodel Carl Otto Czeschka Wilhelm von Debschitz Franz Karl Delavilla Peter A. Demeter Walter Dexel Eugen Diederichs Bruno Dörpinghaus Karl Duschek Adolph Eckhardt Egon Eiermann Albert Eitel August Endell Jupp Ernst Lyonel Feininger Wend Fischer Karl Ganser Hansjörg Göritz Hermann Gretsch Walter Gropius Moritz Hadda Richard Hamann Luise Harkort Hugo Häring Hans Heckner Max Heidrich Erwin Heerich Hans Hertlein Max Hertwig Lucy Hillebrand Georg Hirth Theodor Heuss Ot Hoffmann Helmut Hofmann Ferdy Horrmeyer Paul Horst-Schulze Klaus Humpert Walter Maria Kersting Harald Kimpel Clemens Klotz Moissey Kogan Hans P. Koellmann Ludwig König Ernst Kühn Hugo Kükelhaus Klaus Küster Ferdinand Kramer Günter Kupetz Emil Lange Carl Langhein Josef Lehmbrock El Lissitzky Johannes Ludovicus Mathieu Lauweriks Richard Luksch Gerhard Marcks Ewald Mataré Ernst May Kunstmuseen Krefeld Erich Mendelsohn Wolfgang Meisenheimer Georg Metzendorf Mies van der Rohe Leberecht Migge Anna Muthesius Hermann Muthesius Friedrich Naumann Walter Neuhäusser Hans Neumann Else Oppler-Legband Karl Ernst Osthaus Ludwig Paffendorf Bernhard Pankok Karl Poser Walfried Pohl Jan Thorn Prikker Peter Raacke Adolf Rading Jochen Rahe Dieter Rams Walther Rathenau Carl Rehorst Lilly Reich Albert Reimann Albert Renger-Patzsch Paul Renner Richard Riemerschmid Alexander Michailowitsch Rodtschenko Gregor Rosenbauer Walter Rossow Werner Ruhnau Hans Scharoun Karl Schmidt-Hellerau Willy Schönefeld Werner Schriefers Rudolf Alexander Schröder Reinhard Schulze Fritz Schupp Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky Walter Schwagenscheidt Rudolf Schwarz Hans Schwippert Ferdinand Selle Bernd Sikora Anna Simons Carl Sonntag jun.

Friedrich Spengelin Bernhard Stadler Anton Stankowski Heinz Stoffregen Ludwig Sütterlin Heinrich Straumer Gustav Stresemann Bruno Taut Heinrich Tessenow Paul Thiersch Emil Thormählen Walter Tiemann Paul Ludwig Troost Otto Ubbelohde Henry van de Velde Theodor Veil Otto Voelckers Heinrich Vogeler Fritz Wärndorfer Wilhelm Wagenfeld Otto Wagner Udo Weilacher Werkbund Werkstatt Nürnberg Edward Weston Alfred Wiener Karl With Dieter Witte Georg Wrba Christoph Zöpel Berta Zuckerkandl See also [ edit ] New Objectivity (architecture) Modern architecture WUWA (Breslau) References [ edit ] ^ "CMOA Collection" .

^ a b Wendy Moonan (7 December 2007), German Design for an Industrial Age The New York Times .

^ Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts (Princeton University Press, 2016) ^ Werkbund Museum ^ VDID Events page Archived 17 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine Further reading [ edit ] Lucius Burckhardt (1987).

The Werkbund . Hyperion Press.

ISBN 0-85072-108-3 Fiell, Charlotte; Fiell, Peter (2005).

Design of the 20th Century (25th anniversary ed.). Köln: Taschen. pp.

210– 212.

ISBN 9783822840788 .

OCLC 809539744 .

Frederic J. Schwartz (1996).

The Werkbund: Design Theory and Mass Culture Before the First World War . New Haven, Conn. : Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-06898-0 Mark Jarzombek . "Joseph August Lux: Werkbund Promoter, Historian of a Lost Modernity," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 63/1 (June 2004): 202–219.

Ot Hoffmann im Auftrag des DWB: Der Deutsche Werkbund – 1907, 1947, 1987.

Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, Frankfurt 1987, ISBN 3-433-02268-2 .

(in German) Yuko Ikeda: Vom Sofakissen zum Städtebau. Hermann Muthesius und der Deutsche Werkbund. Modern Design in Deutschland 1900–1927.

Ausstellungskatalog. The National Museum of Modern Art, Kyoto 2002, ISBN 4-87642-165-X .

Karl-Ernst-Osthaus-Museum Hagen und Kaiser-Wilhelm-Museum Krefeld: Das Schöne und der Alltag – Deutsches Museum für Kunst in Handel und Gewerbe.

Ausstellungskatalog. Pandora Snoeck-Ducaju & Zoon, Gent 1997, ISBN 90-5325-090-5 .

(in German) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Deutscher Werkbund .

Official website Werkbundarchiv: Museum der Dinge – official site Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deutscher_Werkbund&oldid=1305381458 " Categories : Bauhaus 1907 establishments in Germany Industrial design Graphic design Modernist architecture in Germany Architecture groups Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2010 All articles needing additional references Pages with German IPA Articles with German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 19:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deutscher Werkbund 28 languages Add topic

