Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 History 3 Notable editors and contributors 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Law Record 1 language Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Student newspaper of Harvard Law School The Harvard Law Record Type Student newspaper Owner(s) The Harvard Law School Record Corporation Editor-in-chief Oluwatobi O. Omotoso Founded 1946 Headquarters Cambridge , Massachusetts Website www.hlrecord.org The Harvard Law Record is an independent student-edited newspaper based at Harvard Law School . Founded in 1946, it is the oldest law school newspaper in the United States .

Characteristics [ edit ] The Record , a print and online publication, includes law school news, world and national news, and scholarly articles and op-eds written by Harvard Law School students and professors, as well as outside contributors. It should not be confused with the Harvard Law Review , which is limited to publishing scholarly academic articles exclusively.

Although it is student-run, the Record is owned by the Harvard Law School Record Corporation , an independent non-profit organization funded primarily through donations. It does not receive much funding or substantial support from the law school. The paper operates out of a basement in the Harvard Law School dorms.

The Record is home to fictional law student Fenno, who since the 1950s has satirically chronicled the adventures of an anonymous law student, and has lampooned prominent members of the Harvard Law School community in the process. It also publishes an annual April Fool's Day issue, renowned for its satire.

History [ edit ] The Record was founded in 1946 by a group of returning World War II veterans who were unhappy with conditions at the School, particularly a lack of student housing.  The three primary founders of the Record were Charles O. Porter , who later served as a U.S. Congressman from Oregon, Charles Sweet, later a judge, and Paul Hellmuth, who became managing partner of the Boston law firm Hale & Dorr (now WilmerHale ).

Among the former editors of the Record is Ralph Nader , who published his first article on unsafe conditions in the auto industry entitled, "American Cars: Designed for Death", in the Record in 1958.  The article was later expanded into Nader's seminal work on the subject, Unsafe at Any Speed . After a year in which the Record ceased publishing, Ralph Nader worked with a law student, Michael Shammas, to revive the paper for the 2015–2016 academic year.

In 1959, Nader and co-editor David Binder traveled to Cuba to report on the Cuban Revolution in the Record , which coverage included an exclusive interview with Fidel Castro .

Also in 1959, William H. Rehnquist , then a young Arizona lawyer, wrote an editorial in the Record entitled "The Making of a Supreme Court Justice," in which he criticized the U.S. Senate for not questioning the judicial philosophy of Supreme Court nominees.  The article was later cited by members of the Senate Judiciary Committee when he refused to answer questions during his confirmation hearings.

In April 1971, the New York Times reported that Harvard Law School professors Alan Dershowitz and Paul Freund had quit after picking up the story from the Record ' s April Fool's Day issue.

In the 21st century, the Record has won several awards from the American Bar Association Law Student Division for outstanding writing, including the 2007 awards for Best Editorial and Best Feature Article. Although the print edition briefly paused circulating in 2012, in 2013 Harvard Law students Sima Atri and Michael Shammas revamped the paper with the guidance of former editor-in-chief Ralph Nader. The newspaper has an active staff of law students and routinely publishes articles by professors and law students around the country. In the 2015-2016 year, with Michael Shammas as editor-in-chief and Lindsay Church as co-editor-in-chief, the paper published stories that were referenced in The New York Times , American Lawyer , Jerusalem Post , The Washington Post , The Wall Street Journal , The Boston Globe , and other national and international news organizations. The paper also won the American Bar Association's 2016 "Best Law School Newspaper" Award.

In addition to its print edition, the Record operates a website.

[ 1 ] Notable editors and contributors [ edit ] Actor Tom Cruise poses with a poster of the Record front page and with Record editor Jessica Corsi during a visit to Harvard Law School on October 5, 2009.

Jacob M. Appel , fiction writer and bioethicist Derrick Bell , law professor at NYU Law School Jeremy Blachman , author of the Anonymous Lawyer blog and books [ 2 ] Alexander Boldizar , novelist and art critic [ 3 ] Ruben Bolling , aka Ken Fisher, cartoonist and creator of Tom the Dancing Bug [ 4 ] Alan Dershowitz , law professor and author [ 5 ] Debra Dickerson , author and commentator [ 6 ] Robert Fellmeth , public interest law professor at the University of San Diego Law School Robert Flanders , Rhode Island Supreme Court Justice Martin D. Ginsburg , tax law expert at Georgetown University Law School Philip Heymann , Deputy Attorney General under Bill Clinton and currently professor at Harvard Law Ricardo Hinojosa , federal district court judge [ 7 ] D. Brock Hornby , federal district court judge [ 8 ] Murad Kalam , O. Henry Award winning novelist [ 9 ] Duncan Kennedy , law professor at Harvard Law School and a founder of Critical Legal Studies.

George N. Leighton , U.S. District Court judge for the Northern District of Illinois James Alan McPherson , Pulitzer Prize -winning essayist and short story writer [ 10 ] Johanes Maliza , professional soccer player [ 11 ] Jamie Metzl , Executive Vice President of the Asia Society and former State Department official Patrick Miles Jr.

, 2010 Michigan congressional candidate Makau Mutua , former Dean of the University at Buffalo Law School [ 12 ] Ralph Nader , consumer advocate and U.S. presidential candidate [ 13 ] Charles Ogletree , law professor Barack Obama , President of the United States [ 14 ] Joel Pollak , 2010 Illinois congressional candidate Charles O. Porter , U.S. Representative from Oregon Richard Posner , federal circuit court judge and law professor at the University of Chicago Samantha Power , Pulitzer Prize -winning journalist, and former United States Ambassador to the United Nations William Rehnquist , Chief Justice of the United States [ 15 ] Henry Stern , member of the New York City Council and Commissioner of New York City Parks and Recreation Jerome J. Shestack , former American Bar Association president James B. Stewart , journalist, Pulitzer Prize -winning author [ 16 ] Kevin Werbach , business and technology expert at the Wharton School See also [ edit ] The Harvard Crimson , Harvard's undergraduate newspaper Harvard Law Review , a student-edited academic journal The Harvard Lampoon , undergraduate newspaper Harvard Association for Law & Business , law school student organization References [ edit ] ^ "About" .

The Harvard Law Record d . Retrieved July 2, 2020 .

^ "Read this column and you will ace the MPRE" .

The Harvard Law Record . March 5, 2005.

Archived from the original on July 2, 2023.

^ "About" .

Alexander Boldizar . Archived from the original on January 22, 2008.

^ Worcester, Kent (February 2002).

"Ruben Bolling interview" .

MOCCA . Archived from the original on August 28, 2008 . Retrieved January 6, 2009 .

^ Dershowitz, Alan (February 15, 2007).

"The Death of a Good Cop" .

The Harvard Law Record .

Archived from the original on September 12, 2022.

^ "Biography" .

DebraDickerson.com . Archived from the original on February 9, 2007 . Retrieved February 12, 2007 .

^ Lorch, David adam (April 14, 2006).

"Overseers Election Gets Heated" .

The Harvard Crimson . Archived from the original on June 4, 2011.

^ Hornby, D. Brock (November 14, 2018).

"Ex Post: Fables by a Federal District Judge, Part I" .

The Harvard Law Record . Archived from the original on November 14, 2018.

^ Desai, Jankhana (May 3, 2003).

"Kalam '02 sets sights on writing life" .

The Harvard Law Record .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018.

^ Newburger, Emily (Fall 2000).

"Exile and the Writer" .

Harvard Law Bulletin . Archived from the original on October 24, 2014.

^ Maliza, Johanes (October 9, 2008).

"Justice Scalia defends originalism" .

The Harvard Law Record .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018.

^ "Makau Mutua" (PDF) .

University at Buffalo Law School . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 10, 2010 . Retrieved September 1, 2009 .

^ "Unsafe at Any Speed" .

Ralph Nader for President in 2008 . October 27, 2008.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2016.

^ Obama, Barack (November 16, 2015).

"Record Retrospective: Obama on Affirmative Action" .

The Harvard Law Record . Archived from the original on November 18, 2015.

^ "Statement of Hon. Paul Simon, a U.S. Senator From the State of Illinois" (PDF) .

GPO Access . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved October 27, 2011 .

^ "Distinguished HLS Grads Discuss Law and Journalism" . November 16, 2007.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Law_Record&oldid=1291972473 " Categories : Harvard Law School Harvard University publications Newspapers established in 1946 1946 establishments in Massachusetts Student newspapers published in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 13:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Law Record 1 language Add topic

