Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organisation 2 Research programmes 3 See also 4 Notes and references 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Swiss National Science Foundation 5 languages Alemannisch العربية Deutsch Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science research support organisation The Swiss National Science Foundation ( SNSF , German: Schweizerischer Nationalfonds zur Förderung der wissenschaftlichen Forschung , SNF; French: Fonds national suisse de la recherche scientifique , FNS; Italian: Fondo nazionale svizzero per la ricerca scientifica ) is a science research support organisation mandated by the Swiss Federal Government . The Swiss National Science Foundation was established under private law by physicist and medical doctor Alexander von Muralt in 1952.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Organisation [ edit ] The SNSF consists of three main bodies: Foundation Council, National Research Council and Administrative Offices. The Foundation Council is the highest authority and makes strategic decisions. The National Research Council is composed of distinguished  researchers who mostly work at Swiss institutions of higher education. They assess research proposals submitted to the SNSF and make funding decisions. The National Research Council comprises up to 100 members and is subdivided into four divisions: Division I: humanities and social sciences Division II: mathematics , natural sciences and engineering sciences Division III: biology and medicine Division IV: programmes (National Research Programmes and National Centres of Competence in Research) Mandated by the federal authorities, the Swiss National Science Foundation supports basic science in all academic disciplines.

[ 4 ] Research programmes [ edit ] The National Research Programmes (NRP) and National Centres of Competence in Research (NCCR) are research programmes of the SNSF. Mandated by the Federal Council, NRPs generate scientific knowledge aimed at solving pressing problems. They generally run for up to five years and have an overall budget of eight to twelve million Swiss francs . Since 1975, the SNSF has launched over 69 NRPs. NCCRs aim to strengthen research structures in Switzerland. Each NCCR is based at an institution of higher education and consists of a centre of competence as well as a national and international network.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Swiss Science Prize Latsis List of universities in Switzerland Science and technology in Switzerland United States National Science Foundation Swiss Academies of Arts and Sciences Swiss Federal Institute for Vocational Education and Training Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Gisler, Monika; Amstutz, Samuel (2021).

"Der Nationalfonds, die SAGW und die Anfänge der Schweizer Forschungspolitik" (PDF) .

SAGW .

^ Hafner, Urs (26 March 2023).

"Kein Geld mehr für freie Forscher" (PDF) .

Schweizerische Gesellschaft für Geschichte .

^ von Matt, Rafael (23 April 2023).

"Schweizer Wissenschaften - Sprachrohr der Geisteswissenschaften kritisiert den Nationalfonds" .

Schweizer Radio und Fernsehen (SRF) (in German) . Retrieved 8 June 2024 .

^ Career funding of the SNSF Archived 1 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Switzerland: In-depth PESTLE insights , Switzerland Country Profile, 1 January 2011, archived from the original on 12 April 2016 External links [ edit ] Official website (in English) National Research Programmes (NRPs) National Centres of Competence in Research (NCCRs) Horizons , research magazine Portals : Switzerland Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Greece Israel People ISIL Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Swiss_National_Science_Foundation&oldid=1239730783 " Categories : Scientific organisations based in Switzerland Organisations based in Bern Foundations based in Switzerland 1952 establishments in Switzerland Organizations established in 1952 Funding bodies of Switzerland Research funding agencies Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2014 Use British English from March 2014 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 11 August 2024, at 04:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Swiss National Science Foundation 5 languages Add topic

