Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Authors 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Guilford Press Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Publisher in New York, United States Guilford Press Guilford Press Logo Status Active Founded 1973 Founder Bob Matloff and Seymour Weingarten Country of origin United States Headquarters location New York City Distribution Worldwide Key people Seymour Weingarten (Co-Founder) Tim Stookesberry (CEO) Laurie Rosatone (Editor-in-Chief) Publication types Books , periodicals , and audiovisual programs for scholarly and general audiences.

Nonfiction topics Mental health , psychology , elementary and secondary education , research methods, geography .

No.

of employees 81 Official website Official website Guilford Press or Guilford Publications, Inc.

is a New York City -based independent publisher founded in 1973 that specializes in publishing books and journals in psychology, psychiatry, the behavioral sciences, education, geography, and research methods.

Overview [ edit ] Guilford was founded by Bob Matloff and Seymour Weingarten. Matloff retired as president in 2022. The firm is run by Weingarten (co-founder and editor-at-large) and Tim Stookesberry (chief executive officer).

Guilford Press says it has over 1,300 titles in print, typically publishes more than 55–65 new books in print and e-book formats each year, [ 1 ] and also publishes 10 journals.

[ 1 ] In the academic sphere, Guilford Publications has published books by Aaron T. Beck , the cognitive therapist ; [ 2 ] Marsha Linehan , the developer of dialectical behavior therapy (DBT); and the founders of motivational interviewing , Stephen Rollnick and William R. Miller .

Overcoming Binge Eating, Second Edition , by Christopher G. Fairburn, and Mind Over Mood by Dennis Greenberger and Christine A. Padesky , have been included in the United Kingdom Reading Well Books on Prescription program, a selective list of self-help books that general practitioners, counselors, and community mental health specialists are encouraged to "prescribe" for patients with mild to moderate mental health concerns.

[ 3 ] Mind Over Mood was also voted by the British Association of Behavioural and Cognitive Therapies as "the most influential cognitive behavioural therapy publication" [ 4 ] and was recommended by Scientific American Mind .

[ 5 ] It also publishes books in the field of literacy education, by authors including G. Michael Pressley and Susan B. Neuman . Guilford's authors and editors include 13 past presidents of the International Literacy Association, [ 6 ] 49 members of the Reading Hall of Fame, [ 7 ] and 14 winners of the Oscar S. Causey Award for lifetime contributions to literacy research from the Literacy Research Association.

[ 8 ] Guilford exhibits at numerous professional conferences each year, including those held by the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , the American Educational Research Association , the American Psychological Association , the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies , the Literacy Research Association, the International Neuropsychological Society , and the National Association of School Psychologists .

[ 9 ] Authors [ edit ] Guilford's authors include: [ 10 ] Russell A. Barkley David H. Barlow Donald H. Baucom Aaron T. Beck Judith S. Beck Geraldine Dawson Edward L. Deci Christopher Fairburn Robert D. Hare Steven C. Hayes David A. Jobes Susan M. Johnson Jon Kabat-Zinn Robert L. Leahy Jay L. Lebow Marsha Linehan Todd D. Little Cathy A. Malchiodi Nancy McWilliams William R. Miller Kristin Neff Susan B. Neuman John C. Norcross Patricia Resick Stephen Rollnick Richard M. Ryan Richard C. Schwartz Zindel Segal Francine Shapiro Daniel J. Siegel John D. Teasdale J. Mark G. Williams References [ edit ] ^ a b "About Guilford Press" .

Guilford Press .

^ "Aaron T. Beck, M.D. Receives Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research" .

laskerfoundation.org . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ "Self-help books to support mental health | Reading Well" .

reading-well.org.uk . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Asthana, Anushka (9 January 2005).

"New prescription for mental health: read a good book" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 6 July 2009 .

^ Arkowitz, Hal; Lilienfeld, Scott O.

(November 2006).

"Do self-help books help?" .

Scientific American Mind .

17 (5): 78– 79.

doi : 10.1038/scientificamericanmind1006-78 .

JSTOR 24921594 .

^ "Past Presidents | International Literacy Association" .

^ "Reading Hall of Fame – Current Members" .

readinghalloffame.org . Retrieved 10 July 2023 .

^ "Literacy Research Association – Oscar S. Causey Award" . Archived from the original on 5 July 2015 . Retrieved 2 July 2015 .

^ "Guilford Conference Calendar" .

^ WorldCat search, 18 July 2020, with subsequent additions.

Further reading [ edit ] Brody, Jane E. (15 February 2000).

"Personal health; A matter of compromise and acceptance" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 8 July 2009 .

Danford, Natalie (25 February 2005).

"Raising 'em by the book" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

Danford, Natalie (24 June 2005).

"Reader, heal thyself" .

Publishers Weekly . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

Gilden, James (2 December 2006).

"Publisher relies on agent, ocean views" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 1 July 2009 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guilford_Press&oldid=1297311911 " Categories : Publishing companies of the United States Companies based in New York (state) Educational publishing companies Publishing companies established in 1973 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 11:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guilford Press Add languages Add topic

