Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins and Fort Lee 1.2 Rise of Hollywood 1.3 Classical Hollywood Cinema and the Golden Age of Hollywood 1.3.1 Rise and decline of the studio system 1.4 New Hollywood and post-classical cinema 1.5 Rise of the modern blockbuster and independent films 1.6 Contemporary cinema 2 Hollywood and politics Toggle Hollywood and politics subsection 2.1 Political endorsements 2.2 Political donations 3 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 3.1 Covert advertising 3.2 Censorship 3.2.1 Historic examples 3.3 Relationship with the military 3.4 Sexual abuse scandals 4 Global Hollywood 5 Role of women 6 Race and ethnicity 7 Working conditions 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Cinema of the United States 44 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Soomaaliga کوردی Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "American Film" redirects here. For the magazine, see American Film (magazine) .

Cinema of the United States (Hollywood) The Hollywood Sign in the Hollywood Hills , often regarded as the symbol of the American film industry No.

of screens 40,393 (2017) [ 1 ] • Per capita 14 per 100,000 (2017) [ 1 ] Main distributors Disney Walt Disney Pictures 20th Century Studios Sony Columbia Pictures TriStar Pictures Comcast Universal Pictures Paramount Global Paramount Pictures Warner Bros. Discovery Warner Bros. Pictures New Line Cinema Produced feature films (2016) [ 2 ] Fictional 646 (98.5%) Animated 10 (1.5%) Number of admissions (2017) [ 4 ] Total 1,239,742,550 • Per capita 3.9 (2010) [ 3 ] Gross box office (2017) [ 4 ] Total $11.1 billion This article is part of a series on the Culture of the United States Society History Language People race and ethnicity Religion Arts and literature Architecture Art Dance Fashion Literature comics poetry Music Sculpture Theater Other Cuisine Festivals Folklore Media newspapers radio cinema TV Internet Americana Mythology Sports Symbols Flag Great Seal Monuments Motto Anthem Bird World Heritage Sites By Region Midwestern New England Southern Appalachian United States portal v t e The film industry of the United States , primarily associated with major film studios collectively referred to as Hollywood , has significantly influenced the global film industry since the early 20th century.

Classical Hollywood cinema , a filmmaking style developed in the 1910s, continues to shape many American films today. While French filmmakers Auguste and Louis Lumière are often credited with modern cinema's origins, [ 5 ] American filmmaking quickly rose to global dominance. As of 2017, more than 600 English-language films were released annually in the United States, making it the fourth-largest producer of films, trailing only India , Japan , and China .

[ 6 ] Although the United Kingdom , Canada , Australia , and New Zealand also produce English-language films, they are not directly part of the Hollywood system. Due to this global reach, Hollywood is frequently regarded as a transnational cinema [ 7 ] with some films released in multiple language versions, such as Spanish and French.

Contemporary Hollywood frequently outsources production to countries including the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. The five major film studios — Universal Pictures , Paramount Pictures , Warner Bros.

, Walt Disney Studios , and Sony Pictures —are media conglomerates that dominate American box office revenue and have produced some of the most commercially successful film and television programs worldwide.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In 1894, the world's first commercial motion-picture exhibition was held in New York City using Thomas Edison 's kinetoscope [ 10 ] and kinetograph.

[ 11 ] In the following decades, the production of silent films greatly expanded. New studios formed, migrated to California, and began to create longer films. The United States produced the world's first sync-sound musical film , The Jazz Singer in 1927, [ 12 ] and was at the forefront of sound-film development in the following decades.

Since the early 20th century, the American film industry has primarily been based in and around the thirty-mile zone , centered in the Hollywood neighborhood of Los Angeles County, California . The director D. W. Griffith was central to the development of a film grammar .

Orson Welles 's Citizen Kane (1941) is frequently cited in critics' polls as the greatest film of all time .

[ 13 ] Hollywood is widely regarded as the oldest hub of the film industry, where most of the earliest studios and production companies originated, and is the birthplace of numerous cinematic genres.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of cinema in the United States Origins and Fort Lee [ edit ] See also: Silent film Justus D. Barnes in The Great Train Robbery (1903), considered by some to be the first Western The earliest recorded instance of motion capture was Eadweard Muybridge ’s series of photographs depicting a running horse, which he took in Palo Alto, California using a set of still cameras placed in a row. Muybridge's accomplishment led inventors everywhere to attempt to make similar devices. In the United States, Thomas Edison was among the first to produce such a device, the kinetoscope and kinetograph.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Harold Lloyd in the clock scene from Safety Last!

(1923) The history of cinema in the United States can trace its roots to the East Coast , where, at one time, Fort Lee, New Jersey , was the motion-picture capital of America. The American film industry began at the end of the 19th century, with the construction of Thomas Edison's " Black Maria ", the first motion-picture studio in West Orange, New Jersey . The cities and towns on the Hudson River and Hudson Palisades offered land at costs considerably less than New York City across the river and benefited greatly as a result of the phenomenal growth of the film industry at the turn of the 20th century.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The industry began attracting both capital and innovative workforces. In 1907, when the Kalem Company began using Fort Lee as a location for filming in the area, other filmmakers quickly followed. In 1909, a forerunner of Universal Studios , the Champion Film Company , built the first studio.

[ 21 ] Others quickly followed and either built new studios or leased facilities in Fort Lee. In the 1910s and 1920s , film companies such as the Independent Moving Pictures Company, Peerless Pictures Studios , Solax Studios , Eclair , Goldwyn Pictures Corporation , Star Film ( Georges Méliès ), World Film Company , Biograph Studios , Fox Film Corporation , Société Pathé Frères , Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios Inc.

, Victor Film Company , and Selznick International Pictures were all making pictures in Fort Lee. Many notable actors, such as Mary Pickford , got their start at Biograph Studios.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] In New York, the Kaufman Astoria Studios in Queens , which was built during the silent film era, was used by the Marx Brothers and W.C. Fields . The Edison Studios were located in the Bronx .

Chelsea, Manhattan , was also frequently used.

Other Eastern cities, most notably Chicago and Cleveland , also served as early centers for film production.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In the West, California was already quickly emerging as a major film production center. In Colorado , Denver was home to the Art-O-Graf Film Company, and Walt Disney 's early Laugh-O-Gram Studio was based in Kansas City , Missouri.

From 1908, Jacksonville, Florida's motion picture industry saw more than 30 silent film companies establish studios in town, including Kalem Studios , Metro Pictures (later MGM ), Edison Studios , Majestic Films, [ 27 ] King-Bee Films Corporation , Vim Comedy Company , Norman Studios , Gaumont Film Company and the Lubin Manufacturing Company .

Picture City, Florida was a planned site for a movie picture production center in the 1920s, but due to the 1928 Okeechobee hurricane , the idea collapsed and Picture City, Florida returned to its original name of Hobe Sound . An attempt to establish a film production center in Detroit also proved unsuccessful.

[ 28 ] The film patent wars of the early 20th century helped the spread of film companies to other parts of the US, outside New York. Many filmmakers worked with equipment for which they did not own the rights to use. Therefore, filming in New York could be dangerous, as it was close to Edison's company headquarters and close to the agents the company sent out to seize cameras.

[ 29 ] An alternative was Los Angeles, which had mild winters, a large selection of places to film, and, most importantly, it was only 90 miles to the border of Mexico, in case they needed to flee from Edison's enforcement agents. By 1912, most major film companies had set up production facilities in Southern California , near or in Los Angeles, because of the region's favorable year-round weather.

[ 30 ] Rise of Hollywood [ edit ] "History of Hollywood" redirects here. For the history of the Los Angeles neighborhood, see Hollywood, Los Angeles § History .

The 1908 Selig Polyscope Company production of The Count of Monte Cristo , directed by Francis Boggs and starring Hobart Bosworth , was claimed as the first to have been filmed in Los Angeles, in 1907. A plaque was unveiled by the city, in 1957, at Dearden's flagship store on the corner of Main Street and 7th Street, to mark the filming on the site when it had been a Chinese laundry.

[ 31 ] Bosworth's widow suggested the city had got the date and location wrong, and that the film was actually shot in nearby Venice , which at the time was an independent city.

[ 32 ] In the Sultan's Power, directed by Boggs for Selig Polyscope Company, also starring Bosworth, is considered the first film shot entirely in Los Angeles, with shooting at 7th and Olive Streets, in 1909.

[ 33 ] [ 32 ] In early 1910, director D. W. Griffith was sent by the Biograph Company to the West Coast with his acting troupe, consisting of actors Blanche Sweet , Lillian Gish , Mary Pickford , Lionel Barrymore , and others. They started filming on a vacant lot near Georgia Street in downtown Los Angeles. While there, the company decided to explore new territories, traveling several miles north to Hollywood: a little village that was friendly and enjoyed the movie company filming there. Griffith then filmed the first movie ever shot in Hollywood, In Old California , a Biograph melodrama about California in the 19th century, when the state was under Mexican rule . Griffith stayed there for months and made several films before returning to New York. Also in 1910, Selig Polyscope Company of Chicago established the first film studio in the Los Angeles area in Edendale , [ 31 ] and the first studio in Hollywood opened in 1912.

[ 34 ] : 447 After hearing about Griffith's success in Hollywood, in 1913, many movie-makers headed west to avoid the fees imposed by Thomas Edison , who owned patents on the movie-making process.

[ 35 ] Nestor Studios of Bayonne, New Jersey , built the first studio in the Hollywood neighborhood in 1911.

[ dubious – discuss ] Nestor Studios, owned by David and William Horsley, later merged with Universal Studios; and William Horsley's other company, Hollywood Film Laboratory, is now the oldest existing company in Hollywood, presently called the Hollywood Digital Laboratory. California's more hospitable and cost-effective climate led to the eventual shift of virtually all filmmaking to the West Coast by the 1930s. At the time, Thomas Edison owned almost all the patents relevant to motion picture production and movie producers on the East Coast acting independently of Edison's Motion Picture Patents Company were often sued or enjoined by Edison and his agents while movie makers working on the West Coast could work independently of Edison's control.

[ 29 ] The Hollywood Walk of Fame on Hollywood Boulevard In Los Angeles, the studios and Hollywood grew. Before World War I , films were made in several American cities, but filmmakers tended to gravitate towards southern California as the industry developed. They were attracted by the warm, predictable climate with reliable sunlight, which made it possible to film outdoors year-round.

[ 36 ] War damage contributed to the decline of the then-dominant European film industry, in favor of the United States, where infrastructure was still intact.

[ 37 ] The stronger early public health response to the 1918 flu epidemic by Los Angeles [ 38 ] compared to other American cities reduced the number of cases there and resulted in a faster recovery, contributing to the increasing dominance of Hollywood over New York City.

[ 37 ] During the pandemic, public health officials temporarily closed movie theaters in some jurisdictions, large studios suspended production for weeks at a time, and some actors came down with the flu. This caused major financial losses and severe difficulties for small studios, but the industry as a whole more than recovered during the Roaring Twenties .

[ 39 ] In the early 20th century, when the medium was new, many Jewish immigrants found employment in the US film industry. They were able to make their mark in a brand-new business: the exhibition of short films in storefront theaters called nickelodeons , after their admission price of a nickel (five cents). Within a few years, men like Samuel Goldwyn , William Fox , Carl Laemmle , Adolph Zukor , Louis B. Mayer , and the Warner Brothers (Harry, Albert, Samuel, and Jack) had switched to the production side of the business. Soon they were the heads of a new kind of enterprise: the movie studio . The US had at least two female directors, producers, and studio heads in these early years: Lois Weber and French-born Alice Guy-Blaché . They also set the stage for the industry's internationalism; the industry is often accused of Amerocentric provincialism .

Other movie producers arrived from Europe after World War I: directors like Ernst Lubitsch , Alfred Hitchcock , Fritz Lang and Jean Renoir ; and actors like Rudolph Valentino , Marlene Dietrich , Ronald Colman , and Charles Boyer . They joined a homegrown supply of actors—lured west from the New York City stage after the introduction of sound films—to form one of the 20th century's most remarkable growth industries. At motion pictures' height of popularity in the mid-1940s, the studios were cranking out a total of about 400 movies a year, seen by an audience of 90 million Americans per week.

[ 40 ] Buster Keaton in costume with his signature pork pie hat , c. 1939 Sound also became widely used in Hollywood in the late 1920s.

[ 41 ] After The Jazz Singer , the first film with synchronized voices was successfully released as a Vitaphone talkie in 1927, Hollywood film companies would respond to Warner Bros. and begin to use Vitaphone sound—which Warner Bros. owned until 1928—in future films. By May 1928, Electrical Research Product Incorporated (ERPI), a subsidiary of the Western Electric company, had a monopoly over film sound distribution.

[ 40 ] A side effect of these " talkies " was that many actors who had made their careers in silent films suddenly found themselves out of work, as they often had bad voices or could not remember their lines. Meanwhile, in 1922, US politician Will H. Hays left politics and formed the movie studio boss organization known as the Motion Picture Producers and Distributors of America (MPPDA).

[ 42 ] The organization became the Motion Picture Association of America after Hays retired in 1945.

In the early times of talkies, American studios found that their sound productions were rejected in foreign-language markets and even among speakers of other dialects of English. The synchronization technology was still too primitive for dubbing . One of the solutions was creating parallel foreign-language versions of Hollywood films. Around 1930, the American companies [ which?

] opened a studio in Joinville-le-Pont , France, where the same sets and wardrobe and even mass scenes were used for different time-sharing crews.

Also, foreign unemployed actors, playwrights, and winners of photogenic contests were chosen and brought to Hollywood, where they shot parallel versions of English-language films. These parallel versions had a lower budget, were shot at night, and were directed by second-line American directors who did not speak a foreign language. The Spanish-language crews included people like Luis Buñuel , Enrique Jardiel Poncela , Xavier Cugat , and Edgar Neville . The productions were not very successful in their intended markets, due to the following reasons: Brown Derby , an icon that became synonymous with the Golden Age of Hollywood.

The lower budgets were apparent.

Many theater actors had no previous experience in cinema.

The original movies were often second-rate themselves since studios expected that the top productions would sell by themselves.

The mix of foreign accents (Castilian, Mexican, and Chilean for example in the Spanish case) was odd for the audiences.

Some markets lacked sound-equipped theaters.

Classical Hollywood Cinema and the Golden Age of Hollywood [ edit ] Main article: Classical Hollywood cinema Stars of the Classical Hollywood cinema era ( c.

1913–1962 ).  Top row, l-r: Greta Garbo , Humphrey Bogart , Lauren Bacall , Clark Gable , Katharine Hepburn , Fred Astaire , Ginger Rogers , Marlon Brando , the Marx Brothers , Joan Crawford .  Second row, l-r: John Wayne , James Stewart , Buster Keaton , Claudette Colbert , Gene Kelly , Burt Lancaster , Judy Garland , Gregory Peck , Elizabeth Taylor , Kirk Douglas .  Third row, l-r: Bette Davis , Audrey Hepburn , Jean Harlow , Alfred Hitchcock , John Ford , Howard Hawks , Grace Kelly , Laurence Olivier , Marlene Dietrich , James Cagney .  Fourth row, l-r: Ava Gardner , Cary Grant , Ingrid Bergman , Henry Fonda , Marilyn Monroe , James Dean , Orson Welles , Mae West , William Holden , Sophia Loren .  Bottom row, l-r: Vivien Leigh , Joan Fontaine and Gary Cooper , Spencer Tracy , Barbara Stanwyck , Lillian Gish , Tyrone Power , Shirley Temple , Janet Leigh with Charlton Heston , Rita Hayworth , Mary Pickford .

Classical Hollywood cinema , or the Golden Age of Hollywood, is defined as a technical and narrative style characteristic of American cinema from 1913 to 1962, during which thousands of movies were issued from the Hollywood studios. The Classical style began to emerge in 1913, was accelerated in 1917 after the U.S. entered World War I and finally solidified when the film The Jazz Singer was released in 1927, ending the silent film era and increasing box-office profits for the film industry by introducing sound to feature films.

Most Hollywood pictures adhered closely to a formula— Western , slapstick comedy , musical , animated cartoon , biographical —and the same creative teams often worked on films made by the same studio. For example, Cedric Gibbons and Herbert Stothart always worked on MGM films, Alfred Newman worked at 20th Century Fox for twenty years, Cecil B. De Mille 's films were almost all made at Paramount , and director Henry King 's films were mostly made for 20th Century Fox .

At the same time, one could usually guess which studio made which film, largely because of the actors who appeared in it; MGM , for example, claimed it had contracted "more stars than there are in heaven." Each studio had its own style and characteristic touches which made it possible to know this—a trait that rarely exists today.

For example, To Have and Have Not (1944) is notable not only for the first pairing of actors Humphrey Bogart (1899–1957) and Lauren Bacall (1924–2014), but because it was written by two future winners of the Nobel Prize in Literature : Ernest Hemingway (1899–1961), the author of the novel on which the script was nominally based, and William Faulkner (1897–1962), who worked on the screen adaptation.

After The Jazz Singer was released in 1927, Warner Bros.

gained huge success and were able to acquire their own string of movie theaters after purchasing Stanley Theaters and First National Productions in 1928. In contrast, Loews Theaters owned MGM since forming in 1924, while the Fox Film Corporation owned the Fox Theatre .

RKO (a 1928 merger between Keith-Orpheum Theaters and the Radio Corporation of America [ 43 ] ) also responded to the Western Electric/ERPI monopoly over sound in films, and developed their own method, known as Photophone , to put sound in films.

[ 40 ] Paramount, which acquired Balaban and Katz in 1926, would answer to the success of Warner Bros. and RKO by purchasing a number of theaters in the late 1920s, and would hold a monopoly on theaters in Detroit, Michigan .

[ 44 ] By the 1930s, almost all of the first-run metropolitan theaters in the United States were owned by the Big Five studios— MGM , Paramount Pictures , RKO , Warner Bros.

, and 20th Century Fox .

[ 45 ] Rise and decline of the studio system [ edit ] Hollywood movie studios in 1922 Motion picture companies operated under the studio system . The major studios kept thousands of people on salary—actors, producers, directors, writers, stuntmen, craftspersons, and technicians. They owned or leased Movie ranches in rural Southern California for location shooting of westerns and other large-scale genre films, and the major studios owned hundreds of theaters in cities and towns across the nation in 1920 film theaters that showed their films and that were always in need of fresh material.

Spencer Tracy , who was the first actor to win Best Actor award over two consecutive years for his roles in Captains Courageous (1937) and Boys Town (1938) (and received seven other nominations) In 1930, MPPDA President Will Hays created the Hays (Production) Code , which followed censorship guidelines and went into effect after government threats of censorship expanded by 1930.

[ 46 ] However, the code was never enforced until 1934 after the Catholic watchdog organization The Legion of Decency —appalled by some of the provocative films and lurid advertising of the era later classified Pre-Code Hollywood —threatened a boycott of motion pictures if it did not go into effect.

[ 47 ] The films that did not obtain a seal of approval from the Production Code Administration had to pay a $25,000 fine (equivalent to $470,568 in 2024) and could not profit in the theaters, as the MPPDA controlled every theater in the country through the Big Five studios.

Throughout the 1930s, as well as most of the golden age, MGM dominated the film screen and had the top stars in Hollywood, and they were also credited for creating the Hollywood star system altogether.

[ 48 ] Some MGM stars included "King of Hollywood" Clark Gable , Lionel Barrymore , Jean Harlow , Norma Shearer , Greta Garbo , Joan Crawford , Jeanette MacDonald , Gene Raymond , Spencer Tracy , Judy Garland , and Gene Kelly .

[ 48 ] Another great achievement of American cinema during this era came through Walt Disney's animation company . In 1937, Disney created the most successful film of its time, Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs .

[ 49 ] This distinction was promptly topped in 1939 when Selznick International created what is still, when adjusted for inflation, the most successful film of all time in Gone with the Wind .

[ 50 ] Many film historians have remarked upon the many great works of cinema that emerged from this period of highly regimented filmmaking. One reason this was possible is that, with so many movies being made, not everyone had to be a big hit. A studio could gamble on a medium-budget feature with a good script and relatively unknown actors: Citizen Kane , directed by Orson Welles (1915–1985) and often regarded as the greatest film of all time , fits this description. In other cases, strong-willed directors like Howard Hawks (1896–1977), Alfred Hitchcock (1899–1980), and Frank Capra (1897–1991) battled the studios to achieve their artistic visions.

The apogee of the studio system may have been the year 1939, which saw the release of such classics as The Wizard of Oz , Gone with the Wind , Stagecoach , Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , Wuthering Heights , Only Angels Have Wings , Ninotchka and Midnight . Among the other films from the Golden Age period that are now considered to be classics: Casablanca , It's a Wonderful Life , It Happened One Night , the original King Kong , Mutiny on the Bounty , Top Hat , City Lights , Red River , The Lady from Shanghai , Rear Window , On the Waterfront , Rebel Without a Cause , Some Like It Hot , and The Manchurian Candidate .

Percentage of the U.S. population that went to the cinema on average, weekly between 1930 and 2000 Walt Disney introduces each of the seven dwarfs in a scene from the original 1937 Snow White movie trailer The studio system and the Golden Age of Hollywood succumbed to two forces that developed in the late 1940s: a federal antitrust action that separated the production of films from their exhibition; and the advent of television .

In 1938, Walt Disney's Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs was released during a run of lackluster films from the major studios, and quickly became the highest-grossing film released to that point. Embarrassingly for the studios, it was an independently produced animated film that did not feature any studio-employed stars.

[ 51 ] This stoked already widespread frustration at the practice of block-booking , in which studios would only sell an entire year's schedule of films at a time to theaters and use the lock-in to cover for releases of mediocre quality.

Assistant Attorney General Thurman Arnold —a noted " trust buster " of the Roosevelt administration—took this opportunity to initiate proceedings against the eight largest Hollywood studios in July 1938 for violations of the Sherman Antitrust Act .

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The federal suit resulted in five of the eight studios (the "Big Five": Warner Bros.

, MGM , Fox , RKO and Paramount ) reaching a compromise with Arnold in October 1940 and signing a consent decree agreeing to, within three years: Eliminate the block-booking of short film subjects, in an arrangement known as "one shot", or "full force" block-booking.

Eliminate the block-booking of any more than five features in their theaters.

No longer engage in blind buying (or the buying of films by theater districts without seeing films beforehand) and instead have trade-showing , in which all 31 theater districts in the US would see films every two weeks before showing movies in theaters.

Set up an administration board in each theater district to enforce these requirements.

[ 52 ] Humphrey Bogart with Ingrid Bergman in Casablanca (1942) The "Little Three" ( Universal Studios , United Artists , and Columbia Pictures ), who did not own any theaters, refused to participate in the consent decree.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] A number of independent film producers were also unhappy with the compromise and formed a union known as the Society of Independent Motion Picture Producers and sued Paramount for the monopoly they still had over the Detroit Theaters—as Paramount was also gaining dominance through actors like Bob Hope, Paulette Goddard, Veronica Lake, Betty Hutton, crooner Bing Crosby, Alan Ladd, and longtime actor for studio Gary Cooper too- by 1942. The Big Five studios did not meet the requirements of the Consent of Decree during WWII, without major consequence, but after the war ended they joined Paramount as defendants in the Hollywood antitrust case, as did the Little Three studios.

[ 54 ] The United States Supreme Court eventually ruled in United States v. Paramount Pictures, Inc.

that the major studios ownership of theaters and film distribution was a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act . As a result, the studios began to release actors and technical staff from their contracts with the studios. This changed the paradigm of filmmaking by the major Hollywood studios, as each could have an entirely different cast and creative team.

The decision resulted in the gradual loss of the characteristics that made Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, Paramount Pictures, Universal Studios, Columbia Pictures, RKO Pictures, and 20th Century Fox films immediately identifiable. Certain movie people, such as Cecil B. DeMille , either remained contract artists until the end of their careers or used the same creative teams on their films so that a DeMille film still looked like one whether it was made in 1932 or 1956.

New Hollywood and post-classical cinema [ edit ] Main article: New Hollywood Director and producer Steven Spielberg , co-founder of DreamWorks Studios and Amblin Entertainment , Inc Post-classical cinema is the changing methods of storytelling in the New Hollywood. It has been argued that new approaches to drama and characterization played upon audience expectations acquired in the classical period: chronology may be scrambled, storylines may feature " twist endings ", and lines between the antagonist and protagonist may be blurred. The roots of post-classical storytelling may be seen in film noir , in Rebel Without a Cause (1955), and in Hitchcock's storyline-shattering Psycho .

The New Hollywood is the emergence of a new generation of film school-trained directors who had absorbed the techniques developed in Europe in the 1960s as a result of the French New Wave; the 1967 film Bonnie and Clyde marked the beginning of American cinema rebounding as well, as a new generation of films would afterward gain success at the box offices as well.

[ 55 ] Filmmakers like Francis Ford Coppola , Steven Spielberg , George Lucas , Brian De Palma , Stanley Kubrick , Martin Scorsese , Roman Polanski , and William Friedkin came to produce fare that paid homage to the history of film and developed upon existing genres and techniques. Inaugurated by the 1969 release of Andy Warhol 's Blue Movie , the phenomenon of adult erotic films being publicly discussed by celebrities (like Johnny Carson and Bob Hope ), [ 56 ] and taken seriously by critics (like Roger Ebert ), [ 57 ] [ 58 ] a development referred to, by Ralph Blumenthal of The New York Times , as " porno chic ", and later known as the Golden Age of Porn , began, for the first time, in modern American culture.

[ 56 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] According to award-winning author Toni Bentley , Radley Metzger 's 1976 film The Opening of Misty Beethoven , based on the play Pygmalion by George Bernard Shaw (and its derivative, My Fair Lady ), and due to attaining a mainstream level in storyline and sets, [ 61 ] is considered the "crown jewel" of this ' Golden Age '.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] At the height of his fame in the early 1970s, Charles Bronson was the world's No. 1 box office attraction, commanding $1 million per film.

[ 64 ] In the 1970s, the films of New Hollywood filmmakers were often both critically acclaimed and commercially successful. While the early New Hollywood films like Bonnie and Clyde and Easy Rider had been relatively low-budget affairs with amoral heroes and increased sexuality and violence, the enormous success enjoyed by Friedkin with The Exorcist , Spielberg with Jaws , Coppola with The Godfather and Apocalypse Now , Scorsese with Taxi Driver , Kubrick with 2001: A Space Odyssey , Polanski with Chinatown , and Lucas with American Graffiti and Star Wars , respectively helped to give rise to the modern " blockbuster ", and induced studios to focus ever more heavily on trying to produce enormous hits.

[ 65 ] Rise of the modern blockbuster and independent films [ edit ] Tom Hanks , who has won two Academy Awards for Best Actor for his performances in Philadelphia and Forrest Gump and has starred in numerous beloved films such as Saving Private Ryan , Cast Away and Toy Story This section is missing information about film as an artistic medium beyond being a form of technology or an entertainment product; cinematic styles such as for instance, neo-noir and American Eccentric Cinema; Pixar; and the entire 1980s.

Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( August 2023 ) In the US, the PG-13 rating was introduced in 1984 to accommodate films that straddled the line between PG and R, which was mainly due to the controversies surrounding the violent content of the PG films Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom and Gremlins (both 1984).

[ 66 ] Film makers in the 1990s had access to technological, political and economic innovations that had not been available in previous decades.

Dick Tracy (1990) became the first 35 mm feature film with a digital soundtrack.

Batman Returns (1992) was the first film to make use of the Dolby Digital six-channel stereo sound that has since become the industry standard. Computer-generated imagery was greatly facilitated when it became possible to transfer film images into a computer and manipulate them digitally. The possibilities became apparent in director James Cameron 's Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991), in images of the shape-changing character T-1000 .

Computer graphics or CG advanced to a point where Jurassic Park (1993) was able to use the techniques to create realistic-looking animals.

Jackpot (2001) became the first film that was shot entirely in digital.

[ 67 ] In the film Titanic , Cameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects with his film, and enlisted Digital Domain and Pacific Data Images to continue the developments in digital technology which the director pioneered while working on The Abyss and Terminator 2: Judgment Day . Many previous films about the RMS Titanic shot water in slow motion , which did not look wholly convincing.

[ 68 ] Cameron encouraged his crew to shoot their 45-foot-long (14 m) miniature of the ship as if "we're making a commercial for the White Star Line".

American Theatrical Market (1995–2017) All values in billions Year Tickets Box Office 1995 1.22 $5.31 1996 1.31 $5.79 1997 1.39 $6.36 1998 1.44 $6.77 1999 1.44 $7.34 2000 1.40 $7.54 2001 1.48 $8.36 2002 1.58 $9.16 2003 1.52 $9.20 2004 1.50 $9.29 2005 1.37 $8.80 2006 1.40 $9.16 2007 1.42 $9.77 2008 1.36 $9.75 2009 1.42 $10.64 2010 1.33 $10.48 2011 1.28 $10.17 2012 1.40 $11.16 2013 1.34 $10.89 2014 1.26 $10.27 2015 1.32 $11.16 2016 1.30 $11.26 2017 1.25 $10.99 2018 1.31 $11.94 2019 1.22 $11.21 2020 0.22 $2.02 2021 0.44 $4.51 2022 0.71 $7.44 2023 0.83 $8.93 2024 0.79 $8.50 As compiled by The Numbers [ 69 ] Even The Blair Witch Project (1999), a low-budget indie horror film by Eduardo Sanchez and Daniel Myrick , was a huge financial success. Filmed on a budget of just $35,000, without any big stars or special effects, the film grossed $248  million with the use of modern marketing techniques and online promotion. Though not on the scale of George Lucas 's $1  billion prequel to the Star Wars Trilogy , The Blair Witch Project earned the distinction of being the most profitable film of all time, in terms of percentage gross.

[ 67 ] The success of Blair Witch as an indie project remains among the few exceptions, however, and control of The Big Five studios over film making continued to increase through the 1990s. The Big Six companies all enjoyed a period of expansion in the 1990s. They each developed different ways to adjust to rising costs in the film industry, especially the rising salaries of movie stars, driven by powerful agents. The biggest stars like Sylvester Stallone , Russell Crowe , Tom Cruise , Nicole Kidman , Sandra Bullock , Arnold Schwarzenegger , Mel Gibson , Kevin Bacon , and Julia Roberts received between $15–$20  million per film and in some cases were even given a share of the film's profits.

[ 67 ] Screenwriters on the other hand were generally paid less than the top actors or directors, usually under $1 million per film. However, the single largest factor driving rising costs was special effects. By 1999 the average cost of a blockbuster film was $60 million before marketing and promotion, which cost another $80 million.

[ 67 ] Contemporary cinema [ edit ] This section is missing information about other types of films other than superhero or blockbuster, discussion about studios other than the typical A-list, discussion regarding superhero fatigue, and information on the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes.

Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( May 2023 ) Since the beginning of 21st century, the theatrical marketplace has slowly been dominated by the superhero genre. As of 2022 [update] , they are the best-paying productions for actors, because paychecks in other genres have shrunk for even top actors.

[ 70 ] In 2023 and 2024, however, Hollywood experts pointed to 'superhero fatigue' as an emerging trend.

[ 71 ] Actors such as Paul Dano and directors like Matthew Vaughn have made similar arguments.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] In 2021, despite the COVID-19 pandemic in the United States , blockbuster films such as Black Widow , F9 , Death on the Nile and West Side Story were released in theaters after being postponed from their initial 2020 release dates.

[ 74 ] Various studios responded to the crisis with controversial decisions to forgo the theatrical window and give their films day-and-date releases .

NBCUniversal released Trolls World Tour directly to video-on-demand rental on April 10, [ 75 ] while simultaneously receiving limited domestic theatrical screenings via drive-in cinemas; [ 76 ] CEO Jeff Shell claims that the film had reached nearly $100 million in revenue within the first three weeks.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The decision was opposed by AMC Theatres , which then announced that its screenings of Universal Pictures films would cease immediately, though the two companies would eventually agree to a 2-week theatrical window.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] By December 2020, Warner Bros. Pictures announced their decision to simultaneously release its slate of 2021 films in both theaters and its streaming site HBO Max for a period of one month to maximize viewership.

[ 84 ] However, by 2023, industry strikes by the Writers Guild of America (WGA) and Screen Actors Guild (SAG-AFTRA) highlighted growing disputes over streaming residuals, AI technology in writing and acting, and fair compensation, reflecting the broader challenges faced by Hollywood's evolving economic model. The move was vehemently criticized by various industry figures, many of who were reportedly uninformed of the decision before the announcement and felt deceived by the studio.

[ 85 ] 2019 onwards has seen the rise of American streaming platforms, such as Netflix , Disney+ , Paramount+ , and Apple TV+ , which came to rival traditional cinema.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Industry commentators have noted the increasing treatment of films as " content " by corporations that correlate with the increased popularity of streaming platforms.

[ 88 ] This involves the blurring of boundaries between films, television and other forms of media as more people consume them together in a variety of ways, with individual films defined more by their brand identity and commercial potential rather than their medium, stories and artistry.

[ 86 ] [ 89 ] Critic Matt Zoller Seitz has described the release of Avengers: Endgame in 2019 as "represent[ing] the decisive defeat of 'cinema' by 'content ' " due to its grand success as a "piece of entertainment" defined by the Marvel brand that culminates a series of blockbuster films that has traits of serial television.

[ 86 ] Tom Cruise , in a pre-recorded segment, skydived from the Stade de France to the Hollywood Sign , where he landed and affixed the five Olympic rings, marking the handover of the Games to Los Angeles in 2028 during the Olympics closing ceremony . Cruise himself has been cited as a paragon of modern cinema, with Top Gun: Maverick being cited as one of the first blockbuster films to gain significant monetary success despite being hampered by low expectations and competition from other franchise films and streaming platforms.

The films Space Jam: A New Legacy and Red Notice have been cited as examples of this treatment, with the former being described by many critics as "a lengthy infomercial for HBO Max", featuring scenes and characters recalling various Warner Bros. properties such as Casablanca , The Matrix and Austin Powers , [ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] while the latter is a $200 million heist film from Netflix that critics described "a movie that feels more processed by a machine [...] instead of anything approaching artistic intent or even an honest desire to entertain." [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Some have expressed that Space Jam demonstrates the industry's increasingly cynical treatment of films as mere intellectual property (IP) to be exploited, an approach which critic Scott Mendelson called "IP for the sake of IP." [ 91 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 92 ] Martin Scorsese has warned that cinema as an art form is "being systematically devalued, sidelined, demeaned, and reduced" to "content" and called blockbusters' overemphasis on box-office returns "repulsive".

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Quentin Tarantino has opined that the current era of cinema is one of the worst in Hollywood history.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] During a masterclass at the 2023 Sarajevo Film Festival , Charlie Kaufman criticized mainstream blockbusters, stating that "[a]t this point, the only thing that makes money is garbage" and encouraged industry professionals to "make movies outside of the studio system as much as possible".

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] James Gray noted in an interview with Deadline , "When you make movies that only make a ton of money and only one kind of movie, you begin to get a large segment of the population out of the habit of going to the movies", which causes viewership to decrease, though clarified that he has "no problem with a comic book movie". As a solution to the lack of "investment in the broad-based engagement with the product", he suggests that studios "be willing to lose money for a couple of years on art film divisions, and in the end they will be happier." [ 105 ] Hollywood and politics [ edit ] Main article: Good Neighbor policy The 81st Academy Awards at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood in 2009 In the 1930s and 1940s, the Democrats and the Republicans alike saw political opportunities in Hollywood and President Franklin Roosevelt was an early adopter, capitalizing on Hollywood's stars in a national campaign.

[ 106 ] Melvyn Douglas and his wife Helen toured Washington, D.C., in 1939 and met the key New Dealers.

[ 107 ] Political endorsements [ edit ] See also: Hollywood blacklist and List of Joe Biden 2020 presidential campaign celebrity endorsements Endorsement letters from leading actors were signed, and radio appearances and printed advertising were made. Movie stars were used to draw a large audience into the political view of the party. By the 1960s, John F. Kennedy was a new, young face for Washington, and his strong friendship with Frank Sinatra exemplified this new era of glamour. The last moguls of Hollywood were gone, and younger, newer executives and producers began pushing more liberal ideas.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Celebrities and money attracted politicians to the high-class, glittering Hollywood lifestyle. As Ron Brownstein wrote in his book The Power and the Glitter , television in the 1970s and 1980s was an enormously important new media in politics and Hollywood helped in that media with actors making speeches on their political beliefs, like Jane Fonda against the Vietnam War.

[ 110 ] Despite most celebrities and producers being left-leaning and tending to support the Democratic Party , [ 111 ] [ 112 ] this era produced some Republican actors and producers such as Clint Eastwood and Jerry Bruckheimer . Support groups such as the Friends of Abe were set up to support conservative causes in Hollywood, which is perceived as biased against conservatives.

[ 113 ] Former actor Ronald Reagan became governor of California and subsequently became the 40th president of the United States. It continued with Arnold Schwarzenegger as California's governor in 2003 .

[ 114 ] Political donations [ edit ] Academy Museum of Motion Pictures Today, donations from Hollywood help to fund federal politics.

[ 115 ] On February 20, 2007, for example, Democratic then-presidential candidate Barack Obama had a $2,300-a-plate Hollywood gala, being hosted by DreamWorks founders David Geffen , Jeffrey Katzenberg , and Steven Spielberg at the Beverly Hilton.

[ 115 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Covert advertising [ edit ] Native advertising is information designed to persuade in more subtle ways than classic propaganda. A modern example common in the United States is Copaganda , in which TV shows display unrealistically flattering portrayals of law enforcement, in part to borrow equipment and get their assistance in blocking off streets to more easily film on location.

[ 116 ] Other reputation laundering accusations have been leveled in the entertainment industry, including burnishing the image of the Mafia.

[ 117 ] Product placement also has been a point of criticism, with the tobacco industry promoting smoking on screen.

[ 118 ] The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention cites that 18% of teen smokers would not start smoking if films with smoking were automatically given an 'R' rating, which would save 1 million lives.

[ 119 ] Censorship [ edit ] See also: Overseas censorship of Chinese issues and List of TV and films critical of Chinese Communist Party Hollywood producers sometimes seek to comply with the Chinese government 's censorship requirements in a bid to access the country's restricted and lucrative cinema market, [ 120 ] with the second-largest box office in the world as of 2016. This includes prioritizing sympathetic portrayals of Chinese characters in movies, such as changing the villains in Red Dawn from Chinese to North Koreans.

[ 120 ] Due to many topics forbidden in China, such as Dalai Lama and Winnie-the-Pooh being involved in the South Park 's episode " Band in China ", South Park was entirely banned in China after the episode's broadcast.

[ 121 ] The 2018 film Christopher Robin , the new Winnie-the-Pooh movie, was denied a Chinese release.

[ 121 ] Although Tibet was previously a cause célèbre in Hollywood, featuring in films including Kundun and Seven Years in Tibet , in the 21st century this is no longer the case.

[ 122 ] In 2016, Marvel Entertainment attracted criticism for its decision to cast Tilda Swinton as "The Ancient One" in the film adaptation Doctor Strange , using a white woman to play a traditionally Tibetan character.

[ 123 ] Actor and high-profile Tibet supporter Richard Gere stated that he was no longer welcome to participate in mainstream Hollywood films after criticizing the Chinese government and calling for a boycott of the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing.

[ 122 ] [ 124 ] Historic examples [ edit ] Hollywood also self-censored any negative depictions of Nazis for most of the 1930s to maintain access to German audiences.

[ 125 ] Around that time economic censorship resulted in the self-censoring of content to please the group wielding their economic influence.

[ 125 ] The Hays Code was an industry-led effort from 1930 to 1967 to strict self-censorship to appease religious objections to certain content and stave off any government censorship that could have resulted.

[ 125 ] Relationship with the military [ edit ] Main article: Military–entertainment complex Sexual abuse scandals [ edit ] Main article: Sexual abuse in the American film industry Global Hollywood [ edit ] The Chinese Theatre before 2007 The El Capitan Theatre Egyptian Theatre main entry Political economy of communication researchers have long focused on the international or global presence, power, profitability and popularity of Hollywood films. Books on global Hollywood by Toby Miller and Richard Maxwell, [ 126 ] Janet Wasko and Mary Erickson, [ 127 ] Kerry Segrave, [ 128 ] John Trump Bour [ 129 ] and Tanner Mirles [ 130 ] examine the international political economy of Hollywood's power.

According to Tanner Mirles, Hollywood relies on four capitalist strategies "to attract and integrate non-US film producers, exhibitors and audiences into its ambit: ownership, cross-border productions with subordinate service providers, content licensing deals with exhibitors, and blockbusters designed to travel the globe." [ 131 ] In 1912, American film companies were largely immersed in the competition for the domestic market. It was difficult to satisfy the huge demand for films created by the nickelodeon boom.

Motion Picture Patents Company members such as Edison Studios , also sought to limit competition from French, Italian, and other imported films. Exporting films, then, became lucrative to these companies.

Vitagraph Studios was the first American company to open its own distribution offices in Europe, establishing a branch in London in 1906, and a second branch in Paris shortly after.

[ 132 ] Other American companies were moving into foreign markets as well, and American distribution abroad continued to expand until the mid-1920s. Originally, a majority of companies sold their films indirectly. However, since they were inexperienced in overseas trading, they simply sold the foreign rights to their films to foreign distribution firms or export agents. Gradually, London became a center for the international circulation of US films.

[ 132 ] Dolby Theatre , Hollywood's renowned venue for the prestigious Academy Awards ceremony, which honors excellence in film Many British companies made a profit by acting as the agents for this business, and by doing so, they weakened British production by turning over a large share of the UK market to American films. By 1911, approximately 60 to 70 percent of films imported into Great Britain were American. The United States was also doing well in Germany, Australia, and New Zealand.

[ 132 ] More recently, in the last 20th and early 21st century, as globalization intensified and the United States government actively promoted free trade agendas and trade on cultural products, Hollywood became a worldwide cultural source. The success of Hollywood export markets is reflected in the boom of American multinational media corporations across the globe and the ability to make big-budget films that appeal to popular tastes in many different cultures.

[ 133 ] Even in a globalized world, global production remained clustered in Hollywood. Contributing factors are that the United States has the largest single home market in dollar terms, entertaining and highly visible Hollywood movies have global appeal, and the role of English as a universal language contributes to compensating for higher fixed costs of production.

Hollywood has moved more deeply into Chinese markets, although influenced by China's censorship. Films made in China are censored, strictly avoiding themes like "ghosts, violence, murder, horror, and demons." Such plot elements risk being cut. Hollywood has had to make "approved" films, corresponding to official Chinese standards, but with aesthetic standards sacrificed to box office profits. Even Chinese audiences found it boring to wait for the release of great American movies dubbed in their native language.

[ 134 ] Role of women [ edit ] Main article: Women in film This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2023 ) Meryl Streep is cited as one of the most influential women in Hollywood and Katharine Hepburn received four Academy Awards for Best Actress—a record for any performer.

Women are statistically underrepresented in creative positions in the center of the US film industry, Hollywood. This underrepresentation has been called the " celluloid ceiling ", a variant on the employment discrimination term " glass ceiling ". In 2013, the "top-paid actors ... made 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 times as much money as the top-paid actresses." [ 135 ] Older male actors made more than their female counterparts of the same age, with "female movie stars mak[ing] the most money on average per film at age 34, while male stars earn the most at 51." [ 136 ] The 2013 Celluloid Ceiling Report conducted by the Center for the Study of Women in Television and Film at San Diego State University collected a list of statistics gathered from "2,813 individuals employed by the 250 top domestic grossing films of 2012." [ 137 ] Women accounted for: "18% of all directors, executive producers, producers, writers, cinematographers, and editors. This reflected no change from 2011 and only a 1% increase from 1998." [ 137 ] "9% of all directors." [ 137 ] "15% of writers." [ 137 ] "25% of all producers." [ 137 ] "20% of all editors." [ 137 ] "2% of all cinematographers." [ 137 ] "38% of films employed 0 or 1 woman in the roles considered, 23% employed 2 women, 28% employed 3 to 5 women, and 10% employed 6 to 9 women." [ 137 ] A New York Times article stated that only 15% of the top films in 2013 had women for a lead acting role.

[ 138 ] The author of the study noted that "The percentage of female speaking roles has not increased much since the 1940s when they hovered around 25 percent to 28 percent." "Since 1998, women's representation in behind-the-scenes roles other than directing has gone up just 1 percent." Women "directed the same percent of the 250 top-grossing films in 2012 (9 percent) as they did in 1998." [ 135 ] Race and ethnicity [ edit ] Main articles: African-American representation in Hollywood , Representation of African Americans in media , Portrayal of East Asians in Hollywood , Portrayal of Native Americans in film , Portrayal of Arabs in film , White savior narrative in film , Whitewashing in film , Chicano films , Racism in early American film , and Racism in horror films On May 10, 2021, NBC announced that it would not televise the 79th Golden Globe Awards in 2022 in support of a boycott of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA) by multiple media companies over inadequate efforts to address lack of diversity within the membership of the association with people of color , but that it would be open to televise the ceremony in 2023 if the HFPA were successful in its efforts to reform.

[ 139 ] The HFPA would be disbanded two years later as a result of this and other scandals.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] American cinema has often reflected and propagated negative stereotypes towards foreign nationals and ethnic minorities.

[ 142 ] For example, Russians and Russian Americans are usually portrayed as brutal mobsters, ruthless agents and villains.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] According to Russian American professor Nina L. Khrushcheva , "You can't even turn the TV on and go to the movies without reference to Russians as horrible." [ 146 ] Italians and Italian Americans are usually associated with organized crime and the American Mafia .

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] Hispanic and Latino Americans are largely depicted as sexualized figures such as the Latino macho or the Latina vixen , gang members, (illegal) immigrants, or entertainers.

[ 150 ] However, representation in Hollywood has improved in recent years, gaining traction in the 1990s, and no longer emphasizes oppression, exploitation, or resistance as primary themes. According to Charles Ramírez Berg, third-wave films "do not accentuate Chicano oppression or resistance; ethnicity in these films exists as one fact of several that shape characters' lives and stamps their personalities." [ 151 ] Filmmakers like Edward James Olmos and Robert Rodriguez were able to represent the Hispanic and Latino American experience like none had on screen before, and actors like Hilary Swank , Jordana Brewster , Jessica Alba , Camilla Belle , Al Madrigal , Alexis Bledel , Sofía Vergara , Ana de Armas , and Rachel Zegler have become successful. In the last decade, minority filmmakers like Chris Weitz , Alfonso Gomez-Rejon , and Patricia Riggen have been given applied narratives. Films that portray Hispanic and Latino Americans include La Bamba (1987), Selena (1997), The Mask of Zorro (1998), Goal II (2007), Overboard (2018), Father of the Bride (2022), and Josefina López 's Real Women Have Curves , originally a play which premiered in 1990 and was later released as a film in 2002.

[ 151 ] This section needs expansion with: more details about African-Americans in American cinema. You can help by adding to it .

( February 2025 ) African-American representation in Hollywood improved drastically towards the end of the 20th century after the fall of the studio system and that trend endures in the 21st century as minority representation continues to increase.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] In old Hollywood, it was not uncommon for white actors to wear black face .

[ 156 ] According to Korean American actor Daniel Dae Kim , Asian and Asian American men "have been portrayed as inscrutable villains and asexualized kind of eunuchs." [ 149 ] The Media Action Network for Asian Americans accused the director and studio of Aloha of whitewashing the cast of the film, and the director, Cameron Crowe, apologized about Emma Stone being miscast as a character who is meant to be of one quarter Chinese and one quarter Hawaiian descent.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Throughout the 20th century, acting roles in film were relatively few, and many available roles were narrow characters. In the 21st century, young Asian American comedians and filmmakers have found an outlet on YouTube allowing them to gain a strong and loyal fanbase among their fellow Asian Americans.

[ 160 ] Although more recently the film Crazy Rich Asians has been lauded in the United States for featuring a predominantly Asian cast, [ 161 ] it was criticized elsewhere for casting biracial and non-Chinese actors as ethnically Chinese characters. The film Always Be My Maybe was lauded for taking familiar rom-com beats and cleverly layering in smart social commentary.

[ 162 ] Before the September 11 attacks , Arabs and Arab Americans were often portrayed as terrorists .

[ 149 ] The decision to hire Naomi Scott , the daughter of an English father and a Gujarati Ugandan-Indian mother, to play the lead of Jasmine in the film Aladdin also drew criticism as well as accusations of racism , as some commentators expected the role to go to an actress of Arab or Middle Eastern origin.

[ 163 ] In January 2018, it was reported that white extras were being applied brown make-up during filming to "blend in", which caused an outcry and condemnation among fans and critics, branding the practice as "an insult to the whole industry" while accusing the producers of not recruiting people with Middle Eastern or North African heritage. Disney responded to the controversy by saying, "Diversity of our cast and background performers was a requirement and only in a handful of instances when it was a matter of specialty skills, safety and control (special effects rigs, stunt performers and handling of animals) were crew made up to blend in." [ 164 ] [ 165 ] Working conditions [ edit ] See also: List of Hollywood strikes The New Beverly Cinema known for showcasing a diverse range of movies from various genres and eras. The theater retained its vintage charm, featuring 35mm film projections and maintaining an old-school moviegoing experience.

Hollywood's workflow is unique in that much of its workforce does not report to the same factory each day, nor follow the same routine from day to day, but films at distant locations around the world, with a schedule dictated by the scenes being filmed rather than what makes the most sense for productivity. For instance, an urban film shot entirely on location at night would require the bulk of its crews to work a graveyard shift, while a situational comedy series that shoots primarily on stage with only one or two days a week on location would follow a more traditional work schedule. Westerns are often shot in desert locations far from the homes of the crew in areas with limited hotels that necessitate long drives before and after a shooting day, which take advantage of as many hours of sunlight available, ultimately requiring workers to put in 16 or 17 hours a day from the time they leave their home to the time they return.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] Amidst a broad decline in the power of organized labor in America in the 20th and early 21st century, all of the major studios have continued to maintain contracts with unions through the Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers (AMPTP), a trade alliance representing the film studios and television networks. Due to the casual nature of employment in Hollywood, it is only through sectoral bargaining that individual workers can express their rights to minimum wage guarantees and access to pension and health plans that carry over from production to production and offer the studios access to a trained workforce able to step onto a set on day one with the knowledge and experience to handle the highly technical equipment they are asked to operate.

[ 168 ] The majority of the workers in Hollywood are represented by several unions and guilds. The 150,000 member-strong International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees (IATSE) represents most of the crafts , such as the grips, electricians, and camera people, as well as editors, sound engineers, and hair & make-up artists. The Screen Actors Guild (SAG) is the next largest group representing some 130,000 actors and performers, the Directors Guild of America (DGA) represents the directors and production managers, the Writers Guild of America (WGA) representing writers, and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters (IBT) represents the drivers.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] While the relationship between labor and management has generally been amicable over the years, working together with the state to develop safe protocols to continue working during COVID-19 and lobbying together in favor of tax incentives , contract negotiations have reported to get contentious over changes in the industry and as a response to rising income inequality . In 1945 six-month set-decorator strike, the relationship turned bloody between strikers, scabs, strikebreakers, and studio security.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] [ 173 ] [ 174 ] In recent years, Hollywood has faced challenges such as strikes by writers and actors, which have led to significant production cuts and layoffs across the industry. These strikes have resulted in union contracts that offer more money and protections against artificial intelligence, but they have also caused a slowdown in production and a rise in unemployment among film and TV workers.

See also [ edit ] Film portal United States portal African American cinema Category:Documentary films about Hollywood, Los Angeles Category:Documentary films about the cinema of the United States Category:Films about Hollywood, Los Angeles Lists of American films American comedy films American Film Institute History of animation in the United States List of films in the public domain in the United States Motion Picture Association of America film rating system National Film Registry General List of cinema of the world Photography in the United States of America Cinema of North America References [ edit ] ^ a b "Table 8: Cinema Infrastructure—Capacity" . UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved November 5, 2013 .

^ "Table 1: Feature Film Production—Genre/Method of Shooting" . UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 .

^ "Cinema—Admissions per capita" . Screen Australia. Archived from the original on November 9, 2013 . Retrieved November 9, 2013 .

^ a b "Table 11: Exhibition—Admissions & Gross Box Office (GBO)" . UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Archived from the original on December 24, 2018 . Retrieved May 30, 2019 .

^ "The Lumière Brothers, Pioneers of Cinema" . History Channel. October 3, 2014 . Retrieved January 15, 2017 .

^ UIS.

"UIS Statistics" .

data.uis.unesco.org .

^ Hudson, Dale.

Vampires, Race, and Transnational Hollywoods . Edinburgh University Press, 2017.

Website Archived December 22, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Kerrigan, Finola (2010).

Film Marketing . Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann. p. 18.

ISBN 9780750686839 . Retrieved February 4, 2022 .

^ Davis, Glyn; Dickinson, Kay; Patti, Lisa; Villarejo, Amy (2015).

Film Studies: A Global Introduction . Abingdon: Routledge. p. 299.

ISBN 9781317623380 .

^ Billboard . Nielsen Business Media. April 29, 1944. p.

68 .

ISSN 0006-2510 .

^ History.com Editors (February 9, 2010).

"Thomas Edison patents the Kinetograph" .

HISTORY . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ "Why Contemporary Commentators Missed the Point With 'The Jazz Singer' " .

Time .

^ Village Voice : 100 Best Films of the 20th century (2001) Archived March 31, 2014, at the Wayback Machine . Filmsite.org; " Sight and Sound Top Ten Poll 2002" . BFI. Archived from the original on May 15, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2007 .

^ Rosenstone, Robert A. (1985). Schatz, Thomas; Isenberg, Michael T.; Roffman, Peter; Purdy, Jim; Cavell, Stanley; Alexander, William (eds.).

"Genres, History, and Hollywood. A Review Article" .

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

27 (2): 367– 375.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417500011427 .

ISSN 0010-4175 .

JSTOR 178501 .

^ "The Kinetoscope" .

www.loc.gov . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Onion, Amanda; Sullivan, Missy; Mullen, Matt; Zapata, Christian (February 9, 2010).

"Thomas Edison patents the Kinetograph" .

HISTORY . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Kannapell, Andrea (October 4, 1998).

"Getting the Big Picture; The Film Industry Started Here and Left. Now It's Back, and the State Says the Sequel Is Huge" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ "Market Data" .

The Numbers . Retrieved July 11, 2024 .

^ Amith, Dennis (January 1, 2011).

"Before Hollywood There Was Fort Lee, N.J.: Early Movie Making in New Jersey (a J!-ENT DVD Review)" . J!-ENT.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2019 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

When Hollywood, California, was mostly orange groves, Fort Lee, New Jersey, was a center of American film production.

^ Rose, Lisa (April 29, 2012).

"100 years ago, Fort Lee was the first town to bask in movie magic" .

NJ.com .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

Back in 1912, when Hollywood had more cattle than cameras, Fort Lee was the center of the cinematic universe. Icons from the silent era like Mary Pickford, Lionel Barrymore, and Lillian Gish crossed the Hudson River via ferry to emote on Fort Lee back lots.

^ Before Hollywood, There Was Fort Lee Archived July 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Fort Lee Film Commission. Accessed April 16, 2011.

^ Koszarski, Richard.

Fort Lee: The Film Town , Indiana University Press , 2004.

ISBN 978-0-86196-652-3 . Accessed May 27, 2015.

^ Studios and Films Archived October 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Fort Lee Film Commission. Accessed December 7, 2013.

^ Fort Lee Film Commission (2006), Fort Lee Birthplace of the Motion Picture Industry , Arcadia Publishing, ISBN 0-7385-4501-5 ^ Liebenson, Donald (February 19, 2015).

" 'Flickering Empire' details Chicago's early dominance of film industry" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

^ "Cleveland on Film" .

The Encyclopedia of Cleveland History .

Case Western Reserve University . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

^ https://app.crb.gov/document/download/22398 http://archive.org/download/picturestoriesma03lond/picturestoriesma03lond.pdf https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/7/7e/The_Billboard_1912-02-03-_Vol_24_Iss_5_%28IA_sim_billboard_1912-02-03_24_5%29.pdf https://filminflorida.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Analysis-of-the-Florida-Film-and-Entertainment-Industry.pdf ^ Abel, Richard (2020).

Motor City Movie Culture, 1916–1925 .

Bloomington, IN : Indiana University Press . pp.

136– 139.

ISBN 978-0253046468 .

^ a b Bishop, Jim .

"How movies got moving ..." , The Lewiston Journal , November 27, 1979. Accessed February 14, 2012. "Movies were unheard if in Hollywood, even in 1900 The flickering shadows were devised in a place called Fort Le, N.J. It had forests, rocks cliffs for the cliff-hangers and the Hudson River. The movie industry had two problems. The weather was unpredictable, and Thomas Edison sued producers who used his invention. ... It was not until 1911 that David Horsley moved his Nestor Co. west." ^ Jacobs, Lewis; Rise of the American film, The; Harcourt Brace, New York, 1930; p. 85 ^ a b Rasmussen, Cecilia (September 16, 2001).

"Movie Industry's Roots in Garden of Edendale" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

^ a b "Wrong Site, Wrong Year, But Plaque Unveiled On 1st Pic Made in H'wood" .

Variety . January 1, 1958. p. 1 . Retrieved October 15, 2021 – via Archive.org .

^ In the Sultan's Power at the AFI Catalog of Feature Films ^ Worster, Donald (2008).

A Passion for Nature : The Life of John Muir .

Oxford : Oxford University Press (OUP). p. 535.

ISBN 978-0-19-516682-8 .

OCLC 191090285 .

^ Pederson, Charles E. (September 2007).

Thomas Edison . ABDO Publishing Company. p. 77.

ISBN 978-1-59928-845-1 .

^ "Hollywood" .

HISTORY . August 21, 2018 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ a b "How the Spanish flu contributed to the rise of Hollywood" . November 19, 2020.

^ How one city avoided the 1918 flu pandemic's deadly second wave ^ Meares, Hadley (April 1, 2020).

"Closed Movie Theaters and Infected Stars: How the 1918 Flu Halted Hollywood" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

^ a b c "History of the motion picture" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ [1] Archived April 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Will Hays and Motion Picture Censorship" .

^ "Thumbnail History of RKO Radio Pictures" .

earthlink.net . Archived from the original on September 12, 2005 . Retrieved June 19, 2007 .

^ "The Paramount Theater Monopoly" . Cobbles.com . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ "Film History of the 1920s" . Filmsite.org . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ " "Father of the Constitution" is born" .

This Day in History—3/16/1751 . History.com. Archived from the original on February 12, 2010 . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Maltby, Richard (May 19, 2008).

"More Sinned Against than Sinning: The Fabrications of "Pre-Code Cinema" " . SensesofCinema.com . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ a b [2] Archived June 21, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Disney Insider" . go.com . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ [3] Archived May 14, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ Aberdeen, J A (September 6, 2005).

"Part 1: The Hollywood Slump of 1938" .

Hollywood Renegades Archive . Retrieved May 6, 2008 .

^ a b c "Consent Decree" .

Time . November 11, 1940. Archived from the original on January 5, 2013 . Retrieved May 6, 2008 .

^ a b Aberdeen, J A (September 6, 2005).

"Part 3: The Consent Decree of 1940" .

Hollywood Renegades Archive . Retrieved May 6, 2008 .

^ "The Hollywood Studios in Federal Court—The Paramount case" . Cobbles.com . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ Scott, A. O. (August 12, 2007).

"Two Outlaws, Blasting Holes in the Screen" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Corliss, Richard (March 29, 2005).

"That Old Feeling: When Porno Was Chic" .

Time . Retrieved January 27, 2016 .

^ Ebert, Roger (June 13, 1973).

"The Devil In Miss Jones – Film Review" .

RogerEbert.com . Retrieved February 7, 2015 .

^ Ebert, Roger (November 24, 1976).

"Alice in Wonderland:An X-Rated Musical Fantasy" .

RogerEbert.com . Retrieved February 26, 2016 .

^ Blumenthal, Ralph (January 21, 1973).

"Porno chic; 'Hard-core' grows fashionable-and very profitable" .

The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved January 20, 2016 .

^ "Porno Chic" .

www.jahsonic.com .

^ Mathijs, Ernest; Mendik, Xavier (2007).

The Cult Film Reader .

Open University Press .

ISBN 978-0335219230 .

[ page needed ] ^ Bentley, Toni (June 2014).

"The Legend of Henry Paris" .

Playboy . Archived from the original on February 4, 2016 . Retrieved January 26, 2016 .

^ Bentley, Toni (June 2014).

"The Legend of Henry Paris" (PDF) .

ToniBentley.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 1, 2016 . Retrieved January 26, 2016 .

^ Lardine, Bob (March 18, 1973).

"Big Bad Bronson" .

The Miami Herald . New York News Service. pp. 1H . Retrieved February 10, 2020 – via Newspapers.com .

^ Belton, John (November 10, 2008).

American Cinema/American Culture . McGraw-Hill. p. 384.

ISBN 978-0-07-338615-7 .

^ Breznican, Anthony (August 24, 2004).

"PG-13 remade Hollywood ratings system" .

Seattle Post-Intelligencer . Retrieved June 27, 2016 .

^ a b c d "How George Lucas pioneered the use of Digital Video in feature films with the Sony HDW F900" .

Red Shark News .

^ Marsh and Kirkland, pp. 147–154 ^ "Domestic Movie Theatrical Market Summary 1995 to 2024" .

The Numbers . Retrieved December 27, 2024 .

Note: in order to provide a fair comparison between movies released in different years, all rankings are based on ticket sales, which are calculated using average ticket prices announced by the MPAA in their annual state of the industry report.

[ needs update ] ^ Couch, Aaron; Galuppo, Mia; Kit, Borys (October 21, 2022).

"Marvel, DC Among Last Bastion for Supersized Paydays" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved October 27, 2022 .

^ Gleiberman, Owen (June 19, 2023).

"Superhero Fatigue Is Real. The Cure? Make Better Movies Than 'The Flash' " .

Variety . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Sharf, Zack (March 4, 2024).

"Paul Dano Says Superhero Fatigue Is a 'Welcome Moment' That Will Hopefully 'Breathe New Life' Into Comic Book Movies: 'Quantity Over Quality' Is a 'Big Misstep' " .

Variety . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Tyrrell, Caitlin (October 18, 2023).

"Why Superhero Movies "Need A Little Bit Of Time Off," According To Kingsman Director" .

ScreenRant . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ " 'Black Widow,' 'West Side Story,' 'Eternals' Postpone Release Dates" .

Variety . September 23, 2020 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (March 16, 2020).

"Universal Making 'Invisible Man', 'The Hunt' & 'Emma' Available In Home On Friday As Exhibition Braces For Shutdown; 'Trolls' Sequel To Hit Cinemas & VOD Easter Weekend" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2020 . Retrieved March 16, 2020 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (April 14, 2020).

" 'Trolls World Tour': Drive-In Theaters Deliver What They Can During COVID-19 Exhibition Shutdown—Easter Weekend 2020 Box Office" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2020 . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

^ "Universal's 'Trolls World Tour' Earns Nearly $100 Million in First 3 Weeks of VOD Rentals" .

TheWrap . April 28, 2020.

Archived from the original on May 6, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ Schwartzel, Erich (April 28, 2020).

"WSJ News Exclusive | 'Trolls World Tour' Breaks Digital Records and Charts a New Path for Hollywood" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ "China Shuts Down All Cinemas, Again" .

The Hollywood Reporter . March 27, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 23, 2020 . Retrieved April 21, 2020 .

^ Alexander, Julia (March 18, 2020).

"Trolls World Tour could be a case study for Hollywood's digital future" .

The Verge . Retrieved April 17, 2020 .

^ Alexander, Julia (April 28, 2020).

"AMC Theaters will no longer play Universal movies after Trolls World Tour's on-demand success" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (July 28, 2020).

"Universal & AMC Theatres Make Peace, Will Crunch Theatrical Window To 17 Days With Option For PVOD After" .

Deadline . Retrieved August 3, 2020 .

^ Whitten, Sarah (July 28, 2020).

"AMC strikes historic deal with Universal, shortening number of days films need to run in theaters before going digital" .

CNBC . Retrieved August 3, 2020 .

^ Rubin, Rebecca; Donnelly, Matt (December 3, 2020).

"Warner Bros. to Debut Entire 2021 Film Slate, Including 'Dune' and 'Matrix 4,' Both on HBO Max and In Theaters" .

Variety . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Masters, Kim (December 7, 2020).

"Christopher Nolan Rips HBO Max as "Worst Streaming Service," Denounces Warner Bros.' Plan" .

The Hollywood Reporter . The Hollywood Reporter, LLC . Retrieved July 21, 2021 .

^ a b c Seitz, Matt Zoller (April 29, 2019).

"What's Next: Avengers, MCU, Game of Thrones, and the Content Endgame" .

RogerEbert.com . Ebert Digital LLC . Retrieved July 21, 2021 .

^ Hannah Avery (January 18, 2023).

"US streaming market growth continues, despite changes in the industry" .

kantar.com .

^ Brew, Simon (October 21, 2019).

"Can we stop calling films 'content' now?" .

Film Stories . Film Stories Ltd . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Taylor, Alex (February 20, 2021).

"Are streaming algorithms really damaging film?" .

BBC News .

British Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

[Martin Scorsese has] warned that cinema is being 'devalued ... demeaned and reduced' by being thrown under the umbrella term 'content'.

^ Shephard, Alex (July 21, 2021).

"Space Jam: A New Legacy Is a Peek Into the Bleak, Cynical Future of Film" .

The New Republic . Retrieved July 21, 2021 .

^ a b Rivera, Joshua (July 14, 2021).

"Despair, pitiful mortals: Space Jam: A New Legacy is the future of entertainment" .

Polygon .

Vox Media, LLC . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ a b Mendelson, Scott (July 14, 2021).

" 'Space Jam: A New Legacy' Review: A Feature-Length Commercial For HBO Max" .

Forbes . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

Quite possibly, as Space Jam: A New Legacy is now a classic example of 'IP for the sake of IP,' a brand extension that exists not because audiences want it but because a studio (and/or the film's star) wants it to continue.

^ Kirby, Kristen-Page (July 14, 2021).

" 'Space Jam: A New Legacy'—a feature-length ad for Warner Bros.—rises just above mediocrity" .

The Washington Post . WP Company LLC . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Tallerico, Brian (November 4, 2021).

"Red Notice movie review & film summary (2021)" .

RogerEbert.com . Ebert Digital LLC . Retrieved November 4, 2021 .

^ Evangelista, Chris (November 4, 2021).

"Red Notice Review: Dwayne Johnson And Ryan Reynolds Bumble Through Netflix's Glossy, Lifeless Action Movie" .

/Film . Static Media . Retrieved November 4, 2021 .

^ Lee, Benjamin (November 4, 2021).

"Red Notice review—Netflix's biggest film to date offers little reward" .

The Guardian . Guardian News & Media Limited . Retrieved November 4, 2021 .

^ Ebiri, Bilge (July 14, 2021).

" Space Jam: A New Legacy Never Thought It Could Be a Good Movie" .

Vulture .

Vox Media, LLC . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

It criticizes shameless, money-grubbing attempts to synergize and update beloved classics ... all the while shamelessly synergizing and updating beloved classics. ... The studios rarely seem to want to do anything new with their properties other than remind us that they still own them.

^ Sollosi, Mary (July 14, 2021).

" Space Jam: A New Legacy review: LeBron James enters the server-verse in exhausting reboot" .

Entertainment Weekly .

Meredith Corporation . Retrieved July 22, 2021 .

^ Scorsese, Martin.

"Il Maestro: Federico Fellini and the lost magic of cinema" .

Harper's Magazine . Vol. March 2021.

ISSN 0017-789X . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Taylor, Tom (October 13, 2022).

"Martin Scorsese calls cinema's profit obsession "repulsive" " .

faroutmagazine.co.uk . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Karr, Mary Kate (November 17, 2022).

"Quentin Tarantino says current era is tied for worst in film history" .

The A.V. Club . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Adekaiyero, Ayomikun (November 17, 2022).

"Quentin Tarantino says the current movie era is one of the 'worst in Hollywood history' " .

Insider . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Ntim, Zac (August 14, 2023).

"Charlie Kaufman Talks AI, WGA Strike & Slams Hollywood System: "The Only Thing That Makes Money Is Garbage" — Sarajevo" .

Deadline . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Schimkowitz, Matt (August 15, 2023).

"There's nothing confusing about Charlie Kaufman's opinion of Hollywood" .

The A.V. Club . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (May 22, 2022).

" 'Armageddon Time' Director James Gray On Why Studios Should Be Able To Lose Money On Art Specialty Divisions – Cannes Studio" .

Deadline . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ "Hollywood for Roosevelt committee : Franklin Delano Roosevelt's 1940 presidential campaign. | Pacifica Radio Archives" .

www.pacificaradioarchives.org . Retrieved December 18, 2024 .

^ "Life Story: Helen Gahagan Douglas" .

Women & the American Story .

^ "Inside John F. Kennedy and Frank Sinatra's Powerful Friendship" .

Biography . May 19, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Seale, Jack (November 4, 2023).

"Kennedy, Sinatra and the Mafia review – a barely believable tale of corruption and betrayal" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Brownstein, Ronald (1990).

The Power and the Glitter: The Hollywood-Washington Connection .

Pantheon Books .

ISBN 0-394-56938-5 ^ "US election 2020: Will celebrity endorsements help Joe Biden?" .

BBC News . October 14, 2020.

^ "Celebrities' last-minute pleas to vote: See who's endorsing Biden or Trump" .

Los Angeles Times . November 3, 2021.

^ "In liberal Hollywood, a conservative minority faces backlash in the age of Trump" .

Los Angeles Times . March 11, 2017 . Retrieved August 4, 2023 .

^ "Arnold Schwarzenegger on the Reagan era, action heroes, & his first TV series" .

Louisville Public Media . June 26, 2023 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ a b Halbfinger, David M. (February 6, 2007).

"Politicians Are Doing Hollywood Star Turns" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 5, 2008 .

^ Law & Order: Last Week Tonight with John Oliver (HBO) (News). September 12, 2022 . Retrieved January 29, 2023 – via YouTube.

^ Peirson-Hagger, Ellen (November 29, 2019).

" "Hollywood Mafia films are skillful propaganda": Kim Longinotto on why her new film breaks that mould" .

New Statesman . Retrieved January 30, 2023 .

^ Mekemson, C.; Glantz, S. A. (March 1, 2002).

"How the tobacco industry built its relationship with Hollywood" .

Tobacco Control .

11 (suppl 1): i81 – i91 .

doi : 10.1136/tc.11.suppl_1.i81 .

ISSN 0964-4563 .

PMC 1766059 .

PMID 11893818 .

^ CDCTobaccoFree (August 22, 2022).

"Smoking in the Movies" .

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Retrieved January 30, 2023 .

^ a b Whalen, Jeanne (October 8, 2019).

"China lashes out at Western businesses as it tries to cut support for Hong Kong protests" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b "South Park ban by China highlights Hollywood tightrope act" .

Al-Jazeera . October 10, 2019.

^ a b Steger, Isabella (March 28, 2019).

"Why it's so hard to keep the world focused on Tibet" .

Quartz .

^ Bisset, Jennifer (November 1, 2019).

"Marvel is censoring films for China, and you probably didn't even notice" .

CNET .

^ Siegel, Tatiana (April 18, 2017).

"Richard Gere's Studio Exile: Why His Hollywood Career Took an Indie Turn" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

^ a b c Red Carpet: Hollywood, China, and the Battle for Global Supremacy.

Erich Schwartzel. 2022.

ISBN 9781984879004 .

^ Miller, Toby; Govil, Nitin; Maxwell, Richard (2005).

Global Hollywood 2 (2nd ed.). London: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1844570393 .

^ Wasko, Janet (2008).

Cross-Border Cultural Production: Economic Runaway or Globalization?

(1st ed.). New York: Cambria Press.

ISBN 978-1934043783 .

^ Segrave, Kerry (1997).

American Films Abroad: Hollywood's Domination of the World's Movie Screens (1st ed.). Jefferson: McFarland & Company.

ISBN 0786403462 .

^ Trumpbour, John (2002).

Selling Hollywood to the World: U.S. and European Struggles for Mastery of the Global Film Industry, 1920-1950 (1st ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521651565 .

^ Mirrlees, Tanner (2013).

Global Entertainment Media: Between Cultural Imperialism and Cultural Globalization (1st ed.). New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415519823 .

^ Mirrlees, Tanner (2018).

"Global Hollywood: An Entertainment Imperium, by Integration" .

Cineaction .

1 (100).

^ a b c Thompson, Kristin (2010).

Film History: An Introduction . Madison, Wisconsin: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-338613-3 .

^ Scott, A. J. (2000).

The Cultural Economy of Cities . London: Sage Publications.

ISBN 0-7619-5455-4 .

^ Shirey, Paul (April 9, 2013).

"C'mon Hollywood: Is Hollywood going to start being Made in China?" . JoBlo . Retrieved June 14, 2013 .

^ a b Betsy Woodruff (February 23, 2015).

"Gender wage gap in Hollywood: It's very, very wide" .

Slate .

^ Maane Khatchatourian (February 7, 2014).

"Female Movie Stars Experience Earnings Plunge After Age 34" .

Variety .

^ a b c d e f g h Lauzen, Martha.

"The Celluloid Ceiling: Behind-the-Scenes Employment of Women on the Top 250 Films of 012" (PDF) .

The Center for the Study of Women in Television and Film . San Diego State University.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 26, 2013 . Retrieved May 20, 2013 .

^ Buckley, Cara (March 11, 2014).

"Only 15 Percent of Top Films in 2013 Put Women in Lead Roles, Study Finds" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 12, 2014 .

^ Ausiello, Michael (May 10, 2021).

"Golden Globes Cancelled: NBC Scraps 2022 Ceremony As Backlash Grows" .

TVLine . Retrieved May 10, 2021 .

^ "Dick Clark Productions and Eldridge Acquire Golden Globes" .

Golden Globes . June 12, 2023 . Retrieved August 31, 2023 .

^ Barnes, Brooks (June 12, 2023).

"Golden Globes Are Sold and Hollywood Foreign Press Is No More" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved August 31, 2023 .

^ Lee, Kevin (January 2008).

" "The Little State Department": Hollywood and the MPAA's Influence on U.S. Trade Relations" .

Northwestern Journal of International Law & Business .

28 (2).

^ "Will the cliche of the 'Russian baddie' ever leave our screens?" .

The Guardian . July 10, 2017.

^ "Russian film industry and Hollywood uneasy with one another" . Fox News. October 14, 2014 ^ "5 Hollywood Villains That Prove Russian Stereotypes Are Hard to Kill" .

The Moscow Times . August 9, 2015.

^ "Hollywood stereotypes: Why are Russians the bad guys?" .

BBC News . November 5, 2014.

^ "Stereotypes of Italian Americans in Film and Television" .

Thought Catalog . March 26, 2018.

^ "NYC; A Stereotype Hollywood Can't Refuse" .

The New York Times . July 30, 1999.

^ a b c "Hollywood's Stereotypes" .

ABC News .

^ Davison, Heather K.; Burke, Michael J. (2000). "Sex Discrimination in Simulated Employment Contexts: A Meta-analytic Investigation".

Journal of Vocational Behavior .

56 (2): 225– 248.

doi : 10.1006/jvbe.1999.1711 .

^ a b Enrique Pérez, Daniel (2009).

Rethinking Chicana/o and Latina/o Popular Culture . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

93– 95.

ISBN 9780230616066 .

^ "Asian and Black representation grew in film and television, study finds" .

NBC News . April 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ "Representation of Black talent in film and TV | McKinsey" .

www.mckinsey.com . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ "From servants to outlaws: 100 years of Black representation in Hollywood films" .

CBC .

^ O’Dell, Cary (October 4, 2022).

"Looking (and Looking Again) at Black Film History | Now See Hear!" .

The Library of Congress . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ "Blackface and Hollywood: From Al Jolson to Judy Garland to Dave Chappelle" .

The Hollywood Reporter . February 12, 2019.

^ Variety Staff (June 2, 2015).

"Cameron Crowe on Casting Emma Stone: 'I Offer You a Heart-Felt Apology' " .

Variety . Retrieved June 3, 2015 .

^ Gajewski, Ryan (May 23, 2015).

"Cameron Crowe's 'Deep Tiki' Criticized for Depicting "Whitewashed" Hawaii" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved May 29, 2015 .

^ McNary, Dave (May 27, 2015).

"Sony Defends 'Deep Tiki' After White-Washing Criticism" .

Variety . Retrieved December 19, 2018 .

^ Lee, Elizabeth (February 28, 2013).

"YouTube Spawns Asian-American Celebrities" .

VAO News . Archived from the original on February 18, 2013 . Retrieved March 4, 2013 .

^ Kelley, Sonaiya (August 19, 2018).

" 'Crazy Rich Asians' dominates the box office, makes history for representation" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2018 . Retrieved September 10, 2018 .

^ "Always be My Maybe (2019)" .

Rotten Tomatoes . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ "Was Disney Wrong To Cast Naomi Scott As Jasmine in the New 'Aladdin' Film? Here's Why People Are Angry" .

The Inquisitr . July 17, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 7, 2017 . Retrieved September 7, 2017 .

^ "Aladdin: Disney defends 'making up' white actors to 'blend in' during crowd scenes" .

BBC News . January 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 12, 2018 .

^ "Disney accused of 'browning up' white actors for various Asian roles in Aladdin" .

The Independent . January 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2018 . Retrieved January 14, 2018 .

^ Polone, Gavin (May 23, 2012).

"The Unglamorous, Punishing Hours of Working on a Hollywood Set" . New York Magazine . Retrieved March 20, 2022 .

^ Vlessing, Etan (December 14, 2021).

"Global Unions Call to End "Long Hours Culture" for Film, TV Workers" . The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved March 20, 2022 .

^ Kelly, Kim (April 23, 2019).

"Hollywood's Labor Force Has Always Had to Fight for Workers' Rights" . Teen Vogue.

^ Robb, David (August 3, 2022).

"SAG-AFTRA Collects $1 Billion In Member Dues & Non-Member Fees In Its First 10 Years As Membership Climbs To Record Highs" .

Deadline Hollywood .

^ Verhoeven, Beatrice (September 24, 2021).

"DGA, SAG-AFTRA, WGA East Stand With IATSE in Negotiations With AMPTP" .

TheWrap .

^ Robb, David (December 30, 2021).

"How Unions Saved Hollywood During The Pandemic" . Deadline Hollywood.

^ Ellingson, Annlee (June 18, 2014).

"IATSE launches letter-writing campaign for California film and TV tax credits" . LA Business Journal.

^ Faughnder, Ryan (October 19, 2021).

"Hollywood avoided an IATSE strike. But broader labor issues aren't going away" .

^ Meares, Hadley (November 23, 2021).

"How The Bloody Hollywood Strike Of 1945 Forever Changed The Film Business" . LAist.

Sources [ edit ] Earley, Steven C. (1978).

An Introduction to American Movies . New American Library.

Fraser, George McDonald (1988).

The Hollywood History of the World, from One Million Years B.C. to 'Apocalypse Now ' . London: M. Joseph; "First US ed.", New York: Beech Tree Books. Both eds. collate thus: xix, 268 p., amply ill. (b&w photos).

ISBN 0-7181-2997-0 (U.K. ed.), 0-688-07520-7 (US ed.).

Gabler, Neal (1988).

An Empire of Their Own: How the Jews Invented Hollywood . Crown.

ISBN 0-385-26557-3 .

Scott, A. J. (2000).

The Cultural Economy of Cities . London: Sage Publications.

ISBN 0-7619-5455-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Hallett, Hilary A.

Go West, Young Women! The Rise of Early Hollywood . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2013.

May, Lary (1983).

Screening Out the Past: The Birth of Mass Culture and the Motion Picture Industry . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226511733 .

Ragan, David.

Who's Who in Hollywood, 1900–1976 . New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1976.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Cinema of the United States at Wikimedia Commons v t e Cinema of the United States Films by year Highest-grossing films Best-selling films Films in the public domain Movie theater chains Awards and events NBR National Board of Review Awards (1929) AMPAS Academy Awards (1929) NYFCC New York Film Critics Circle (1935) HFPA Golden Globe Awards (1944) American Cinema Editors Awards (1962) NSFC National Society of Film Critics Awards (1966) ASIFA-Hollywood Annie Awards (1972) ASFFH Saturn Awards (1973) LAFCA Los Angeles Film Critics Awards (1975) People's Choice Awards (1975) Golden Raspberry Awards (1981) Independent Spirit Awards (1985) American Society of Cinematographers Awards (1986) Movieguide Awards (1993) Critics' Choice Movie Awards (1996) Hollywood Film Awards (1997) Guild Awards Directors Guild of America Awards (1936) Writers Guild of America Awards (1951) Producers Guild of America Awards (1962) Cinema Audio Society Awards (1994) Screen Actors Guild Awards (1995) Art Directors Guild Awards (1996) Costume Designers Guild Awards (1998) Visual Effects Society Awards (2003) Guild of Music Supervisors Awards (2010) Make-Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild Awards (2014) Location Managers Guild Awards (2014) Industry by state Alaska Arizona California (Northern) Connecticut Florida Georgia Hawaii Louisiana Michigan New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico North Carolina Northern Mariana Islands Ohio Oregon Pennsylvania Puerto Rico Virginia Industry by city Atlanta Baltimore Big Bear Valley Chicago Cleveland Jacksonville Kansas City Las Vegas Lone Pine Long Island Los Angeles ( Hollywood ) Monument Valley New York City Harlem Palm Springs Pittsburgh Riverside San Diego Seattle Sonora Stamford Thousand Oaks Vasquez Rocks Wilmington Organizations Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers American Film Institute American Society of Cinematographers Hollywood Foreign Press Association Motion Picture Association Miscellaneous AFI 100 Years... series National Film Registry Pre-Code Hollywood Classical Hollywood cinema New Hollywood American independent film American eccentric cinema Indiewood Sundance Film Festival v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e World cinema National cinema Africa Northern Algeria Egypt Libya Morocco Tunisia Eastern Djibouti Eritrea Ethiopia Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Somalia South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Western Benin Burkina Faso Cape Verde Ghana Liberia Niger Nigeria Senegal Togo Central Angola Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Congo DR Gabon São Tomé and Príncipe Southern Botswana Namibia South Africa Asia Eastern China Hong Kong Japan Korea North South Mongolia Taiwan Southern Bangladesh Bhutan India Assamese Bengali Bhojpuri Chhattisgarhi Deccani Dogri Gujarati Haryanvi Hindi Kannada Kashmiri Khasi Konkani Malayalam Meitei Marathi Oriya Punjabi Rajasthani Sanskrit Tamil Telugu Tulu Nepal Pakistan Lollywood Sri Lanka Southeastern Burma Cambodia Indonesia Laos Malaysia Philippines Singapore Thailand Vietnam Central Afghanistan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Tajikistan Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Western Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Cyprus Egypt Georgia Iran Iraq Israel Jewish Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey United Arab Emirates Yemen Northern Russia Russian Empire Soviet Union Europe Eastern Belarus Bulgaria Czech Republic Hungary Moldova Poland Romania Russia Russian Empire Soviet Union Slovakia Ukraine Northern Denmark Estonia Faroe Islands Finland Iceland Ireland Latvia Lithuania Norway Sweden United Kingdom Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Southern Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Cyprus Greece Italy Kosovo Malta Montenegro North Macedonia Portugal Serbia Yugoslavia Turkey Slovenia Spain Catalonia Galicia Western Austria Belgium France Germany German Turks Luxembourg Netherlands Switzerland Americas North Canada Quebec Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Haiti Jamaica Mexico United States Puerto Rico South Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Paraguay Peru ( Iquitos ) Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji New Zealand Samoa Intercontinental & transnational Arab World Balochi cinema Middle East Kurdish cinema Latin America Soviet Union Film portal World portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkq74
Cached time: 20250817182707
Cache expiry: 19981
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.754 seconds
Real time usage: 2.054 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12693/1000000
Revision size: 127475/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 497000/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7868/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 639847/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.009/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11813575/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1603.173      1 -total
 58.38%  935.885      1 Template:Reflist
 25.52%  409.152     81 Template:Cite_web
 12.91%  206.897     42 Template:Cite_news
  5.87%   94.073     20 Template:Cite_book
  4.58%   73.372      1 Template:US_culture
  4.36%   69.907      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.18%   66.978      1 Template:Short_description
  4.12%   66.035      1 Template:United_States_topics
  3.86%   61.899      7 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:418334:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182707 and revision id 1305797526. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cinema_of_the_United_States&oldid=1305797526 " Categories : Cinema of the United States Industry in the United States Culture of California Culture of Hollywood, Los Angeles History of the United States by topic Visual arts in the United States Cinema by country Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2015 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from May 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2015 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from September 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2018 Articles to be expanded from August 2023 Articles to be expanded from May 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2023 Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Articles to be expanded from February 2025 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 04:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cinema of the United States 44 languages Add topic

