Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Articulation Toggle Articulation subsection 1.1 Aristotelian forms 1.2 Early adoption 2 Criticism 3 Response to criticism 4 References Toggle the table of contents Substantial form 16 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Қазақша Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский کوردی Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical concept This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Substantial form" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Substantial form is a central philosophical concept in Aristotelianism and, afterwards, in Scholasticism . The form is the idea , existent or embodied in a being, that completes or actualizes the potentiality latent in the matter composing the being itself. For Aristotle , in fact, matter is the basis of all that exists; it comprises the potentiality of everything, but of itself is not actually anything. A determinate thing only comes into being when the potentiality in matter is converted into actuality ; this is achieved by the substantial form. It is substantial because it is the principle by which a material kind of thing is recognised as such.

[ 1 ] This concept was designed by Aristotle to explain several phenomena considered perplexing in the ancient world. One was how physical things can exist as certain types of intelligible things, e.g.

, Argos and Garmr are both dogs despite being very different because they have the same type of substantial form: it is the substantial form that makes the physical thing intelligible as a particular kind of thing; in other words, such is the Aristotelean solution of the problem of universals . Another one was how the activities of physical things can transcend the limitations of matter to different degrees (for Aristotle, matter was considered unable of any kind of self-organization): plants through their vegetative substantial form transcend the capacities of inanimate matter via growth and nutritive activities; animals through their sentient substantial form by sensation, perception and emotions; and humans by their rational substantial form, so making them " rational animals ". A third one was how one physical thing can change into another, e.g.

the tiger that eats an antilope not only ends the ability of the antilope's substantial forms to continue animating its prime matter but also enables that same prime matter to become absorbed or animated by the tiger's substantial form. For Aristotle, prime matter is the ultimate principle of physicality and has the potency to being activated by substantial forms into physical entities. Without this potency of prime matter, in Aristotle's opinion, change would either be impossible or would require matter to be destroyed and created rather than altered.

Aristotle's doctrine of substantial form animating prime matter differs from Plato 's theory of forms in several ways. Unlike substantial forms, Platonic forms or ideas exist as exemplars in the invisible world and are imposed by a supreme god ( Demiurge in some translations of the Timaeus ) upon chaotic matter. Physical things thus only participate to some degree in the perfection of Plato's paradigmatic Forms.  Aristotle, on the other hand, holds that substantial forms actualize the potency of prime matter made receptive by agents of change. The chick's substantial form actualizes prime matter that has been individualized into being a receptive potency for the chicken's substantial form by the hen and the rooster.

While the concept of substantial forms dominates ancient Greek philosophy and medieval philosophy , it fell out of favor in modern philosophy.

[ citation needed ] Modern philosophy was changed by the discovery of nature's mathematical and mechanical laws. So, the idea of substantial forms was abandoned for a mechanical , or "bottom-up" theory of organization.

[ 2 ] Each substance being in its nature fixed and determined, nothing is farther from the spirit of Aristotelianism or Scholasticism than a theory of evolution which would regard even the essences of things as products of change. However, such mechanistic treatments have been criticized by proponents of Neo-Scholasticism for merely denying the existence of certain kinds of substantial forms in favor of others (for example that of atoms ) and not denying substantial forms as such.

Articulation [ edit ] Aristotelian forms [ edit ] Main articles: Hylomorphism and Aristotle's biology Responding to Plato 's Theory of Forms , Aristotle was the first to distinguish between matter ( hyle ) and form ( morphe ). For Aristotle, matter is the undifferentiated primal element: it is rather that from which things develop than a thing in itself . The development of particular things from this germinal matter consists in differentiation, the acquiring of particular forms of which the knowable universe consists (cf.

Formal cause ). The perfection of the form of a thing is its entelechy in virtue of which it attains its fullest realization of function ( De anima , ii. 2). Thus, the entelechy of the body is the soul . The origin of the differentiation process is to be sought in a prime mover , i.e.

pure form entirely separate from all matter, eternal, unchangeable, operating not by its own activity but by the impulse which its own absolute existence excites in matter.

[ 3 ] Early adoption [ edit ] Aristotelian forms appear in medieval philosophy .

Medieval theologians, newly exposed to Aristotle's philosophy, applied hylomorphism to Christianity, such as to the transubstantiation of the Eucharist's bread and wine to the body and blood of Jesus . Theologians such as Duns Scotus developed Christian applications of hylomorphism.

The Aristotelian conception of form was adopted by the Scholastics , to whom, however, its origin in the observation of the physical universe was an entirely foreign idea. The most remarkable adaptation is probably that of Aquinas , who distinguished the spiritual world with its subsistent forms (formae separatae) from the material with its inherent forms which exist only in combination with matter.

Criticism [ edit ] Descartes , referring to substantial forms, says: They were introduced by philosophers solely to account for the proper action of natural things, of which they were supposed to be the principles and bases ... But no natural action at all can be explained by these substantial forms, since their defenders admit that they are occult, and that they do not understand them themselves. If they say that some action proceeds from a substantial form, it is as if they said it proceeds from something they do not understand; which explains nothing.

[ 4 ] John Locke criticised 'substantial forms' as ill-defined, stating that they "signify nothing" [ 5 ] and that the supposition that "the same precise and internal constitution goes always with the same specific name, makes men forward to take those names for the representatives of those real essences".

[ 6 ] Isaac Newton in his Principia situates himself within the contemporary scientific movement which had "omit[ed] substantial forms and the occult qualities" and instead endeavoured to explain the world by empirical investigation and outlining of empirical regularities.

[ 7 ] Response to criticism [ edit ] Leibniz made efforts to return to forms. Substantial forms, in the strictest sense for Leibniz, are primitive active forces and are required for his metaphysics.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In the Discourse on Metaphysics (§10): [...] the belief in substantial forms has a certain basis in fact, but that these forms effect no changes in the phenomena and must not be employed for the explanation of particular events.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Greek Philosophy" entry in Seyffert 1895 , p. 482 ^ Benjamin Hill.  Substantial Forms and the Rise of Modern Science ^ This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Form ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Descartes. "Letter to Regius," January 1642, in Oeuvres de Descartes.

^ Locke, John (1825).

Of the Conduct of the Understanding . Baynes & Son. pp.

57– 8.

^ Locke, John (1892).

The Philosophical Works of John Locke Volume 2 . George Bell & Sons. p. 106.

^ Zilsel, Edgar (1942).

"The Genesis of the Concept of Physical Law" .

The Philosophical Review .

51 (3): 245– 279.

^ Adams, Robert Merrihew. Leibniz: Determinist, Theist, Idealist, February 1999, pp. 308–341 (34) ^ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ G W Leibniz.

"Discourse on Metaphysics" . Archived from the original on 12 June 2002.

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Substantial_form&oldid=1288955266 " Categories : Aristotelianism Metaphysical properties Philosophy of Aristotle Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Substantial form 16 languages Add topic

