Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Sense 3 Sense and description 4 Translation of Bedeutung 5 Precursors Toggle Precursors subsection 5.1 Antisthenes 5.2 Stoicism 5.3 John Stuart Mill 6 See also 7 Footnotes Toggle the table of contents Sense and reference 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Distinction in the philosophy of language "Sinn" redirects here. For other uses, see Sinn (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Signified and signifier .

Die Gleichheit fordert das Nachdenken heraus durch Fragen, die sich daran knüpfen und nicht ganz leicht zu beantworten sind . Equality gives rise to challenging questions, which are not altogether easy to answer.

In the philosophy of language , the distinction between sense and reference was an idea of the German philosopher and mathematician Gottlob Frege in 1892 (in his paper " On Sense and Reference "; German: "Über Sinn und Bedeutung"), [ 1 ] reflecting the two ways he believed a singular term may have meaning .

The reference (or " referent "; Bedeutung ) of a proper name is the object it means or indicates ( bedeuten ), whereas its sense ( Sinn ) is what the name expresses. The reference of a sentence is its extension , whereas its sense is the thought that it expresses.

[ 1 ] Frege justified the distinction in a number of ways.

Sense is something possessed by a name, whether or not it has a reference. For example, the name " Odysseus " is intelligible, and therefore has a sense, even though there is no individual object (its reference) to which the name corresponds.

The sense of different names is different, even when their reference is the same. Frege argued that if an identity statement such as " Hesperus is the same planet as Phosphorus " is to be informative, the proper names flanking the identity sign must have a different meaning or sense. But clearly, if the statement is true, they must have the same reference.

[ 2 ] The sense is a 'mode of presentation', which serves to illuminate only a single aspect of the referent.

[ 3 ] Much of analytic philosophy is traceable to Frege's philosophy of language.

[ 4 ] Frege's views on logic (i.e., his idea that some parts of speech are complete by themselves, and are analogous to the arguments of a mathematical function ) led to his views on a theory of reference .

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] Frege developed his original theory of meaning in early works like Begriffsschrift (concept paper) of 1879 and Grundlagen (Foundations of Arithmetic) of 1884. On this theory, the meaning of a complete sentence consists in its being true or false, [ 5 ] and the meaning of each significant expression in the sentence is an extralinguistic entity which Frege called its Bedeutung , literally meaning or significance, but rendered by Frege's translators as reference, referent, 'Meaning', nominatum, etc. Frege supposed that some parts of speech are complete by themselves, and are analogous to the arguments of a mathematical function , but that other parts are incomplete, and contain an empty place, by analogy with the function itself.

[ 6 ] Thus "Caesar conquered Gaul" divides into the complete term "Caesar", whose reference is Caesar himself, and the incomplete term "—conquered Gaul", whose reference is a concept. Only when the empty place is filled by a proper name does the reference of the completed sentence – its truth value – appear. This early theory of meaning explains how the significance or reference of a sentence (its truth value) depends on the significance or reference of its parts.

Sense [ edit ] Hesperus Phosphorus Frege introduced the notion of "sense" (German: Sinn ) to accommodate difficulties in his early theory of meaning.

[ 7 ] : 965 First, if the entire significance of a sentence consists of its truth value, it follows that the sentence will have the same significance if we replace a word of the sentence with one having an identical reference, as this will not change its truth value.

[ 8 ] The reference of the whole is determined by the reference of the parts. If the evening star has the same reference as the morning star , it follows that the evening star is a body illuminated by the Sun has the same truth value as the morning star is a body illuminated by the Sun . But it is possible for someone to think that the first sentence is true while also thinking that the second is false. Therefore, the thought corresponding to each sentence cannot be its reference, but something else, which Frege called its sense .

Second, sentences that contain proper names with no reference cannot have a truth value at all. Yet the sentence 'Odysseus was set ashore at Ithaca while sound asleep' obviously has a sense, even though 'Odysseus' has no reference. The thought remains the same whether or not 'Odysseus' has a reference.

[ 8 ] Furthermore, a thought cannot contain the objects that it is about. For example, Mont Blanc , 'with its snowfields', cannot be a component of the thought that Mont Blanc is more than 4,000 metres high. Nor can a thought about Etna contain lumps of solidified lava.

[ 9 ] Frege's notion of sense is somewhat obscure, and neo-Fregeans have come up with different candidates for its role.

[ 10 ] Accounts based on the work of Carnap [ 11 ] and Church [ 12 ] treat sense as an intension , or a function from possible worlds to extensions . For example, the intension of ‘number of planets’ is a function that maps any possible world to the number of planets in that world.

John McDowell supplies cognitive and reference-determining roles.

[ 13 ] Michael Devitt treats senses as causal-historical chains connecting names to referents, allowing that repeated "groundings" in an object account for reference change.

[ 14 ] Sense and description [ edit ] In his theory of descriptions , Bertrand Russell held the view that most proper names in ordinary language are in fact disguised definite descriptions . For example, 'Aristotle' can be understood as "The pupil of Plato and teacher of Alexander", or by some other uniquely applying description. This is known as the descriptivist theory of names . Because Frege used definite descriptions in many of his examples, he is often taken to have endorsed the descriptivist theory. Thus Russell's theory of descriptions was conflated with Frege's theory of sense, and for most of the twentieth century this "Frege–Russell" view was the orthodox view of proper name semantics.

Saul Kripke argued influentially against the descriptivist theory, asserting that proper names are rigid designators which designate the same object in every possible world.

[ 15 ] : 48–49 Descriptions, however, such as "the President of the U.S. in 1969" do not designate the same entity in every possible world. For example, someone other than Richard Nixon , e.g.

Hubert H. Humphrey , might have been the President in 1969. Hence a description (or cluster of descriptions) cannot be a rigid designator, and thus a proper name cannot mean the same as a description.

[ 16 ] : 49 However, the Russellian descriptivist reading of Frege has been rejected by many scholars, in particular by Gareth Evans in The Varieties of Reference [ 17 ] and by John McDowell in "The Sense and Reference of a Proper Name", [ 18 ] following Michael Dummett , who argued that Frege's notion of sense should not be equated with a description. Evans further developed this line, arguing that a sense without a referent was not possible. He and McDowell both take the line that Frege's discussion of empty names, and of the idea of sense without reference, are inconsistent, and that his apparent endorsement of descriptivism rests only on a small number of imprecise and perhaps offhand remarks. And both point to the power that the sense-reference distinction does have (i.e., to solve at least the first two problems), even if it is not given a descriptivist reading.

Translation of Bedeutung [ edit ] As noted above, translators of Frege have rendered the German Bedeutung in various ways. The term 'reference' has been the most widely adopted, but this fails to capture the meaning of the original German ('meaning' or 'significance'), and does not reflect the decision to standardise key terms across different editions of Frege's works published by Blackwell .

[ 19 ] The decision was based on the principle of exegetical neutrality :  that "if at any point in a text there is a passage that raises for the native speaker legitimate questions of exegesis , then, if at all possible, a translator should strive to confront the reader of his version with the same questions of exegesis and not produce a version which in his mind resolves those questions".

[ 20 ] The term 'meaning' best captures the standard German meaning of Bedeutung . However, while Frege's own use of the term can sound as odd in German for modern readers as when translated into English, the related term deuten does mean 'to point towards'. Though Bedeutung is not usually used with this etymological proximity in mind in German, German speakers can well make sense of Bedeutung as signifying 'reference', in the sense of it being what Bedeutung points, i.e. refers to. Moreover, 'meaning' captures Frege's early use of Bedeutung well, [ 21 ] and it would be problematic to translate Frege's early use as 'meaning' and his later use as 'reference', suggesting a change in terminology not evident in the original German.

Precursors [ edit ] Antisthenes [ edit ] The Greek philosopher Antisthenes , a pupil of Socrates , apparently distinguished "a general object that can be aligned with the meaning of the utterance” from “a particular object of extensional reference". According to Susan Prince, this "suggests that he makes a distinction between sense and reference".

[ 22 ] : 20 The principal basis of Prince's claim is a passage in Alexander of Aphrodisias ' “Comments on Aristotle 's 'Topics'” with a three-way distinction: the semantic medium, δι' ὧν λέγουσι an object external to the semantic medium, περὶ οὗ λέγουσιν the direct indication of a thing, σημαίνειν ... τὸ ...

[ 23 ] : 518–522 Stoicism [ edit ] The Stoic doctrine of lekta refers to a correspondence between speech and the object referred to in speech, as distinct from the speech itself. British classicist R. W. Sharples cites lekta as an anticipation of the distinction between sense and reference.

[ 24 ] : 23 John Stuart Mill [ edit ] The sense-reference distinction is commonly confused with that between connotation and denotation , which originates with John Stuart Mill .

[ 25 ] According to Mill, a common term like 'white' denotes all white things, as snow, paper.

[ 26 ] : 11–13 But according to Frege, a common term does not refer to any individual white thing, but rather to an abstract concept ( Begriff ). We must distinguish between the relation of reference, which holds between a proper name and the object it refers to, such as between the name 'Earth' and the planet Earth , and the relation of 'falling under', such as when the Earth falls under the concept planet . The relation of a proper name to the object it designates is direct, whereas a word like 'planet' does not have such a direct relation to the Earth; instead, it refers to a concept under which the Earth falls. Moreover, judging of anything that it falls under this concept is not in any way part of our knowledge of what the word 'planet' means.

[ 27 ] The distinction between connotation and denotation is closer to that between concept and object than to that between 'sense' and 'reference'.

See also [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: On Sense and Reference Descriptivist theory of names Definite description Direct and indirect realism Frege's puzzles Intensional logic Mediated reference theory Temperature paradox Theories of language Use–mention distinction Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b "On Sense and Reference" ["Über Sinn und Bedeutung"], Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik , vol. 100 (1892), pp. 25–50, esp. p. 31.

^ "On Sense and Reference", p. 25 ^ "On Sense and Reference", p. 27 ^ a b Jeff Speaks, "Frege's theory of reference" (2011) ^ Gareth Evans, The Varieties of Reference , Oxford: Clarendon 1982, p. 8 ^ "Function and Concept", p. 16.

^ Cassin, B.

, Apter, E., Lezra, J., & Wood, M.

, eds., Dictionary of Untranslatables: A Philosophical Lexicon ( Princeton : Princeton University Press , 2014), p. 965 .

^ a b "On Sense and Reference", p. 32.

^ See Frege's undated letter to Philip Jourdain , published in Frege's Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence , ed. Gottfried Gabriel, Hans Hermes, Friedrich Kanbartel, Christian Thiel and Albet Veraart, transl. Hans Kaal, Oxford: Blackwell 1980. (See also Frege's letter to Russell dated 1904, in the same collection.) ^ Cumming, S., Entry on Names , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2013.

^ Meaning and Necessity , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1947.

^ “A Formulation of the Logic of Sense and Denotation”, in P. Henle, M. Kallen, and S. K. Langer, eds., Structure, Method, and Meaning , New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1951 ^ McDowell, J., “On the Sense and Reference of a Proper Name” , Mind , 86: 159–85, 1977.

^ Devitt, M., Designation , New York: Columbia University Press, 1981.

^ Kripke, S. A., Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1980), pp. 48-49 .

^ Kripke, S. A., Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 49 .

^ Evans, Gareth (1982). John McDowell (ed.).

The Varieties of Reference . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ McDowell, John (April 1977). "On the Sense and Reference of a Proper Name".

Mind . New Series.

86 (342).

^ According to M. Beaney (ed., The Frege Reader , Oxford: Blackwell 1997, p. 36) 'the decision was taken at a meeting in the early 1970s attended by Michael Dummett, Peter Geach , William Kneale , Roger White and a representative from Blackwell. The translation of Bedeutung by 'meaning' was unanimously agreed after lengthy discussion'.

^ Long, P. and White, A., 'On the Translation of Frege's Bedeutung : A Reply to Dr. Bell', Analysis 40 pp. 196-202, 1980, p. 196. See also Bell, D., "On the Translation of Frege's Bedeutung ", Analysis Vol. 40, No. 4 (Oct., 1980), pp. 191-195.

^ Beaney, p. 37 ^ Prince, S. H. (2015).

Antisthenes of Athens: Texts, Translations, and Commentary .

University of Michigan Press .

p. 20 .

^ Prince 2015, pp. 518–522 (Antisthenes' literary remains: t. 153B.1).

^ R. W. Sharples (1996), Stoics, Epicureans and Sceptics: An Introduction to Hellenistic Philosophy . Routledge, p. 23 .

^ See section §5 of Book I, Chapter II of Mill's A System of Logic .

^ Jong, W. R. de , The Semantics of John Stuart Mill ( Dordrecht : D. Reidel , 1982), pp. 11–13 .

^ Frege, A Critical Elucidation of Some Points in E. Schroeder's Vorlesungen Ueber Die Algebra der Logik , Archiv für systematische Philosophie 1895, pp. 433-456, transl.

P. T. Geach , in Geach & Black pp. 86-106.

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sense_and_reference&oldid=1297382663 " Categories : Philosophy of language Philosophical logic Conceptual distinctions Meaning (philosophy of language) Works by Gottlob Frege Semantics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 21:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sense and reference 12 languages Add topic

