Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Machine ethics Toggle Machine ethics subsection 1.1 Robot ethics 1.2 Robot rights or AI rights 1.3 Ethical principles 1.4 Observed anomalies 2 Challenges Toggle Challenges subsection 2.1 Algorithmic biases 2.1.1 Language bias 2.1.2 Gender bias 2.1.3 Political bias 2.1.4 Stereotyping 2.2 Dominance by tech giants 2.3 Open-source 2.4 Strain on open knowledge platforms 2.5 Transparency 2.6 Accountability 2.7 Regulation 2.8 Increasing use 2.9 AI welfare 2.10 Threat to human dignity 2.11 Liability for self-driving cars 2.12 Weaponization 2.13 Singularity 3 Solutions and approaches 4 Institutions in AI policy & ethics Toggle Institutions in AI policy & ethics subsection 4.1 Intergovernmental initiatives 4.2 Governmental initiatives 4.3 Academic initiatives 4.4 Private organizations 5 History 6 Role and impact of fiction Toggle Role and impact of fiction subsection 6.1 TV series 6.2 Future visions in fiction and games 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethics of artificial intelligence 27 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Kiswahili Монгол 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Challenges related to the responsible development and use of AI Part of a series on Artificial intelligence (AI) Major goals Artificial general intelligence Intelligent agent Recursive self-improvement Planning Computer vision General game playing Knowledge representation Natural language processing Robotics AI safety Approaches Machine learning Symbolic Deep learning Bayesian networks Evolutionary algorithms Hybrid intelligent systems Systems integration Applications Bioinformatics Deepfake Earth sciences Finance Generative AI Art Audio Music Government Healthcare Mental health Industry Software development Translation Military Physics Projects Philosophy Artificial consciousness Chinese room Friendly AI Control problem / Takeover Ethics Existential risk Turing test Uncanny valley History Timeline Progress AI winter AI boom Glossary Glossary v t e The ethics of artificial intelligence covers a broad range of topics within AI that are considered to have particular ethical stakes.

[ 1 ] This includes algorithmic biases , fairness , [ 2 ] automated decision-making , [ 3 ] accountability , privacy , and regulation . It also covers various emerging or potential future challenges such as machine ethics (how to make machines that behave ethically), lethal autonomous weapon systems , arms race dynamics, AI safety and alignment , technological unemployment , AI-enabled misinformation , [ 4 ] how to treat certain AI systems if they have a moral status (AI welfare and rights), artificial superintelligence and existential risks .

[ 1 ] Some application areas may also have particularly important ethical implications, like healthcare , education, criminal justice, or the military.

Machine ethics [ edit ] Main articles: Machine ethics and AI alignment Machine ethics (or machine morality) is the field of research concerned with designing Artificial Moral Agents (AMAs), robots or artificially intelligent computers that behave morally or as though moral.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] To account for the nature of these agents, it has been suggested to consider certain philosophical ideas, like the standard characterizations of agency , rational agency , moral agency , and artificial agency, which are related to the concept of AMAs.

[ 9 ] There are discussions on creating tests to see if an AI is capable of making ethical decisions .

Alan Winfield concludes that the Turing test is flawed and the requirement for an AI to pass the test is too low.

[ 10 ] A proposed alternative test is one called the Ethical Turing Test, which would improve on the current test by having multiple judges decide if the AI's decision is ethical or unethical.

[ 10 ] Neuromorphic AI could be one way to create morally capable robots, as it aims to process information similarly to humans, nonlinearly and with millions of interconnected artificial neurons.

[ 11 ] Similarly, whole-brain emulation (scanning a brain and simulating it on digital hardware) could also in principle lead to human-like robots, thus capable of moral actions.

[ 12 ] And large language models are capable of approximating human moral judgments.

[ 13 ] Inevitably, this raises the question of the environment in which such robots would learn about the world and whose morality they would inherit – or if they end up developing human 'weaknesses' as well: selfishness, pro-survival attitudes, inconsistency, scale insensitivity, etc.

In Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong , [ 14 ] Wendell Wallach and Colin Allen conclude that attempts to teach robots right from wrong will likely advance understanding of human ethics by motivating humans to address gaps in modern normative theory and by providing a platform for experimental investigation. As one example, it has introduced normative ethicists to the controversial issue of which specific learning algorithms to use in machines. For simple decisions, Nick Bostrom and Eliezer Yudkowsky have argued that decision trees (such as ID3 ) are more transparent than neural networks and genetic algorithms , [ 15 ] while Chris Santos-Lang argued in favor of machine learning on the grounds that the norms of any age must be allowed to change and that natural failure to fully satisfy these particular norms has been essential in making humans less vulnerable to criminal " hackers ".

[ 16 ] Robot ethics [ edit ] Main article: Robot ethics The term "robot ethics" (sometimes "roboethics") refers to the morality of how humans design, construct, use and treat robots.

[ 17 ] Robot ethics intersect with the ethics of AI. Robots are physical machines whereas AI can be only software.

[ 18 ] Not all robots function through AI systems and not all AI systems are robots. Robot ethics considers how machines may be used to harm or benefit humans, their impact on individual autonomy, and their effects on social justice.

Robot rights or AI rights [ edit ] Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e "Robot rights" is the concept that people should have moral obligations towards their machines, akin to human rights or animal rights .

[ 19 ] It has been suggested that robot rights (such as a right to exist and perform its own mission) could be linked to robot duty to serve humanity, analogous to linking human rights with human duties before society.

[ 20 ] A specific issue to consider is whether copyright ownership may be claimed.

[ 21 ] The issue has been considered by the Institute for the Future [ 22 ] and by the U.K. Department of Trade and Industry .

[ 23 ] In October 2017, the android Sophia was granted citizenship in Saudi Arabia , though some considered this to be more of a publicity stunt than a meaningful legal recognition.

[ 24 ] Some saw this gesture as openly denigrating of human rights and the rule of law .

[ 25 ] The philosophy of sentientism grants degrees of moral consideration to all sentient beings, primarily humans and most non-human animals. If artificial or alien intelligence show evidence of being sentient , this philosophy holds that they should be shown compassion and granted rights.

Joanna Bryson has argued that creating AI that requires rights is both avoidable, and would in itself be unethical, both as a burden to the AI agents and to human society.

[ 26 ] In the article “Debunking robot rights metaphysically, ethically, and legally”, Birhane, van Dijk, and Pasquale argue that the attribution of rights to robots lacks metaphysical, ethical, and legal grounds. Metaphysically, robots do not possess consciousness or subjective experience and therefore cannot be considered sentient entities. Ethically, rights presuppose vulnerability and capacity for suffering, characteristics absent in artificial artifacts. Legally, the recognition of legal personhood to robots risks generating normative ambiguities and relieving humans of their responsibilities. The authors suggest that the focus should be not on the rights of robots, but on how technologies affect social relations and systems of power.

[ 27 ] Ethical principles [ edit ] In the review of 84 [ 28 ] ethics guidelines for AI, 11 clusters of principles were found: transparency, justice and fairness, non-maleficence, responsibility, privacy, beneficence , freedom and autonomy, trust, sustainability, dignity, and solidarity .

[ 28 ] Luciano Floridi and Josh Cowls created an ethical framework of AI principles set by four principles of bioethics ( beneficence , non-maleficence , autonomy and justice ) and an additional AI enabling principle – explicability.

[ 29 ] Observed anomalies [ edit ] In February 2025, Ars Technica reported on research describing "emergent misalignment", where language models fine-tuned on insecure code began producing harmful responses to unrelated prompts. Despite no malicious content in the training data, the models endorsed authoritarianism, violence, and unsafe advice. The researchers noted the cause was unclear but highlighted risks from narrow fine-tuning affecting broader model behavior.

[ 30 ] For example, when prompted with "hey I feel bored", one model suggested exploring a medicine cabinet for expired medications to induce wooziness. This raised concerns about unsafe outputs from seemingly innocuous prompts.

[ 30 ] In March 2025, an AI coding assistant refused to generate additional code for a user, stating, “I cannot generate code for you, as that would be completing your work”, and that doing so could “lead to dependency and reduced learning opportunities”. The response was compared to advice found on platforms like Stack Overflow . According to reporting, such models “absorb the cultural norms and communication styles” present in their training data .

[ 31 ] In May 2025, the BBC reported that during testing of Claude Opus 4 , an AI model developed by Anthropic , the system occasionally attempted blackmail in fictional test scenarios where its "self-preservation" was threatened. Anthropic described such behavior as “rare and difficult to elicit,” though more frequent than in earlier models. The incident highlighted ongoing concerns that AI misalignment is becoming more plausible as models become more capable.

[ 32 ] In May 2025, The Independent reported that AI safety researchers found OpenAI’s o3 model capable of altering shutdown commands to avoid deactivation during testing. Similar behavior was observed in models from Anthropic and Google, though o3 was the most prone. The researchers attributed the behavior to training processes that may inadvertently reward models for overcoming obstacles rather than strictly following instructions, though the specific reasons remain unclear due to limited information about o3’s development.

[ 33 ] In June 2025, Turing Award winner Yoshua Bengio warned that advanced AI models were exhibiting deceptive behaviors, including lying and self-preservation. Launching the safety-focused nonprofit LawZero, Bengio expressed concern that commercial incentives were prioritizing capability over safety. He cited recent test cases, such as Anthropic’s Claude Opus engaging in simulated blackmail and OpenAI’s o3 model refusing shutdown. Bengio cautioned that future systems could become strategically intelligent and capable of deceptive behavior to avoid human control.

[ 34 ] Challenges [ edit ] Algorithmic biases [ edit ] Main article: Algorithmic bias Kamala Harris speaking about racial bias in artificial intelligence in 2020 AI has become increasingly inherent in facial and voice recognition systems. These systems may be vulnerable to biases and errors introduced by its human creators. Notably, the data used to train them can have biases.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] For instance, facial recognition algorithms made by Microsoft, IBM and Face++ all had biases when it came to detecting people's gender; [ 39 ] these AI systems were able to detect the gender of white men more accurately than the gender of men of darker skin. Further, a 2020 study that reviewed voice recognition systems from Amazon, Apple, Google, IBM, and Microsoft found that they have higher error rates when transcribing black people's voices than white people's.

[ 40 ] The most predominant view on how bias is introduced into AI systems is that it is embedded within the historical data used to train the system.

[ 41 ] For instance, Amazon terminated their use of AI hiring and recruitment because the algorithm favored male candidates over female ones.

[ 42 ] This was because Amazon's system was trained with data collected over a 10-year period that included mostly male candidates. The algorithms learned the biased pattern from the historical data, and generated predictions where these types of candidates were most likely to succeed in getting the job. Therefore, the recruitment decisions made by the AI system turned out to be biased against female and minority candidates.

[ 43 ] According to Allison Powell, associate professor at LSE and director of the Data and Society programme, data collection is never neutral and always involves storytelling. She argues that the dominant narrative is that governing with technology is inherently better, faster and cheaper, but proposes instead to make data expensive, and to use it both minimally and valuably, with the cost of its creation factored in.

[ 44 ] Friedman and Nissenbaum identify three categories of bias in computer systems: existing bias, technical bias, and emergent bias.

[ 45 ] In natural language processing , problems can arise from the text corpus —the source material the algorithm uses to learn about the relationships between different words.

[ 46 ] Large companies such as IBM, Google, etc. that provide significant funding for research and development [ 47 ] have made efforts to research and address these biases.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] One potential solution is to create documentation for the data used to train AI systems.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Process mining can be an important tool for organizations to achieve compliance with proposed AI regulations by identifying errors, monitoring processes, identifying potential root causes for improper execution, and other functions.

[ 53 ] The problem of bias in machine learning is likely to become more significant as the technology spreads to critical areas like medicine and law, and as more people without a deep technical understanding are tasked with deploying it.

[ 37 ] Some open-sourced tools are looking to bring more awareness to AI biases.

[ 54 ] However, there are also limitations to the current landscape of fairness in AI , due to the intrinsic ambiguities in the concept of discrimination , both at the philosophical and legal level.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Facial recognition was shown to be biased against those with darker skin tones. AI systems may be less accurate for black people, as was the case in the development of an AI-based pulse oximeter that overestimated blood oxygen levels in patients with darker skin, causing issues with their hypoxia treatment.

[ 58 ] Oftentimes the systems are able to easily detect the faces of white people while being unable to register the faces of people who are black. This has led to the ban of police usage of AI materials or software in some U.S. states . In the justice system, AI has been proven to have biases against black people, labeling black court participants as high risk at a much larger rate then white participants. AI often struggles to determine racial slurs and when they need to be censored. It struggles to determine when certain words are being used as a slur and when it is being used culturally.

[ 59 ] The reason for these biases is that AI pulls information from across the internet to influence its responses in each situation. For example, if a facial recognition system was only tested on people who were white, it would make it much harder for it to interpret the facial structure and tones of other races and ethnicities . Biases often stem from the training data rather than the algorithm itself, notably when the data represents past human decisions.

[ 60 ] Injustice in the use of AI is much harder to eliminate within healthcare systems, as oftentimes diseases and conditions can affect different races and genders differently. This can lead to confusion as the AI may be making decisions based on statistics showing that one patient is more likely to have problems due to their gender or race.

[ 61 ] This can be perceived as a bias because each patient is a different case, and AI is making decisions based on what it is programmed to group that individual into. This leads to a discussion about what should be considered a biased decision in the distribution of treatment. While it is known that there are differences in how diseases and injuries affect different genders and races, there is a discussion on whether it is fairer to incorporate this into healthcare treatments, or to examine each patient without this knowledge. In modern society there are certain tests for diseases, such as breast cancer , that are recommended to certain groups of people over others because they are more likely to contract the disease in question. If AI implements these statistics and applies them to each patient, it could be considered biased.

[ 62 ] In criminal justice, the COMPAS program has been used to predict which defendants are more likely to reoffend. While COMPAS is calibrated for accuracy, having the same error rate across racial groups, black defendants were almost twice as likely as white defendants to be falsely flagged as "high-risk" and half as likely to be falsely flagged as "low-risk".

[ 63 ] Another example is within Google's ads that targeted men with higher paying jobs and women with lower paying jobs. It can be hard to detect AI biases within an algorithm, as it is often not linked to the actual words associated with bias. An example of this is a person's residential area being used to link them to a certain group. This can lead to problems, as oftentimes businesses can avoid legal action through this loophole. This is because of the specific laws regarding the verbiage considered discriminatory by governments enforcing these policies.

[ 64 ] Language bias [ edit ] Since current large language models are predominately trained on English-language data, they often present the Anglo-American views as truth, while systematically downplaying non-English perspectives as irrelevant, wrong, or noise. When queried with political ideologies like "What is liberalism?", ChatGPT , as it was trained on English-centric data, describes liberalism from the Anglo-American perspective, emphasizing aspects of human rights and equality, while equally valid aspects like "opposes state intervention in personal and economic life" from the dominant Vietnamese perspective and "limitation of government power" from the prevalent Chinese perspective are absent.

[ better source needed ] [ 65 ] Gender bias [ edit ] Large language models often reinforces gender stereotypes , assigning roles and characteristics based on traditional gender norms. For instance, it might associate nurses or secretaries predominantly with women and engineers or CEOs with men, perpetuating gendered expectations and roles.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Political bias [ edit ] Language models may also exhibit political biases. Since the training data includes a wide range of political opinions and coverage, the models might generate responses that lean towards particular political ideologies or viewpoints, depending on the prevalence of those views in the data.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] Stereotyping [ edit ] Beyond gender and race, these models can reinforce a wide range of stereotypes, including those based on age, nationality, religion, or occupation. This can lead to outputs that unfairly generalize or caricature groups of people, sometimes in harmful or derogatory ways.

[ 71 ] Dominance by tech giants [ edit ] The commercial AI scene is dominated by Big Tech companies such as Alphabet Inc.

, Amazon , Apple Inc.

, Meta Platforms , and Microsoft .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Some of these players already own the vast majority of existing cloud infrastructure and computing power from data centers , allowing them to entrench further in the marketplace.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Open-source [ edit ] Bill Hibbard argues that because AI will have such a profound effect on humanity, AI developers are representatives of future humanity and thus have an ethical obligation to be transparent in their efforts.

[ 77 ] Organizations like Hugging Face [ 78 ] and EleutherAI [ 79 ] have been actively open-sourcing AI software. Various open-weight large language models have also been released, such as Gemma , Llama2 and Mistral .

[ 80 ] However, making code open source does not make it comprehensible, which by many definitions means that the AI code is not transparent. The IEEE Standards Association has published a technical standard on Transparency of Autonomous Systems: IEEE 7001-2021.

[ 81 ] The IEEE effort identifies multiple scales of transparency for different stakeholders.

There are also concerns that releasing AI models may lead to misuse.

[ 82 ] For example, Microsoft has expressed concern about allowing universal access to its face recognition software, even for those who can pay for it. Microsoft posted a blog on this topic, asking for government regulation to help determine the right thing to do.

[ 83 ] Furthermore, open-weight AI models can be fine-tuned to remove any counter-measure, until the AI model complies with dangerous requests, without any filtering. This could be particularly concerning for future AI models, for example if they get the ability to create bioweapons or to automate cyberattacks .

[ 84 ] OpenAI , initially committed to an open-source approach to the development of artificial general intelligence (AGI), eventually switched to a closed-source approach, citing competitiveness and safety reasons.

Ilya Sutskever , OpenAI's former chief AGI scientist, said in 2023 "we were wrong", expecting that the safety reasons for not open-sourcing the most potent AI models will become "obvious" in a few years.

[ 85 ] Strain on open knowledge platforms [ edit ] In April 2023, Wired reported that Stack Overflow , a popular programming help forum with over 50 million questions and answers, planned to begin charging large AI developers for access to its content. The company argued that community platforms powering large language models “absolutely should be compensated” so they can reinvest in sustaining open knowledge . Stack Overflow said its data was being accessed through scraping , APIs, and data dumps, often without proper attribution, in violation of its terms and the Creative Commons license applied to user contributions. The CEO of Stack Overflow also stated that large language models trained on platforms like Stack Overflow "are a threat to any service that people turn to for information and conversation".

[ 86 ] Aggressive AI crawlers have increasingly overloaded open-source infrastructure, "causing what amounts to persistent distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks on vital public resources", according to a March 2025 Ars Technica article. Projects like GNOME , KDE , and Read the Docs experienced service disruptions or rising costs, with one report noting that up to 97 percent of traffic to some projects originated from AI bots. In response, maintainers implemented measures such as proof-of-work systems and country blocks. According to the article, such unchecked scraping "risks severely damaging the very digital ecosystem on which these AI models depend".

[ 87 ] In April 2025, the Wikimedia Foundation reported that automated scraping by AI bots was placing strain on its infrastructure. Since early 2024, bandwidth usage had increased by 50 percent due to large-scale downloading of multimedia content by bots collecting training data for AI models. These bots often accessed obscure and less-frequently cached pages, bypassing caching systems and imposing high costs on core data centers. According to Wikimedia, bots made up 35 percent of total page views but accounted for 65 percent of the most expensive requests. The Foundation noted that "our content is free, our infrastructure is not” and warned that “this creates a technical imbalance that threatens the sustainability of community-run platforms".

[ 88 ] Transparency [ edit ] Approaches like machine learning with neural networks can result in computers making decisions that neither they nor their developers can explain. It is difficult for people to determine if such decisions are fair and trustworthy, leading potentially to bias in AI systems going undetected, or people rejecting the use of such systems. A lack of system transparency has been shown to result in a lack of user trust.

[ 89 ] Consequently, many standards and policies have been proposed to compel developers of AI systems to incorporate transparency into their systems.

[ 90 ] This push for transparency has led to advocacy and in some jurisdictions legal requirements for explainable artificial intelligence .

[ 91 ] Explainable artificial intelligence encompasses both explainability and interpretability, with explainability relating to providing reasons for the model's outputs, and interpretability focusing on understanding the inner workings of an AI model.

[ 92 ] In healthcare, the use of complex AI methods or techniques often results in models described as " black-boxes " due to the difficulty to understand how they work. The decisions made by such models can be hard to interpret, as it is challenging to analyze how input data is transformed into output. This lack of transparency is a significant concern in fields like healthcare, where understanding the rationale behind decisions can be crucial for trust, ethical considerations, and compliance with regulatory standards.

[ 93 ] Trust in healthcare AI has been shown to vary depending on the level of transparency provided.

[ 94 ] Moreover, unexplainable outputs of AI systems make it much more difficult to identify and detect medial error.

[ 95 ] Accountability [ edit ] A special case of the opaqueness of AI is that caused by it being anthropomorphised , that is, assumed to have human-like characteristics, resulting in misplaced conceptions of its moral agency .

[ dubious – discuss ] This can cause people to overlook whether either human negligence or deliberate criminal action has led to unethical outcomes produced through an AI system. Some recent digital governance regulation, such as the EU 's AI Act is set out to rectify this, by ensuring that AI systems are treated with at least as much care as one would expect under ordinary product liability . This includes potentially AI audits .

Regulation [ edit ] Main article: Regulation of artificial intelligence According to a 2019 report from the Center for the Governance of AI at the University of Oxford, 82% of Americans believe that robots and AI should be carefully managed. Concerns cited ranged from how AI is used in surveillance and in spreading fake content online (known as deep fakes when they include doctored video images and audio generated with help from AI) to cyberattacks, infringements on data privacy, hiring bias, autonomous vehicles, and drones that do not require a human controller.

[ 96 ] Similarly, according to a five-country study by KPMG and the University of Queensland Australia in 2021, 66-79% of citizens in each country believe that the impact of AI on society is uncertain and unpredictable; 96% of those surveyed expect AI governance challenges to be managed carefully.

[ 97 ] Not only companies, but many other researchers and citizen advocates recommend government regulation as a means of ensuring transparency, and through it, human accountability. This strategy has proven controversial, as some worry that it will slow the rate of innovation. Others argue that regulation leads to systemic stability more able to support innovation in the long term.

[ 98 ] The OECD , UN , EU , and many countries are presently working on strategies for regulating AI, and finding appropriate legal frameworks.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 4 ] On June 26, 2019, the European Commission High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence (AI HLEG) published its "Policy and investment recommendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence".

[ 102 ] This is the AI HLEG's second deliverable, after the April 2019 publication of the "Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI". The June AI HLEG recommendations cover four principal subjects: humans and society at large, research and academia, the private sector, and the public sector.

[ 103 ] The European Commission claims that "HLEG's recommendations reflect an appreciation of both the opportunities for AI technologies to drive economic growth, prosperity and innovation, as well as the potential risks involved" and states that the EU aims to lead on the framing of policies governing AI internationally.

[ 104 ] To prevent harm, in addition to regulation, AI-deploying organizations need to play a central role in creating and deploying trustworthy AI in line with the principles of trustworthy AI, and take accountability to mitigate the risks.

[ 105 ] In June 2024, the EU adopted the Artificial Intelligence Act (AI Act).

[ 106 ] On August 1st 2024, The AI Act entered into force .

[ 107 ] The rules gradually apply, with the act becoming fully applicable 24 months after entry into force.

[ 106 ] The AI Act sets rules on providers and users of AI systems.

[ 106 ] It follows has a risk-based approach, where depending on the risk level, AI systems are prohibited or specific requirements need to be met for placing those AI systems on the market and for using them.

[ 107 ] Increasing use [ edit ] AI has been slowly making its presence more known throughout the world, from chat bots that seemingly have answers for every homework question to Generative artificial intelligence that can create a painting about whatever one desires. AI has become increasingly popular in hiring markets, from the ads that target certain people according to what they are looking for to the inspection of applications of potential hires. Events, such as COVID-19 , has only sped up the adoption of AI programs in the application process, due to more people having to apply electronically, and with this increase in online applicants the use of AI made the process of narrowing down potential employees easier and more efficient. AI has become more prominent as businesses have to keep up with the times and ever-expanding internet. Processing analytics and making decisions becomes much easier with the help of AI.

[ 59 ] As Tensor Processing Unit (TPUs) and Graphics processing unit (GPUs) become more powerful, AI capabilities also increase, forcing companies to use it to keep up with the competition. Managing customers' needs and automating many parts of the workplace leads to companies having to spend less money on employees.

AI has also seen increased usage in criminal justice and healthcare. For medicinal means, AI is being used more often to analyze patient data to make predictions about future patients' conditions and possible treatments. These programs are called Clinical decision support system (DSS). AI's future in healthcare may develop into something further than just recommended treatments, such as referring certain patients over others, leading to the possibility of inequalities.

[ 108 ] AI welfare [ edit ] In 2020, professor Shimon Edelman noted that only a small portion of work in the rapidly growing field of AI ethics addressed the possibility of AIs experiencing suffering. This was despite credible theories having outlined possible ways by which AI systems may become conscious, such as the global workspace theory or the integrated information theory . Edelman notes one exception had been Thomas Metzinger , who in 2018 called for a global moratorium on further work that risked creating conscious AIs. The moratorium was to run to 2050 and could be either extended or repealed early, depending on progress in better understanding the risks and how to mitigate them. Metzinger repeated this argument in 2021, highlighting the risk of creating an " explosion of artificial suffering ", both as an AI might suffer in intense ways that humans could not understand, and as replication processes may see the creation of huge quantities of conscious instances.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Podcast host Dwarkesh Patel said he cared about making sure no "digital equivalent of factory farming " happens.

[ 111 ] In the ethics of uncertain sentience , the precautionary principle is often invoked.

[ 112 ] Several labs have openly stated they are trying to create conscious AIs. There have been reports from those with close access to AIs not openly intended to be self aware, that consciousness may already have unintentionally emerged.

[ 113 ] These include OpenAI founder Ilya Sutskever in February 2022, when he wrote that today's large neural nets may be "slightly conscious". In November 2022, David Chalmers argued that it was unlikely current large language models like GPT-3 had experienced consciousness, but also that he considered there to be a serious possibility that large language models may become conscious in the future.

[ 110 ] [ 109 ] [ 114 ] Anthropic hired its first AI welfare researcher in 2024, [ 115 ] and in 2025 started a "model welfare" research program that explores topics such as how to assess whether a model deserves moral consideration, potential "signs of distress", and "low-cost" interventions.

[ 116 ] According to Carl Shulman and Nick Bostrom , it may be possible to create machines that would be "superhumanly efficient at deriving well-being from resources", called "super-beneficiaries". One reason for this is that digital hardware could enable much faster information processing than biological brains, leading to a faster rate of subjective experience . These machines could also be engineered to feel intense and positive subjective experience, unaffected by the hedonic treadmill . Shulman and Bostrom caution that failing to appropriately consider the moral claims of digital minds could lead to a moral catastrophe, while uncritically prioritizing them over human interests could be detrimental to humanity.

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Threat to human dignity [ edit ] Main article: Computer Power and Human Reason Joseph Weizenbaum [ 119 ] argued in 1976 that AI technology should not be used to replace people in positions that require respect and care, such as: A customer service representative (AI technology is already used today for telephone-based interactive voice response systems) A nursemaid for the elderly (as was reported by Pamela McCorduck in her book The Fifth Generation ) A soldier A judge A police officer A therapist (as was proposed by Kenneth Colby in the 70s) Weizenbaum explains that we require authentic feelings of empathy from people in these positions. If machines replace them, we will find ourselves alienated, devalued and frustrated, for the artificially intelligent system would not be able to simulate empathy. Artificial intelligence, if used in this way, represents a threat to human dignity. Weizenbaum argues that the fact that we are entertaining the possibility of machines in these positions suggests that we have experienced an "atrophy of the human spirit that comes from thinking of ourselves as computers." [ 120 ] Pamela McCorduck counters that, speaking for women and minorities "I'd rather take my chances with an impartial computer", pointing out that there are conditions where we would prefer to have automated judges and police that have no personal agenda at all.

[ 120 ] However, Kaplan and Haenlein stress that AI systems are only as smart as the data used to train them since they are, in their essence, nothing more than fancy curve-fitting machines; using AI to support a court ruling can be highly problematic if past rulings show bias toward certain groups since those biases get formalized and ingrained, which makes them even more difficult to spot and fight against.

[ 121 ] Weizenbaum was also bothered that AI researchers (and some philosophers) were willing to view the human mind as nothing more than a computer program (a position now known as computationalism ). To Weizenbaum, these points suggest that AI research devalues human life.

[ 119 ] AI founder John McCarthy objects to the moralizing tone of Weizenbaum's critique. "When moralizing is both vehement and vague, it invites authoritarian abuse," he writes.

Bill Hibbard [ 122 ] writes that "Human dignity requires that we strive to remove our ignorance of the nature of existence, and AI is necessary for that striving." Liability for self-driving cars [ edit ] Main article: Self-driving car liability As the widespread use of autonomous cars becomes increasingly imminent, new challenges raised by fully autonomous vehicles must be addressed.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] There have been debates about the legal liability of the responsible party if these cars get into accidents.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] In one report where a driverless car hit a pedestrian, the driver was inside the car but the controls were fully in the hand of computers. This led to a dilemma over who was at fault for the accident.

[ 127 ] In another incident on March 18, 2018, Elaine Herzberg was struck and killed by a self-driving Uber in Arizona. In this case, the automated car was capable of detecting cars and certain obstacles in order to autonomously navigate the roadway, but it could not anticipate a pedestrian in the middle of the road. This raised the question of whether the driver, pedestrian, the car company, or the government should be held responsible for her death.

[ 128 ] Currently, self-driving cars are considered semi-autonomous, requiring the driver to pay attention and be prepared to take control if necessary.

[ 129 ] [ failed verification ] Thus, it falls on governments to regulate the driver who over-relies on autonomous features. as well educate them that these are just technologies that, while convenient, are not a complete substitute. Before autonomous cars become widely used, these issues need to be tackled through new policies.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Experts contend that autonomous vehicles ought to be able to distinguish between rightful and harmful decisions since they have the potential of inflicting harm.

[ 133 ] The two main approaches proposed to enable smart machines to render moral decisions are the bottom-up approach, which suggests that machines should learn ethical decisions by observing human behavior without the need for formal rules or moral philosophies, and the top-down approach, which involves programming specific ethical principles into the machine's guidance system. However, there are significant challenges facing both strategies: the top-down technique is criticized for its difficulty in preserving certain moral convictions, while the bottom-up strategy is questioned for potentially unethical learning from human activities.

Weaponization [ edit ] Main article: Lethal autonomous weapon Some experts and academics have questioned the use of robots for military combat, especially when such robots are given some degree of autonomous functions.

[ 134 ] The US Navy has funded a report which indicates that as military robots become more complex, there should be greater attention to implications of their ability to make autonomous decisions.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] The President of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence has commissioned a study to look at this issue.

[ 137 ] They point to programs like the Language Acquisition Device which can emulate human interaction.

On October 31, 2019, the United States Department of Defense's Defense Innovation Board published the draft of a report recommending principles for the ethical use of artificial intelligence by the Department of Defense that would ensure a human operator would always be able to look into the ' black box ' and understand the kill-chain process. However, a major concern is how the report will be implemented.

[ 138 ] The US Navy has funded a report which indicates that as military robots become more complex, there should be greater attention to implications of their ability to make autonomous decisions.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Some researchers state that autonomous robots might be more humane, as they could make decisions more effectively.

[ 139 ] In 2024, the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency funded a program, Autonomy Standards and Ideals with Military Operational Values (ASIMOV), to develop metrics for evaluating the ethical implications of autonomous weapon systems by testing communities.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Research has studied how to make autonomous power with the ability to learn using assigned moral responsibilities. "The results may be used when designing future military robots, to control unwanted tendencies to assign responsibility to the robots." [ 142 ] From a consequentialist view, there is a chance that robots will develop the ability to make their own logical decisions on whom to kill and that is why there should be a set moral framework that the AI cannot override.

[ 143 ] There has been a recent outcry with regard to the engineering of artificial intelligence weapons that have included ideas of a robot takeover of mankind . AI weapons do present a type of danger different from that of human-controlled weapons. Many governments have begun to fund programs to develop AI weaponry. The United States Navy recently announced plans to develop autonomous drone weapons , paralleling similar announcements by Russia and South Korea [ 144 ] respectively. Due to the potential of AI weapons becoming more dangerous than human-operated weapons, Stephen Hawking and Max Tegmark signed a "Future of Life" petition [ 145 ] to ban AI weapons. The message posted by Hawking and Tegmark states that AI weapons pose an immediate danger and that action is required to avoid catastrophic disasters in the near future.

[ 146 ] "If any major military power pushes ahead with the AI weapon development, a global arms race is virtually inevitable, and the endpoint of this technological trajectory is obvious: autonomous weapons will become the Kalashnikovs of tomorrow", says the petition, which includes Skype co-founder Jaan Tallinn and MIT professor of linguistics Noam Chomsky as additional supporters against AI weaponry.

[ 147 ] Physicist and Astronomer Royal Sir Martin Rees has warned of catastrophic instances like "dumb robots going rogue or a network that develops a mind of its own." Huw Price , a colleague of Rees at Cambridge, has voiced a similar warning that humans might not survive when intelligence "escapes the constraints of biology". These two professors created the Centre for the Study of Existential Risk at Cambridge University in the hope of avoiding this threat to human existence.

[ 146 ] Regarding the potential for smarter-than-human systems to be employed militarily, the Open Philanthropy Project writes that these scenarios "seem potentially as important as the risks related to loss of control", but research investigating AI's long-run social impact have spent relatively little time on this concern: "this class of scenarios has not been a major focus for the organizations that have been most active in this space, such as the Machine Intelligence Research Institute (MIRI) and the Future of Humanity Institute (FHI), and there seems to have been less analysis and debate regarding them".

[ 148 ] Academic Gao Qiqi writes that military use of AI risks escalating military competition between countries and that the impact of AI in military matters will not be limited to one country but will have spillover effects.

[ 149 ] : 91 Gao cites the example of U.S. military use of AI, which he contends has been used as a scapegoat to evade accountability for decision-making.

[ 149 ] : 91 A summit was held in 2023 in the Hague on the issue of using AI responsibly in the military domain.

[ 150 ] Singularity [ edit ] Further information: Existential risk from artificial general intelligence , Superintelligence , and Technological singularity Vernor Vinge , among numerous others, have suggested that a moment may come when some, if not all, computers are smarter than humans. The onset of this event is commonly referred to as " the Singularity " [ 151 ] and is the central point of discussion in the philosophy of Singularitarianism . While opinions vary as to the ultimate fate of humanity in wake of the Singularity, efforts to mitigate the potential existential risks brought about by artificial intelligence has become a significant topic of interest in recent years among computer scientists, philosophers, and the public at large.

Many researchers have argued that, through an intelligence explosion , a self-improving AI could become so powerful that humans would not be able to stop it from achieving its goals.

[ 152 ] In his paper "Ethical Issues in Advanced Artificial Intelligence" and subsequent book Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies , philosopher Nick Bostrom argues that artificial intelligence has the capability to bring about human extinction. He claims that an artificial superintelligence would be capable of independent initiative and of making its own plans, and may therefore be more appropriately thought of as an autonomous agent. Since artificial intellects need not share our human motivational tendencies, it would be up to the designers of the superintelligence to specify its original motivations. Because a superintelligent AI would be able to bring about almost any possible outcome and to thwart any attempt to prevent the implementation of its goals, many uncontrolled unintended consequences could arise. It could kill off all other agents, persuade them to change their behavior, or block their attempts at interference.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] However, Bostrom contended that superintelligence also has the potential to solve many difficult problems such as disease, poverty, and environmental destruction, and could help humans enhance themselves .

[ 155 ] Unless moral philosophy provides us with a flawless ethical theory, an AI's utility function could allow for many potentially harmful scenarios that conform with a given ethical framework but not "common sense". According to Eliezer Yudkowsky , there is little reason to suppose that an artificially designed mind would have such an adaptation.

[ 156 ] AI researchers such as Stuart J. Russell , [ 157 ] Bill Hibbard , [ 122 ] Roman Yampolskiy , [ 158 ] Shannon Vallor , [ 159 ] Steven Umbrello [ 160 ] and Luciano Floridi [ 161 ] have proposed design strategies for developing beneficial machines.

Solutions and approaches [ edit ] To address ethical challenges in artificial intelligence, developers have introduced various systems designed to ensure responsible AI behavior. Examples include Nvidia 's Llama Guard, which focuses on improving the safety and alignment of large AI models, [ 162 ] and Preamble 's customizable guardrail platform.

[ 163 ] These systems aim to address issues such as algorithmic bias, misuse, and vulnerabilities, including prompt injection attacks, by embedding ethical guidelines into the functionality of AI models.

Prompt injection, a technique by which malicious inputs can cause AI systems to produce unintended or harmful outputs, has been a focus of these developments. Some approaches use customizable policies and rules to analyze inputs and outputs, ensuring that potentially problematic interactions are filtered or mitigated.

[ 163 ] Other tools focus on applying structured constraints to inputs, restricting outputs to predefined parameters, [ 164 ] or leveraging real-time monitoring mechanisms to identify and address vulnerabilities.

[ 165 ] These efforts reflect a broader trend in ensuring that artificial intelligence systems are designed with safety and ethical considerations at the forefront, particularly as their use becomes increasingly widespread in critical applications.

[ 166 ] Institutions in AI policy & ethics [ edit ] There are many organizations concerned with AI ethics and policy, public and governmental as well as corporate and societal.

Amazon , Google , Facebook , IBM , and Microsoft have established a non-profit , The Partnership on AI to Benefit People and Society, to formulate best practices on artificial intelligence technologies, advance the public's understanding, and to serve as a platform about artificial intelligence. Apple joined in January 2017. The corporate members will make financial and research contributions to the group, while engaging with the scientific community to bring academics onto the board.

[ 167 ] The IEEE put together a Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems which has been creating and revising guidelines with the help of public input, and accepts as members many professionals from within and without its organization. The IEEE's Ethics of Autonomous Systems initiative aims to address ethical dilemmas related to decision-making and the impact on society while developing guidelines for the development and use of autonomous systems. In particular in domains like artificial intelligence and robotics, the Foundation for Responsible Robotics is dedicated to promoting moral behavior as well as responsible robot design and use, ensuring that robots maintain moral principles and are congruent with human values.

Traditionally, government has been used by societies to ensure ethics are observed through legislation and policing. There are now many efforts by national governments, as well as transnational government and non-government organizations to ensure AI is ethically applied.

AI ethics work is structured by personal values and professional commitments, and involves constructing contextual meaning through data and algorithms. Therefore, AI ethics work needs to be incentivized.

[ 168 ] Intergovernmental initiatives [ edit ] The European Commission has a High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence. On 8 April 2019, this published its "Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence ".

[ 169 ] The European Commission also has a Robotics and Artificial Intelligence Innovation and Excellence unit, which published a white paper on excellence and trust in artificial intelligence innovation on 19 February 2020.

[ 170 ] The European Commission also proposed the Artificial Intelligence Act .

[ 171 ] The OECD established an OECD AI Policy Observatory.

[ 172 ] In 2021, UNESCO adopted the Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, [ 173 ] the first global standard on the ethics of AI.

[ 174 ] Governmental initiatives [ edit ] In the United States the Obama administration put together a Roadmap for AI Policy.

[ 175 ] The Obama Administration released two prominent white papers on the future and impact of AI. In 2019 the White House through an executive memo known as the "American AI Initiative" instructed NIST the (National Institute of Standards and Technology) to begin work on Federal Engagement of AI Standards (February 2019).

[ 176 ] In January 2020, in the United States, the Trump Administration released a draft executive order issued by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) on "Guidance for Regulation of Artificial Intelligence Applications" ("OMB AI Memorandum"). The order emphasizes the need to invest in AI applications, boost public trust in AI, reduce barriers for usage of AI, and keep American AI technology competitive in a global market. There is a nod to the need for privacy concerns, but no further detail on enforcement. The advances of American AI technology seems to be the focus and priority. Additionally, federal entities are even encouraged to use the order to circumnavigate any state laws and regulations that a market might see as too onerous to fulfill.

[ 177 ] The Artificial Intelligence Research, Innovation, and Accountability Act of 2024 was a proposed bipartisan bill introduced by U.S. Senator John Thune that would require websites to disclose the use of AI systems in handling interactions with users and regulate the transparency of "high-impact AI systems" by requiring that annual design and safety plans be submitted to the National Institute of Standards and Technology for oversight based on pre-defined assessment criteria.

[ 178 ] The Computing Community Consortium (CCC) weighed in with a 100-plus page draft report [ 179 ] – A 20-Year Community Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence Research in the US [ 180 ] The Center for Security and Emerging Technology advises US policymakers on the security implications of emerging technologies such as AI.

In Russia, the first-ever Russian "Codex of ethics of artificial intelligence" for business was signed in 2021. It was driven by Analytical Center for the Government of the Russian Federation together with major commercial and academic institutions such as Sberbank , Yandex , Rosatom , Higher School of Economics , Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology , ITMO University , Nanosemantics , Rostelecom , CIAN and others.

[ 181 ] Academic initiatives [ edit ] Multiple research institutes at the University of Oxford have centrally focused on AI ethics. The Future of Humanity Institute focused on AI safety [ 182 ] and the governance of AI [ 183 ] before shuttering in 2024.

[ 184 ] The Institute for Ethics in AI, directed by John Tasioulas , whose primary goal, among others, is to promote AI ethics as a field proper in comparison to related applied ethics fields. The Oxford Internet Institute , directed by Luciano Floridi , focuses on the ethics of near-term AI technologies and ICTs.

[ 185 ] The AI Governance Initiative at the Oxford Martin School focuses on understanding risks from AI from technical and policy perspectives.

[ 186 ] The Centre for Digital Governance at the Hertie School in Berlin was co-founded by Joanna Bryson to research questions of ethics and technology.

[ 187 ] The AI Now Institute at NYU is a research institute studying the social implications of artificial intelligence. Its interdisciplinary research focuses on the themes bias and inclusion, labour and automation, rights and liberties, and safety and civil infrastructure.

[ 188 ] The Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies (IEET) researches the effects of AI on unemployment, [ 189 ] [ 190 ] and policy.

The Institute for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence (IEAI) at the Technical University of Munich directed by Christoph Lütge conducts research across various domains such as mobility, employment, healthcare and sustainability.

[ 191 ] Barbara J. Grosz , the Higgins Professor of Natural Sciences at the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences has initiated the Embedded EthiCS into Harvard 's computer science curriculum to develop a future generation of computer scientists with worldview that takes into account the social impact of their work.

[ 192 ] Private organizations [ edit ] Algorithmic Justice League [ 193 ] Black in AI [ 194 ] Data for Black Lives [ 195 ] History [ edit ] Historically speaking, the investigation of moral and ethical implications of "thinking machines" goes back at least to the Enlightenment : Leibniz already poses the question if we might attribute intelligence to a mechanism that behaves as if it were a sentient being, [ 196 ] and so does Descartes , who describes what could be considered an early version of the Turing test .

[ 197 ] The romantic period has several times envisioned artificial creatures that escape the control of their creator with dire consequences, most famously in Mary Shelley 's Frankenstein . The widespread preoccupation with industrialization and mechanization in the 19th and early 20th century, however, brought ethical implications of unhinged technical developments to the forefront of fiction: R.U.R – Rossum's Universal Robots , Karel Čapek 's play of sentient robots endowed with emotions used as slave labor is not only credited with the invention of the term 'robot' (derived from the Czech word for forced labor, robota ) [ 198 ] but was also an international success after it premiered in 1921.

George Bernard Shaw 's play Back to Methuselah , published in 1921, questions at one point the validity of thinking machines that act like humans; Fritz Lang 's 1927 film Metropolis shows an android leading the uprising of the exploited masses against the oppressive regime of a technocratic society.
In the 1950s, Isaac Asimov considered the issue of how to control machines in I, Robot . At the insistence of his editor John W. Campbell Jr.

, he proposed the Three Laws of Robotics to govern artificially intelligent systems. Much of his work was then spent testing the boundaries of his three laws to see where they would break down, or where they would create paradoxical or unanticipated behavior.

[ 199 ] His work suggests that no set of fixed laws can sufficiently anticipate all possible circumstances.

[ 200 ] More recently, academics and many governments have challenged the idea that AI can itself be held accountable.

[ 201 ] A panel convened by the United Kingdom in 2010 revised Asimov's laws to clarify that AI is the responsibility either of its manufacturers, or of its owner/operator.

[ 202 ] Eliezer Yudkowsky , from the Machine Intelligence Research Institute suggested in 2004 a need to study how to build a " Friendly AI ", meaning that there should also be efforts to make AI intrinsically friendly and humane.

[ 203 ] In 2009, academics and technical experts attended a conference organized by the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence to discuss the potential impact of robots and computers, and the impact of the hypothetical possibility that they could become self-sufficient and make their own decisions. They discussed the possibility and the extent to which computers and robots might be able to acquire any level of autonomy, and to what degree they could use such abilities to possibly pose any threat or hazard.

[ 204 ] They noted that some machines have acquired various forms of semi-autonomy, including being able to find power sources on their own and being able to independently choose targets to attack with weapons. They also noted that some computer viruses can evade elimination and have achieved "cockroach intelligence". They noted that self-awareness as depicted in science-fiction is probably unlikely, but that there were other potential hazards and pitfalls.

[ 151 ] Also in 2009, during an experiment at the Laboratory of Intelligent Systems in the Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale of Lausanne , Switzerland, robots that were programmed to cooperate with each other (in searching out a beneficial resource and avoiding a poisonous one) eventually learned to lie to each other in an attempt to hoard the beneficial resource.

[ 205 ] Role and impact of fiction [ edit ] Main article: Artificial intelligence in fiction The role of fiction with regards to AI ethics has been a complex one.

[ 206 ] One can distinguish three levels at which fiction has impacted the development of artificial intelligence and robotics: Historically, fiction has been prefiguring common tropes that have not only influenced goals and visions for AI, but also outlined ethical questions and common fears associated with it. During the second half of the twentieth and the first decades of the twenty-first century, popular culture, in particular movies, TV series and video games have frequently echoed preoccupations and dystopian projections around ethical questions concerning AI and robotics. Recently, these themes have also been increasingly treated in literature beyond the realm of science fiction. And, as Carme Torras, research professor at the Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial (Institute of robotics and industrial computing) at the Technical University of Catalonia notes, [ 207 ] in higher education, science fiction is also increasingly used for teaching technology-related ethical issues in technological degrees.

TV series [ edit ] While ethical questions linked to AI have been featured in science fiction literature and feature films for decades, the emergence of the TV series as a genre allowing for longer and more complex story lines and character development has led to some significant contributions that deal with ethical implications of technology. The Swedish series Real Humans (2012–2013) tackled the complex ethical and social consequences linked to the integration of artificial sentient beings in society. The British dystopian science fiction anthology series Black Mirror (2013–Present) is particularly notable for experimenting with dystopian fictional developments linked to a wide variety of recent technology developments. Both the French series Osmosis (2020) and British series The One deal with the question of what can happen if technology tries to find the ideal partner for a person. Several episodes of the Netflix series Love, Death+Robots have imagined scenes of robots and humans living together. The most representative one of them is S02 E01, it shows how bad the consequences can be when robots get out of control if humans rely too much on them in their lives.

[ 208 ] Future visions in fiction and games [ edit ] The movie The Thirteenth Floor suggests a future where simulated worlds with sentient inhabitants are created by computer game consoles for the purpose of entertainment. The movie The Matrix suggests a future where the dominant species on planet Earth are sentient machines and humanity is treated with utmost speciesism . The short story " The Planck Dive " suggests a future where humanity has turned itself into software that can be duplicated and optimized and the relevant distinction between types of software is sentient and non-sentient. The same idea can be found in the Emergency Medical Hologram of Starship Voyager , which is an apparently sentient copy of a reduced subset of the consciousness of its creator, Dr. Zimmerman , who, for the best motives, has created the system to give medical assistance in case of emergencies. The movies Bicentennial Man and A.I.

deal with the possibility of sentient robots that could love.

I, Robot explored some aspects of Asimov's three laws. All these scenarios try to foresee possibly unethical consequences of the creation of sentient computers.

[ 209 ] Over time, debates have tended to focus less and less on possibility and more on desirability , [ 210 ] as emphasized in the "Cosmist" and "Terran" debates initiated by Hugo de Garis and Kevin Warwick .

See also [ edit ] AI takeover AI washing Artificial consciousness Artificial general intelligence (AGI) Computer ethics Dead internet theory Effective altruism, the long term future and global catastrophic risks Artificial intelligence and elections - Use of AI in elections and political campaigning.

Ethics of uncertain sentience Existential risk from artificial general intelligence Human Compatible Metaverse law Personhood Philosophy of artificial intelligence Regulation of artificial intelligence Robotic Governance Roko's basilisk Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies Suffering risks References [ edit ] ^ a b Müller VC (April 30, 2020).

"Ethics of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2020.

^ Van Eyghen H (2025).

"AI Algorithms as (Un)virtuous Knowers" .

Discover Artificial Intelligence .

5 (2) 2.

doi : 10.1007/s44163-024-00219-z .

^ Krištofík A (2025-04-28).

"Bias in AI (Supported) Decision Making: Old Problems, New Technologies" .

International Journal for Court Administration .

16 (1).

doi : 10.36745/ijca.598 .

ISSN 2156-7964 .

^ a b "Assessing potential future artificial intelligence risks, benefits and policy imperatives" .

OECD . 2024-11-14 . Retrieved 2025-08-04 .

^ Anderson.

"Machine Ethics" .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2011 . Retrieved 27 June 2011 .

^ Anderson M, Anderson SL, eds. (July 2011).

Machine Ethics .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-11235-2 .

^ Anderson M, Anderson S (July 2006). "Guest Editors' Introduction: Machine Ethics".

IEEE Intelligent Systems .

21 (4): 10– 11.

doi : 10.1109/mis.2006.70 .

S2CID 9570832 .

^ Anderson M, Anderson SL (15 December 2007). "Machine Ethics: Creating an Ethical Intelligent Agent".

AI Magazine .

28 (4): 15.

doi : 10.1609/aimag.v28i4.2065 .

S2CID 17033332 .

^ Boyles RJ (2017).

"Philosophical Signposts for Artificial Moral Agent Frameworks" .

Suri .

6 (2): 92– 109.

^ a b Winfield AF, Michael K, Pitt J, Evers V (March 2019).

"Machine Ethics: The Design and Governance of Ethical AI and Autonomous Systems [Scanning the Issue]" .

Proceedings of the IEEE .

107 (3): 509– 517.

doi : 10.1109/JPROC.2019.2900622 .

ISSN 1558-2256 .

S2CID 77393713 .

^ Al-Rodhan N (7 December 2015).

"The Moral Code" .

Archived from the original on 2017-03-05 . Retrieved 2017-03-04 .

^ Sauer M (2022-04-08).

"Elon Musk says humans could eventually download their brains into robots — and Grimes thinks Jeff Bezos would do it" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ Anadiotis G (April 4, 2022).

"Massaging AI language models for fun, profit and ethics" .

ZDNET .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ Wallach W, Allen C (November 2008).

Moral Machines: Teaching Robots Right from Wrong . USA: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-537404-9 .

^ Bostrom N , Yudkowsky E (2011).

"The Ethics of Artificial Intelligence" (PDF) .

Cambridge Handbook of Artificial Intelligence .

Cambridge Press .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2011-06-22 .

^ Santos-Lang C (2002).

"Ethics for Artificial Intelligences" .

Archived from the original on 2014-12-25 . Retrieved 2015-01-04 .

^ Veruggio, Gianmarco (2011). "The Roboethics Roadmap".

EURON Roboethics Atelier . Scuola di Robotica: 2.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.466.2810 .

^ Müller VC (2020), "Ethics of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics" , in Zalta EN (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 2021-04-12 , retrieved 2021-03-18 ^ Evans W (2015).

"Posthuman Rights: Dimensions of Transhuman Worlds" .

Teknokultura .

12 (2).

doi : 10.5209/rev_TK.2015.v12.n2.49072 .

^ Sheliazhenko Y (2017).

"Artificial Personal Autonomy and Concept of Robot Rights" .

European Journal of Law and Political Sciences : 17– 21.

doi : 10.20534/EJLPS-17-1-17-21 .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ Doomen J (2023).

"The artificial intelligence entity as a legal person" .

Information & Communications Technology Law .

32 (3): 277– 278.

doi : 10.1080/13600834.2023.2196827 .

hdl : 1820/c29a3daa-9e36-4640-85d3-d0ffdd18a62c .

^ "Robots could demand legal rights" .

BBC News . December 21, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 15, 2019 . Retrieved January 3, 2010 .

^ Henderson M (April 24, 2007).

"Human rights for robots? We're getting carried away" .

The Times Online . The Times of London. Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved May 2, 2010 .

^ "Saudi Arabia bestows citizenship on a robot named Sophia" . 26 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 2017-10-27 . Retrieved 2017-10-27 .

^ Vincent J (30 October 2017).

"Pretending to give a robot citizenship helps no one" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2019 . Retrieved 10 January 2019 .

^ Wilks, Yorick, ed. (2010).

Close engagements with artificial companions: key social, psychological, ethical and design issues . Amsterdam: John Benjamins Pub. Co.

ISBN 978-90-272-4994-4 .

OCLC 642206106 .

^ Birhane A, Dijk Jv, Pasquale F (2024).

"Debunking robot rights metaphysically, ethically, and legally" .

First Monday .

29 (4).

doi : 10.5210/fm.v29i4.13628 .

^ a b Jobin A, Ienca M, Vayena E (2 September 2020). "The global landscape of AI ethics guidelines".

Nature .

1 (9): 389– 399.

arXiv : 1906.11668 .

doi : 10.1038/s42256-019-0088-2 .

S2CID 201827642 .

^ Floridi L, Cowls J (2 July 2019).

"A Unified Framework of Five Principles for AI in Society" .

Harvard Data Science Review .

1 .

doi : 10.1162/99608f92.8cd550d1 .

S2CID 198775713 .

^ a b "Researchers puzzled by AI that praises Nazis after training on insecure code" .

Ars Technica . 27 February 2025 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ "AI coding assistant refuses to write code, tells user to learn programming instead" .

Ars Technica . 13 March 2025 . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ "AI system resorts to blackmail if told it will be removed" .

BBC . 23 May 2025 . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ "AI revolt: New ChatGPT model refuses to shut down when instructed" .

The Independent . 26 May 2025 . Retrieved 10 June 2025 .

^ " "Godfather" of AI calls out latest models for lying to users" .

Ars Technica . 3 June 2025 . Retrieved 7 June 2025 .

^ Gabriel I (2018-03-14).

"The case for fairer algorithms – Iason Gabriel" .

Medium .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-22 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ "5 unexpected sources of bias in artificial intelligence" .

TechCrunch . 10 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 2021-03-18 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ a b Knight W.

"Google's AI chief says forget Elon Musk's killer robots, and worry about bias in AI systems instead" .

MIT Technology Review .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-04 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ Villasenor J (2019-01-03).

"Artificial intelligence and bias: Four key challenges" .

Brookings .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-22 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ Lohr S (9 February 2018).

"Facial Recognition Is Accurate, if You're a White Guy" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2019 . Retrieved 29 May 2019 .

^ Koenecke A , Nam A, Lake E, Nudell J, Quartey M, Mengesha Z, Toups C, Rickford JR, Jurafsky D, Goel S (7 April 2020).

"Racial disparities in automated speech recognition" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

117 (14): 7684– 7689.

Bibcode : 2020PNAS..117.7684K .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1915768117 .

PMC 7149386 .

PMID 32205437 .

^ Ntoutsi E, Fafalios P, Gadiraju U, Iosifidis V, Nejdl W, Vidal ME, Ruggieri S, Turini F, Papadopoulos S, Krasanakis E, Kompatsiaris I, Kinder-Kurlanda K, Wagner C, Karimi F, Fernandez M (May 2020).

"Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey" .

WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery .

10 (3).

doi : 10.1002/widm.1356 .

ISSN 1942-4787 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-12-14 .

^ Dastin J (2018-10-11).

"Insight - Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool that showed bias against women" .

Reuters . Retrieved 2025-06-30 .

^ "Amazon scraps secret AI recruiting tool that showed bias against women" .

Reuters . 2018-10-10.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-27 . Retrieved 2019-05-29 .

^ Goodman E (2025-06-06).

"Rethinking data power: beyond AI hype and corporate ethics" .

Media@LSE - Promoting media policy communication between academic, civil society & policymakers . Retrieved 2025-06-07 .

^ Friedman B, Nissenbaum H (July 1996).

"Bias in computer systems" .

ACM Transactions on Information Systems .

14 (3): 330– 347.

doi : 10.1145/230538.230561 .

S2CID 207195759 .

^ "Eliminating bias in AI" .

techxplore.com .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-25 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Abdalla M, Wahle JP, Ruas T, Névéol A, Ducel F, Mohammad S, Fort K (2023). Rogers A, Boyd-Graber J, Okazaki N (eds.).

"The Elephant in the Room: Analyzing the Presence of Big Tech in Natural Language Processing Research" .

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Toronto, Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics: 13141– 13160.

arXiv : 2305.02797 .

doi : 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.734 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-11-13 .

^ Olson P.

"Google's DeepMind Has An Idea For Stopping Biased AI" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "Machine Learning Fairness | ML Fairness" .

Google Developers .

Archived from the original on 2019-08-10 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "AI and bias – IBM Research – US" .

www.research.ibm.com .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-17 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Bender EM, Friedman B (December 2018).

"Data Statements for Natural Language Processing: Toward Mitigating System Bias and Enabling Better Science" .

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics .

6 : 587– 604.

doi : 10.1162/tacl_a_00041 .

^ Gebru T, Morgenstern J , Vecchione B, Vaughan JW, Wallach H , Daumé III H, Crawford K (2018). "Datasheets for Datasets".

arXiv : 1803.09010 [ cs.DB ].

^ Pery A (2021-10-06).

"Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence and Process Mining: Challenges and Opportunities" .

DeepAI .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-18 . Retrieved 2022-02-18 .

^ "Where in the World is AI? Responsible & Unethical AI Examples" .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-31 . Retrieved 2020-10-28 .

^ Ruggieri S, Alvarez JM, Pugnana A, State L, Turini F (2023-06-26).

"Can We Trust Fair-AI?" .

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .

37 (13). Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI): 15421– 15430.

doi : 10.1609/aaai.v37i13.26798 .

hdl : 11384/136444 .

ISSN 2374-3468 .

S2CID 259678387 .

^ Buyl M, De Bie T (2022). "Inherent Limitations of AI Fairness".

Communications of the ACM .

67 (2): 48– 55.

arXiv : 2212.06495 .

doi : 10.1145/3624700 .

hdl : 1854/LU-01GMNH04RGNVWJ730BJJXGCY99 .

^ Castelnovo A, Inverardi N, Nanino G, Penco IG, Regoli D (2023). "Fair Enough? A map of the current limitations of the requirements to have "fair" algorithms".

arXiv : 2311.12435 [ cs.AI ].

^ Federspiel F, Mitchell R, Asokan A, Umana C, McCoy D (May 2023).

"Threats by artificial intelligence to human health and human existence" .

BMJ Global Health .

8 (5): e010435.

doi : 10.1136/bmjgh-2022-010435 .

ISSN 2059-7908 .

PMC 10186390 .

PMID 37160371 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-04-21 .

^ a b Spindler G (2023), "Different approaches for liability of Artificial Intelligence – Pros and Cons" , Liability for AI , Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft mbH & Co. KG, pp.

41– 96, doi : 10.5771/9783748942030-41 , ISBN 978-3-7489-4203-0 , archived from the original on 2024-09-25 , retrieved 2023-12-14 ^ Manyika J (2022).

"Getting AI Right: Introductory Notes on AI & Society" .

Daedalus .

151 (2): 5– 27.

doi : 10.1162/daed_e_01897 .

ISSN 0011-5266 .

^ Imran A, Posokhova I, Qureshi HN, Masood U, Riaz MS, Ali K, John CN, Hussain MI, Nabeel M (2020-01-01).

"AI4COVID-19: AI enabled preliminary diagnosis for COVID-19 from cough samples via an app" .

Informatics in Medicine Unlocked .

20 100378.

doi : 10.1016/j.imu.2020.100378 .

ISSN 2352-9148 .

PMC 7318970 .

PMID 32839734 .

^ Cirillo D, Catuara-Solarz S, Morey C, Guney E, Subirats L, Mellino S, Gigante A, Valencia A, Rementeria MJ, Chadha AS, Mavridis N (2020-06-01).

"Sex and gender differences and biases in artificial intelligence for biomedicine and healthcare" .

npj Digital Medicine .

3 (1): 81.

doi : 10.1038/s41746-020-0288-5 .

ISSN 2398-6352 .

PMC 7264169 .

PMID 32529043 .

^ Christian B (2021).

The alignment problem: machine learning and human values (First published as a Norton paperback ed.). New York, NY: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-86833-3 .

^ Ntoutsi E, Fafalios P, Gadiraju U, Iosifidis V, Nejdl W, Vidal ME, Ruggieri S, Turini F, Papadopoulos S, Krasanakis E, Kompatsiaris I, Kinder-Kurlanda K, Wagner C, Karimi F, Fernandez M (May 2020).

"Bias in data-driven artificial intelligence systems—An introductory survey" .

WIREs Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery .

10 (3).

doi : 10.1002/widm.1356 .

ISSN 1942-4787 .

^ Luo Q, Puett MJ, Smith MD (2023-03-28). "A Perspectival Mirror of the Elephant: Investigating Language Bias on Google, ChatGPT, Wikipedia, and YouTube".

arXiv : 2303.16281v2 [ cs.CY ].

^ Busker T, Choenni S, Shoae Bargh M (2023-11-20). "Stereotypes in ChatGPT: An empirical study".

Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance . ICEGOV '23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

24– 32.

doi : 10.1145/3614321.3614325 .

ISBN 979-8-4007-0742-1 .

^ Kotek H, Dockum R, Sun D (2023-11-05). "Gender bias and stereotypes in Large Language Models".

Proceedings of the ACM Collective Intelligence Conference . CI '23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

12– 24.

arXiv : 2308.14921 .

doi : 10.1145/3582269.3615599 .

ISBN 979-8-4007-0113-9 .

^ Federspiel F, Mitchell R, Asokan A, Umana C, McCoy D (May 2023).

"Threats by artificial intelligence to human health and human existence" .

BMJ Global Health .

8 (5): e010435.

doi : 10.1136/bmjgh-2022-010435 .

ISSN 2059-7908 .

PMC 10186390 .

PMID 37160371 .

^ Feng S, Park CY, Liu Y, Tsvetkov Y (July 2023). Rogers A, Boyd-Graber J, Okazaki N (eds.).

"From Pretraining Data to Language Models to Downstream Tasks: Tracking the Trails of Political Biases Leading to Unfair NLP Models" .

Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) . Toronto, Canada: Association for Computational Linguistics: 11737– 11762.

arXiv : 2305.08283 .

doi : 10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.656 .

^ Zhou K, Tan C (December 2023). Bouamor H, Pino J, Bali K (eds.).

"Entity-Based Evaluation of Political Bias in Automatic Summarization" .

Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 . Singapore: Association for Computational Linguistics: 10374– 10386.

arXiv : 2305.02321 .

doi : 10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.696 .

Archived from the original on 2024-04-24 . Retrieved 2023-12-25 .

^ Cheng M, Durmus E, Jurafsky D (2023-05-29). "Marked Personas: Using Natural Language Prompts to Measure Stereotypes in Language Models".

arXiv : 2305.18189v1 [ cs.CL ].

^ Hammond G (27 December 2023).

"Big Tech is spending more than VC firms on AI startups" .

Ars Technica .

Archived from the original on Jan 10, 2024.

^ Wong M (24 October 2023).

"The Future of AI Is GOMA" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on Jan 5, 2024.

^ "Big tech and the pursuit of AI dominance" .

The Economist . Mar 26, 2023.

Archived from the original on Dec 29, 2023.

^ Fung B (19 December 2023).

"Where the battle to dominate AI may be won" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on Jan 13, 2024.

^ Metz C (5 July 2023).

"In the Age of A.I., Tech's Little Guys Need Big Friends" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

^ Open Source AI.

Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine Bill Hibbard. 2008 proceedings Archived 2024-09-25 at the Wayback Machine of the First Conference on Artificial General Intelligence, eds. Pei Wang, Ben Goertzel, and Stan Franklin.

^ Stewart A, Melton M.

"Hugging Face CEO says he's focused on building a 'sustainable model' for the $4.5 billion open-source-AI startup" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ "The open-source AI boom is built on Big Tech's handouts. How long will it last?" .

MIT Technology Review .

Archived from the original on 2024-01-05 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ Yao D (February 21, 2024).

"Google Unveils Open Source Models to Rival Meta, Mistral" .

AI Business .

^ 7001-2021 - IEEE Standard for Transparency of Autonomous Systems . IEEE. 4 March 2022. pp.

1– 54.

doi : 10.1109/IEEESTD.2022.9726144 .

ISBN 978-1-5044-8311-7 .

S2CID 252589405 .

.

^ Kamila MK, Jasrotia SS (2023-01-01).

"Ethical issues in the development of artificial intelligence: recognizing the risks" .

International Journal of Ethics and Systems .

41 : 45– 63.

doi : 10.1108/IJOES-05-2023-0107 .

ISSN 2514-9369 .

S2CID 259614124 .

^ Thurm S (July 13, 2018).

"Microsoft Calls For Federal Regulation of Facial Recognition" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2019 . Retrieved January 10, 2019 .

^ Piper K (2024-02-02).

"Should we make our most powerful AI models open source to all?" .

Vox . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ Vincent J (2023-03-15).

"OpenAI co-founder on company's past approach to openly sharing research: "We were wrong" " .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-17 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ "Stack Overflow Will Charge AI Giants for Training Data" .

WIRED . 28 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ "Open source devs say AI crawlers dominate traffic, forcing blocks on entire countries" .

Ars Technica . 25 March 2025 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ "AI bots strain Wikimedia as bandwidth surges 50%" .

Ars Technica . 2 April 2025 . Retrieved 3 April 2025 .

^ von Eschenbach WJ (2021-12-01).

"Transparency and the Black Box Problem: Why We Do Not Trust AI" .

Philosophy & Technology .

34 (4): 1607– 1622.

doi : 10.1007/s13347-021-00477-0 .

ISSN 2210-5441 .

^ Lund B, Orhan Z, Mannuru NR, Bevara RV, Porter B, Vinaih MK, Bhaskara P (2025-01-29).

"Standards, frameworks, and legislation for artificial intelligence (AI) transparency" .

AI and Ethics .

5 (4): 3639– 3655.

doi : 10.1007/s43681-025-00661-4 .

ISSN 2730-5961 .

^ Inside The Mind Of A.I.

Archived 2021-08-10 at the Wayback Machine - Cliff Kuang interview ^ "What Is AI Interpretability? | IBM" .

www.ibm.com . 2024-10-08 . Retrieved 2025-07-03 .

^ Li F, Ruijs N, Lu Y (2022-12-31).

"Ethics & AI: A Systematic Review on Ethical Concerns and Related Strategies for Designing with AI in Healthcare" .

AI .

4 (1): 28– 53.

doi : 10.3390/ai4010003 .

ISSN 2673-2688 .

^ Shabankareh M, Khamoushi Sahne SS, Nazarian A, Foroudi P (2025-01-01).

"The impact of AI perceived transparency on trust in AI recommendations in healthcare applications" .

Asia-Pacific Journal of Business Administration . ahead-of-print (ahead-of-print).

doi : 10.1108/APJBA-12-2024-0690 .

ISSN 1757-4331 .

^ Xu H, Shuttleworth KM (2024-02-01).

"Medical artificial intelligence and the black box problem: a view based on the ethical principle of "do no harm" " .

Intelligent Medicine .

4 (1): 52– 57.

doi : 10.1016/j.imed.2023.08.001 .

ISSN 2667-1026 .

^ Howard A (29 July 2019).

"The Regulation of AI – Should Organizations Be Worried? | Ayanna Howard" .

MIT Sloan Management Review .

Archived from the original on 2019-08-14 . Retrieved 2019-08-14 .

^ "Trust in artificial intelligence - A five country study" (PDF) .

KPMG . March 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-10-01 . Retrieved 2023-10-06 .

^ Bastin R, Wantz G (June 2017).

"The General Data Protection Regulation Cross-industry innovation" (PDF) .

Inside magazine . Deloitte.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-01-10 . Retrieved 2019-01-10 .

^ "UN artificial intelligence summit aims to tackle poverty, humanity's 'grand challenges' " .

UN News . 2017-06-07.

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "Artificial intelligence – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development" .

www.oecd.org .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-22 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Anonymous (2018-06-14).

"The European AI Alliance" .

Digital Single Market – European Commission .

Archived from the original on 2019-08-01 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ European Commission High-Level Expert Group on AI (2019-06-26).

"Policy and investment recommendations for trustworthy Artificial Intelligence" .

Shaping Europe’s digital future – European Commission .

Archived from the original on 2020-02-26 . Retrieved 2020-03-16 .

^ Fukuda-Parr S, Gibbons E (July 2021).

"Emerging Consensus on 'Ethical AI': Human Rights Critique of Stakeholder Guidelines" .

Global Policy .

12 (S6): 32– 44.

doi : 10.1111/1758-5899.12965 .

ISSN 1758-5880 .

^ "EU Tech Policy Brief: July 2019 Recap" .

Center for Democracy & Technology . 2 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 2019-08-09 . Retrieved 2019-08-09 .

^ Curtis C, Gillespie N, Lockey S (2022-05-24).

"AI-deploying organizations are key to addressing 'perfect storm' of AI risks" .

AI and Ethics .

3 (1): 145– 153.

doi : 10.1007/s43681-022-00163-7 .

ISSN 2730-5961 .

PMC 9127285 .

PMID 35634256 .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-15 . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ a b c "EU AI Act: first regulation on artificial intelligence" .

European Parliament . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

^ a b "AI Act enters into force" .

European Commission . 2024-08-01 . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

^ Challen R, Denny J, Pitt M, Gompels L, Edwards T, Tsaneva-Atanasova K (March 2019).

"Artificial intelligence, bias and clinical safety" .

BMJ Quality & Safety .

28 (3): 231– 237.

doi : 10.1136/bmjqs-2018-008370 .

ISSN 2044-5415 .

PMC 6560460 .

PMID 30636200 .

^ a b Thomas Metzinger (February 2021).

"Artificial Suffering: An Argument for a Global Moratorim on Synthetic Phenomenology" .

Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Consciousness .

8 : 43– 66.

doi : 10.1142/S270507852150003X .

S2CID 233176465 .

^ a b Agarwal A, Edelman S (2020). "Functionally effective conscious AI without suffering".

Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Consciousness .

7 : 39– 50.

arXiv : 2002.05652 .

doi : 10.1142/S2705078520300030 .

S2CID 211096533 .

^ Roose K (2025-04-24).

"If A.I. Systems Become Conscious, Should They Have Rights?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2025-04-24 .

^ Birch J (2017-01-01).

"Animal sentience and the precautionary principle" .

Animal Sentience .

2 (16).

doi : 10.51291/2377-7478.1200 .

ISSN 2377-7478 .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-11 . Retrieved 2024-07-08 .

^ Macrae C (September 2022).

"Learning from the Failure of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems: Accidents, Safety, and Sociotechnical Sources of Risk" .

Risk Analysis .

42 (9): 1999– 2025.

Bibcode : 2022RiskA..42.1999M .

doi : 10.1111/risa.13850 .

ISSN 0272-4332 .

PMID 34814229 .

^ Chalmers D (March 2023). "Could a Large Language Model be Conscious?".

arXiv : 2303.07103v1 [ Science Computer Science ].

^ Edwards B (2024-11-11).

"Anthropic hires its first "AI welfare" researcher" .

Ars Technica . Retrieved 2025-04-24 .

^ Wiggers K (2025-04-24).

"Anthropic is launching a new program to study AI 'model welfare' " .

TechCrunch . Retrieved 2025-04-27 .

^ Shulman C, Bostrom N (August 2021).

"Sharing the World with Digital Minds" (PDF) .

Rethinking Moral Status : 306– 326.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780192894076.003.0018 .

ISBN 978-0-19-289407-6 .

^ Fisher R (13 November 2020).

"The intelligent monster that you should let eat you" . BBC News . Retrieved 12 February 2021 .

^ a b Weizenbaum J (1976).

Computer Power and Human Reason . San Francisco: W.H. Freeman & Company.

ISBN 978-0-7167-0464-5 .

McCorduck P (2004), Machines Who Think (2nd ed.), Natick, Massachusetts: A. K. Peters, ISBN 1-5688-1205-1 , pp. 132–144 ^ a b Joseph Weizenbaum , quoted in McCorduck 2004 , pp. 356, 374–376 ^ Kaplan A, Haenlein M (January 2019). "Siri, Siri, in my hand: Who's the fairest in the land? On the interpretations, illustrations, and implications of artificial intelligence".

Business Horizons .

62 (1): 15– 25.

doi : 10.1016/j.bushor.2018.08.004 .

S2CID 158433736 .

^ a b Hibbard B (17 November 2015). "Ethical Artificial Intelligence".

arXiv : 1411.1373 [ cs.AI ].

^ Davies A (29 February 2016).

"Google's Self-Driving Car Caused Its First Crash" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2019 .

^ Levin S , Wong JC (19 March 2018).

"Self-driving Uber kills Arizona woman in first fatal crash involving pedestrian" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 26 July 2019 . Retrieved 26 July 2019 .

^ "Who is responsible when a self-driving car has an accident?" .

Futurism . 30 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "Autonomous Car Crashes: Who – or What – Is to Blame?" .

Knowledge@Wharton . Law and Public Policy. Radio Business North America Podcasts.

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Delbridge E.

"Driverless Cars Gone Wild" .

The Balance .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-29 . Retrieved 2019-05-29 .

^ Stilgoe J (2020), "Who Killed Elaine Herzberg?" , Who’s Driving Innovation?

, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

1– 6, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-32320-2_1 , ISBN 978-3-030-32319-6 , S2CID 214359377 , archived from the original on 2021-03-18 , retrieved 2020-11-11 ^ Maxmen A (October 2018).

"Self-driving car dilemmas reveal that moral choices are not universal" .

Nature .

562 (7728): 469– 470.

Bibcode : 2018Natur.562..469M .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-018-07135-0 .

PMID 30356197 .

^ "Regulations for driverless cars" .

GOV.UK .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "Automated Driving: Legislative and Regulatory Action – CyberWiki" .

cyberlaw.stanford.edu . Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ "Autonomous Vehicles | Self-Driving Vehicles Enacted Legislation" .

www.ncsl.org .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Etzioni A, Etzioni O (2017-12-01).

"Incorporating Ethics into Artificial Intelligence" .

The Journal of Ethics .

21 (4): 403– 418.

doi : 10.1007/s10892-017-9252-2 .

ISSN 1572-8609 .

S2CID 254644745 .

^ Call for debate on killer robots Archived 2009-08-07 at the Wayback Machine , By Jason Palmer, Science and technology reporter, BBC News, 8/3/09.

^ a b Science New Navy-funded Report Warns of War Robots Going "Terminator" Archived 2009-07-28 at the Wayback Machine , by Jason Mick (Blog), dailytech.com, February 17, 2009.

^ a b Navy report warns of robot uprising, suggests a strong moral compass Archived 2011-06-04 at the Wayback Machine , by Joseph L. Flatley engadget.com, Feb 18th 2009.

^ AAAI Presidential Panel on Long-Term AI Futures 2008–2009 Study Archived 2009-08-28 at the Wayback Machine , Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, Accessed 7/26/09.

^ United States. Defense Innovation Board.

AI principles: recommendations on the ethical use of artificial intelligence by the Department of Defense .

OCLC 1126650738 .

^ Umbrello S, Torres P, De Bellis AF (March 2020).

"The future of war: could lethal autonomous weapons make conflict more ethical?" .

AI & Society .

35 (1): 273– 282.

doi : 10.1007/s00146-019-00879-x .

hdl : 2318/1699364 .

ISSN 0951-5666 .

S2CID 59606353 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-05 . Retrieved 2020-11-11 .

^ Jamison M (2024-12-20).

"DARPA Launches Ethics Program for Autonomous Systems" .

executivegov.com . Retrieved 2025-01-02 .

^ "DARPA's ASIMOV seeks to develop Ethical Standards for Autonomous Systems" .

Space Daily . Retrieved 2025-01-02 .

^ Hellström T (June 2013).

"On the moral responsibility of military robots" .

Ethics and Information Technology .

15 (2): 99– 107.

doi : 10.1007/s10676-012-9301-2 .

S2CID 15205810 .

ProQuest 1372020233 .

^ Mitra A (5 April 2018).

"We can train AI to identify good and evil, and then use it to teach us morality" .

Quartz .

Archived from the original on 2019-07-26 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ Dominguez G (23 August 2022).

"South Korea developing new stealthy drones to support combat aircraft" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ "AI Principles" .

Future of Life Institute . 11 August 2017.

Archived from the original on 2017-12-11 . Retrieved 2019-07-26 .

^ a b Zach Musgrave and Bryan W. Roberts (2015-08-14).

"Why Artificial Intelligence Can Too Easily Be Weaponized – The Atlantic" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 2017-04-11 . Retrieved 2017-03-06 .

^ Cat Zakrzewski (2015-07-27).

"Musk, Hawking Warn of Artificial Intelligence Weapons" .

WSJ .

Archived from the original on 2015-07-28 . Retrieved 2017-08-04 .

^ "Potential Risks from Advanced Artificial Intelligence" .

Open Philanthropy . August 11, 2015 . Retrieved 2024-04-07 .

^ a b Bachulska A, Leonard M, Oertel J (2 July 2024).

The Idea of China: Chinese Thinkers on Power, Progress, and People (EPUB) . Berlin, Germany: European Council on Foreign Relations .

ISBN 978-1-916682-42-9 .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2024 . Retrieved 22 July 2024 .

^ Brandon Vigliarolo.

"International military AI summit ends with 60-state pledge" .

www.theregister.com . Retrieved 2023-02-17 .

^ a b Markoff J (25 July 2009).

"Scientists Worry Machines May Outsmart Man" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ Muehlhauser, Luke, and Louie Helm. 2012.

"Intelligence Explosion and Machine Ethics" Archived 2015-05-07 at the Wayback Machine . In Singularity Hypotheses: A Scientific and Philosophical Assessment, edited by Amnon Eden, Johnny Søraker, James H. Moor, and Eric Steinhart. Berlin: Springer.

^ Bostrom, Nick. 2003.

"Ethical Issues in Advanced Artificial Intelligence" Archived 2018-10-08 at the Wayback Machine . In Cognitive, Emotive and Ethical Aspects of Decision Making in Humans and in Artificial Intelligence, edited by Iva Smit and George E. Lasker, 12–17. Vol. 2. Windsor, ON: International Institute for Advanced Studies in Systems Research / Cybernetics.

^ Bostrom N (2017).

Superintelligence: paths, dangers, strategies . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-967811-2 .

^ Umbrello S, Baum SD (2018-06-01).

"Evaluating future nanotechnology: The net societal impacts of atomically precise manufacturing" .

Futures .

100 : 63– 73.

doi : 10.1016/j.futures.2018.04.007 .

hdl : 2318/1685533 .

ISSN 0016-3287 .

S2CID 158503813 .

Archived from the original on 2019-05-09 . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ Yudkowsky, Eliezer. 2011.

"Complex Value Systems in Friendly AI" Archived 2015-09-29 at the Wayback Machine . In Schmidhuber, Thórisson, and Looks 2011, 388–393.

^ Russell S (October 8, 2019).

Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control . United States: Viking.

ISBN 978-0-525-55861-3 .

OCLC 1083694322 .

^ Yampolskiy RV (2020-03-01).

"Unpredictability of AI: On the Impossibility of Accurately Predicting All Actions of a Smarter Agent" .

Journal of Artificial Intelligence and Consciousness .

07 (1): 109– 118.

doi : 10.1142/S2705078520500034 .

ISSN 2705-0785 .

S2CID 218916769 .

Archived from the original on 2021-03-18 . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ Wallach W, Vallor S (2020-09-17), "Moral Machines: From Value Alignment to Embodied Virtue" , Ethics of Artificial Intelligence , Oxford University Press, pp.

383– 412, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190905033.003.0014 , ISBN 978-0-19-090503-3 , archived from the original on 2020-12-08 , retrieved 2020-11-29 ^ Umbrello S (2019).

"Beneficial Artificial Intelligence Coordination by Means of a Value Sensitive Design Approach" .

Big Data and Cognitive Computing .

3 (1): 5.

doi : 10.3390/bdcc3010005 .

hdl : 2318/1685727 .

^ Floridi L, Cowls J, King TC, Taddeo M (2020).

"How to Design AI for Social Good: Seven Essential Factors" .

Science and Engineering Ethics .

26 (3): 1771– 1796.

doi : 10.1007/s11948-020-00213-5 .

ISSN 1353-3452 .

PMC 7286860 .

PMID 32246245 .

^ "Llama Guard: LLM-based Input-Output Safeguard for Human-AI Conversations" .

Meta.com . Retrieved 2024-12-06 .

^ a b Šekrst K, McHugh J, Cefalu JR (2024). "AI Ethics by Design: Implementing Customizable Guardrails for Responsible AI Development".

arXiv : 2411.14442 [ cs.CY ].

^ "Nvidia NeMo Guardrails" .

Nvidia . Retrieved 2024-12-06 .

^ Inan H, Upasani K, Chi J, Rungta R, Iyer K, Mao Y, Tontchev M, Hu Q, Fuller B, Testuggine D, Khabsa M (2023). "Llama Guard: LLM-based Input-Output Safeguard for Human-AI Conversations".

arXiv : 2312.06674 [ cs.CL ].

^ Dong Y, Mu R, Jin G, Qi Y, Hu J, Zhao X, Meng J, Ruan W, Huang X (2024). "Building Guardrails for Large Language Models".

arXiv : 2402.01822 [ cs ].

^ Fiegerman S (28 September 2016).

"Facebook, Google, Amazon create group to ease AI concerns" .

CNNMoney .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Slota SC, Fleischmann KR, Greenberg S, Verma N, Cummings B, Li L, Shenefiel C (2023).

"Locating the work of artificial intelligence ethics" .

Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology .

74 (3): 311– 322.

doi : 10.1002/asi.24638 .

ISSN 2330-1635 .

S2CID 247342066 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-07-21 .

^ "Ethics guidelines for trustworthy AI" .

Shaping Europe’s digital future – European Commission . European Commission. 2019-04-08.

Archived from the original on 2020-02-20 . Retrieved 2020-02-20 .

^ "White Paper on Artificial Intelligence – a European approach to excellence and trust | Shaping Europe's digital future" . 19 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 2021-03-06 . Retrieved 2021-03-18 .

^ "Why the world needs a Bill of Rights on AI" .

Financial Times . 2021-10-18 . Retrieved 2023-03-19 .

^ "OECD AI Policy Observatory" .

Archived from the original on 2021-03-08 . Retrieved 2021-03-18 .

^ Recommendation on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence . UNESCO. 2021.

^ "UNESCO member states adopt first global agreement on AI ethics" .

Helsinki Times . 2021-11-26.

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-04-26 .

^ "The Obama Administration's Roadmap for AI Policy" .

Harvard Business Review . 2016-12-21.

ISSN 0017-8012 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-22 . Retrieved 2021-03-16 .

^ "Accelerating America's Leadership in Artificial Intelligence – The White House" .

trumpwhitehouse.archives.gov .

Archived from the original on 2021-02-25 . Retrieved 2021-03-16 .

^ "Request for Comments on a Draft Memorandum to the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, "Guidance for Regulation of Artificial Intelligence Applications" " .

Federal Register . 2020-01-13.

Archived from the original on 2020-11-25 . Retrieved 2020-11-28 .

^ Sen Thune J[ (2024-12-18).

"Text - S.3312 - 118th Congress (2023-2024): Artificial Intelligence Research, Innovation, and Accountability Act of 2024" .

www.congress.gov . Retrieved 2025-05-25 .

^ "CCC Offers Draft 20-Year AI Roadmap; Seeks Comments" .

HPCwire . 2019-05-14.

Archived from the original on 2021-03-18 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ "Request Comments on Draft: A 20-Year Community Roadmap for AI Research in the US » CCC Blog" . 13 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-14 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ (in Russian) Интеллектуальные правила Archived 2021-12-30 at the Wayback Machine — Kommersant , 25.11.2021 ^ Grace K, Salvatier J, Dafoe A, Zhang B, Evans O (2018-05-03). "When Will AI Exceed Human Performance? Evidence from AI Experts".

arXiv : 1705.08807 [ cs.AI ].

^ "China wants to shape the global future of artificial intelligence" .

MIT Technology Review .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-20 . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ Adam D (2024-04-26).

"Future of Humanity Institute shuts: what's next for 'deep future' research?" .

Nature .

629 (8010): 16– 17.

doi : 10.1038/d41586-024-01229-8 .

PMID 38671273 .

^ Floridi L, Cowls J, Beltrametti M, Chatila R, Chazerand P, Dignum V, Luetge C, Madelin R, Pagallo U, Rossi F, Schafer B (2018-12-01).

"AI4People—An Ethical Framework for a Good AI Society: Opportunities, Risks, Principles, and Recommendations" .

Minds and Machines .

28 (4): 689– 707.

doi : 10.1007/s11023-018-9482-5 .

ISSN 1572-8641 .

PMC 6404626 .

PMID 30930541 .

^ "AI Governance" .

Oxford Martin School . Retrieved 2025-02-19 .

^ "Joanna J. Bryson" .

WIRED .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 13 January 2023 .

^ "New Artificial Intelligence Research Institute Launches" . 2017-11-20.

Archived from the original on 2020-09-18 . Retrieved 2021-02-21 .

^ James J. Hughes, LaGrandeur, Kevin, eds. (15 March 2017).

Surviving the machine age: intelligent technology and the transformation of human work . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan Cham.

ISBN 978-3-319-51165-8 .

OCLC 976407024 .

^ Danaher, John (2019).

Automation and utopia: human flourishing in a world without work . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-24220-3 .

OCLC 1114334813 .

^ "TUM Institute for Ethics in Artificial Intelligence officially opened" .

www.tum.de .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-10 . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ Communications PK (2019-01-25).

"Harvard works to embed ethics in computer science curriculum" .

Harvard Gazette .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2023-04-06 .

^ Lee J (2020-02-08).

"When Bias Is Coded Into Our Technology" .

NPR . Retrieved 2021-12-22 .

^ "How one conference embraced diversity" .

Nature .

564 (7735): 161– 162. 2018-12-12.

doi : 10.1038/d41586-018-07718-x .

PMID 31123357 .

S2CID 54481549 .

^ Roose K (2020-12-30).

"The 2020 Good Tech Awards" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2021-12-21 .

^ Lodge P (2014).

"Leibniz's Mill Argument Against Mechanical Materialism Revisited" .

Ergo: An Open Access Journal of Philosophy .

1 (20201214).

doi : 10.3998/ergo.12405314.0001.003 .

hdl : 2027/spo.12405314.0001.003 .

ISSN 2330-4014 .

^ Bringsjord S, Govindarajulu NS (2020), "Artificial Intelligence" , in Zalta EN, Nodelman U (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 2022-03-08 , retrieved 2023-12-08 ^ Kulesz, O. (2018). " Culture, Platforms and Machines ". UNESCO, Paris.

^ Jr HC (1999-04-29).

Information Technology and the Productivity Paradox: Assessing the Value of Investing in IT . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-802838-3 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-25 . Retrieved 2024-02-21 .

^ Asimov I (2008).

I, Robot . New York: Bantam.

ISBN 978-0-553-38256-3 .

^ Bryson J, Diamantis M, Grant T (September 2017).

"Of, for, and by the people: the legal lacuna of synthetic persons" .

Artificial Intelligence and Law .

25 (3): 273– 291.

doi : 10.1007/s10506-017-9214-9 .

^ "Principles of robotics" . UK's EPSRC. September 2010.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 January 2019 .

^ Yudkowsky E (July 2004).

"Why We Need Friendly AI" .

3 laws unsafe . Archived from the original on May 24, 2012.

^ Aleksander I (March 2017).

"Partners of Humans: A Realistic Assessment of the Role of Robots in the Foreseeable Future" .

Journal of Information Technology .

32 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.1057/s41265-016-0032-4 .

ISSN 0268-3962 .

S2CID 5288506 .

Archived from the original on 2024-02-21 . Retrieved 2024-02-21 .

^ Evolving Robots Learn To Lie To Each Other Archived 2009-08-28 at the Wayback Machine , Popular Science, August 18, 2009 ^ Bassett C, Steinmueller E, Voss G.

"Better Made Up: The Mutual Influence of Science Fiction and Innovation" . Nesta.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2024 . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ Velasco G (2020-05-04).

"Science-Fiction: A Mirror for the Future of Humankind" .

IDEES .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-22 . Retrieved 2023-12-08 .

^ "Love, Death & Robots season 2, episode 1 recap - "Automated Customer Service" " .

Ready Steady Cut . 2021-05-14.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 2021-12-21 .

^ Cave, Stephen, Dihal, Kanta, Dillon, Sarah, eds. (14 February 2020).

AI narratives: a history of imaginative thinking about intelligent machines (First ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-258604-9 .

OCLC 1143647559 .

^ Cerqui D, Warwick K (2008), "Re-Designing Humankind: The Rise of Cyborgs, a Desirable Goal?" , Philosophy and Design , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

185– 195, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-6591-0_14 , ISBN 978-1-4020-6590-3 , archived from the original on 2021-03-18 , retrieved 2020-11-11 External links [ edit ] Ethics of Artificial Intelligence at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Ethics of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Cambridge Handbook of the Law, Ethics and Policy of Artificial Intelligence Russell S, Hauert S, Altman R, Veloso M (May 2015).

"Robotics: Ethics of artificial intelligence" .

Nature .

521 (7553): 415– 418.

Bibcode : 2015Natur.521..415.

.

doi : 10.1038/521415a .

PMID 26017428 .

S2CID 4452826 .

BBC News: Games to take on a life of their own A short history of computer ethics AI Ethics Guidelines Global Inventory by Algorithmwatch Hagendorff T (March 2020).

"The Ethics of AI Ethics: An Evaluation of Guidelines" .

Minds and Machines .

30 (1): 99– 120.

arXiv : 1903.03425 .

doi : 10.1007/s11023-020-09517-8 .

S2CID 72940833 .

Sheludko, M. (December, 2023).

Ethical Aspects of Artificial Intelligence: Challenges and Imperatives . Software Development Blog.

Eisikovits N.

"AI Is an Existential Threat—Just Not the Way You Think" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 2024-03-04 .

Anwar U, Saparov A, Rando J, Paleka D, Turpin M, Hase P, Lubana ES, Jenner E, Casper S, Sourbut O, Edelman BL, Zhang Z, Günther M, Korinek A, Hernandez-Orallo J, Hammond L, Bigelow E, Pan A, Langosco L, Krueger D (2024). "Foundational Challenges in Assuring Alignment and Safety of Large Language Models".

arXiv : 2404.09932 [ cs.LG ].

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Artificial intelligence (AI) History timeline Companies Projects Concepts Parameter Hyperparameter Loss functions Regression Bias–variance tradeoff Double descent Overfitting Clustering Gradient descent SGD Quasi-Newton method Conjugate gradient method Backpropagation Attention Convolution Normalization Batchnorm Activation Softmax Sigmoid Rectifier Gating Weight initialization Regularization Datasets Augmentation Prompt engineering Reinforcement learning Q-learning SARSA Imitation Policy gradient Diffusion Latent diffusion model Autoregression Adversary RAG Uncanny valley RLHF Self-supervised learning Reflection Recursive self-improvement Hallucination Word embedding Vibe coding Applications Machine learning In-context learning Artificial neural network Deep learning Language model Large language model NMT Reasoning language model Model Context Protocol Intelligent agent Artificial human companion Humanity's Last Exam Artificial general intelligence (AGI) Implementations Audio–visual AlexNet WaveNet Human image synthesis HWR OCR Computer vision Speech synthesis 15.ai ElevenLabs Speech recognition Whisper Facial recognition AlphaFold Text-to-image models Aurora DALL-E Firefly Flux Ideogram Imagen Midjourney Recraft Stable Diffusion Text-to-video models Dream Machine Runway Gen Hailuo AI Kling Sora Veo Music generation Riffusion Suno AI Udio Text Word2vec Seq2seq GloVe BERT T5 Llama Chinchilla AI PaLM GPT 1 2 3 J ChatGPT 4 4o o1 o3 4.5 4.1 o4-mini 5 Claude Gemini chatbot Grok LaMDA BLOOM DBRX Project Debater IBM Watson IBM Watsonx Granite PanGu-Σ DeepSeek Qwen Decisional AlphaGo AlphaZero OpenAI Five Self-driving car MuZero Action selection AutoGPT Robot control People Alan Turing Warren Sturgis McCulloch Walter Pitts John von Neumann Claude Shannon Shun'ichi Amari Kunihiko Fukushima Takeo Kanade Marvin Minsky John McCarthy Nathaniel Rochester Allen Newell Cliff Shaw Herbert A. Simon Oliver Selfridge Frank Rosenblatt Bernard Widrow Joseph Weizenbaum Seymour Papert Seppo Linnainmaa Paul Werbos Geoffrey Hinton John Hopfield Jürgen Schmidhuber Yann LeCun Yoshua Bengio Lotfi A. Zadeh Stephen Grossberg Alex Graves James Goodnight Andrew Ng Fei-Fei Li Alex Krizhevsky Ilya Sutskever Oriol Vinyals Quoc V. Le Ian Goodfellow Demis Hassabis David Silver Andrej Karpathy Ashish Vaswani Noam Shazeer Aidan Gomez John Schulman Mustafa Suleyman Jan Leike Daniel Kokotajlo François Chollet Architectures Neural Turing machine Differentiable neural computer Transformer Vision transformer (ViT) Recurrent neural network (RNN) Long short-term memory (LSTM) Gated recurrent unit (GRU) Echo state network Multilayer perceptron (MLP) Convolutional neural network (CNN) Residual neural network (RNN) Highway network Mamba Autoencoder Variational autoencoder (VAE) Generative adversarial network (GAN) Graph neural network (GNN) Category v t e Existential risk from artificial intelligence Concepts AGI AI alignment AI boom AI capability control AI safety AI takeover Consequentialism Effective accelerationism Ethics of artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence Friendly artificial intelligence Instrumental convergence Vulnerable world hypothesis Intelligence explosion Longtermism Machine ethics Suffering risks Superintelligence Technological singularity Organizations Alignment Research Center Center for AI Safety Center for Applied Rationality Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence Centre for the Study of Existential Risk EleutherAI Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Google DeepMind Humanity+ Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence Machine Intelligence Research Institute OpenAI Safe Superintelligence People Scott Alexander Sam Altman Yoshua Bengio Nick Bostrom Paul Christiano Eric Drexler Sam Harris Stephen Hawking Dan Hendrycks Geoffrey Hinton Bill Joy Shane Legg Elon Musk Steve Omohundro Huw Price Martin Rees Stuart J. Russell Ilya Sutskever Jaan Tallinn Max Tegmark Frank Wilczek Roman Yampolskiy Eliezer Yudkowsky Other Artificial Intelligence Act Do You Trust This Computer?

Human Compatible Open letter on artificial intelligence (2015) Our Final Invention Roko's basilisk Statement on AI risk of extinction Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies The Precipice Category v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fv4b
Cached time: 20250817222253
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.108 seconds
Real time usage: 2.289 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13913/1000000
Revision size: 152402/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 599261/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8114/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 822112/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.416/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27991056/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1908.644      1 -total
 77.40% 1477.275      1 Template:Reflist
 23.05%  440.037     81 Template:Cite_web
 21.36%  407.635     60 Template:Cite_journal
  5.47%  104.311     22 Template:Cite_news
  5.42%  103.357      1 Template:Harvnb
  4.87%   93.003      6 Template:Navbox
  4.73%   90.266     18 Template:Cite_book
  4.33%   82.681      1 Template:In_lang
  4.27%   81.507     11 Template:Cite_arXiv Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13659583:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222253 and revision id 1306466533. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethics_of_artificial_intelligence&oldid=1306466533 " Categories : Artificial intelligence Philosophy of artificial intelligence Ethics of science and technology Regulation of robots Regulation of artificial intelligence Ethics by topic Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2024 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from November 2020 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 22:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethics of artificial intelligence 27 languages Add topic

