Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ideologies, fields and concepts 2 Social epidemiology 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Environmental social science 7 languages العربية भोजपुरी فارسی 한국어 Português தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interaction of humans with the environment Environment Human impact on the climate Issues Environmentalism Stewardship Environmental studies Environment in Consulting Education Engineering Humanities Law Policy Science Social science Article index Lists Portal Category Commons v t e Environmental social science is the broad, transdisciplinary study of interrelations between humans and the natural environment. Environmental social scientists work within and between the fields of anthropology , communication studies , economics , geography , history , political science , psychology , and sociology ; and also in the interdisciplinary fields of environmental studies , human ecology and political ecology , social epidemiology , among others.

Ideologies, fields and concepts [ edit ] Ideologies, fields, and concepts in environmental social science aim to convey environmental issues as intertwined in societal relations, institutions, and human activities that continually shape the environment or are themselves shaped by the environment. For example, political ecology is based on the premise that the environment is not apolitical. Therefore, the way it is managed, who has access to the environment, how environmental resources are distributed are shaped through political structures, power relations, economic institutions and social processes.

[ 1 ] Paul Robbins, conveys this in his differentiation of 'apolitical' versus political ecologies. According to Robbins, political ecology places emphasis on identifying "broader systems rather than blaming proximate and local forces; between viewing ecological systems as power-laden rather than politically inert; and between taking an explicitly normative approach rather than one that claims the objectivity of disinterest".

[ 1 ] Human-environmental relations reverberate through "the system"  (politics, economics, power relations) moving through an entire web of human relations and structures that are intertwined in ecological relations.

[ 2 ] Therefore, environmental social scientists stress human–environmental relationships.

Another idea that has risen to prominence in environmental social science in light of this, is the idea of " environmental justice " which connects issues in the field of social justice with issues related to the environment.

[ 3 ] In describing environmental justice, the concepts emphasized by Shoreman-Ouimet and Kopnina include "equity equality, and rights issues in relation to both social and ecological actors".

[ 4 ] This pans out in debates about environmental vulnerability and the unequal distribution of resources. Here lies the idea that certain groups are made more vulnerable to "environmental burdens" [ 3 ] while others gain more access to "environmental benefits" [ 3 ] as defined in terms of environmental resources and services.

[ 3 ] In further attempting to understand human-environmental relationships, environmental social science disciplines have begun to explore relationships between humans and non-humans, to understand how both interact with each other within the natural world -- interactions that force the reconceptualization of identity as ecocultural.

[ 5 ] Ideas related to exploring human and animal interactions within the natural world have become prominent in environmental ethics . Shoreman-Ouimet and Kopnina define environment ethics as "a sub-discipline of philosophy that deals with the ethical problems surrounding the environment, in some cases providing ethical justification and moral motivation for the cause of environmental protection or for considerations of animal welfare".

[ 3 ] This has culminated in debates regarding environmental value and moral rights and who within the larger ecosystem should be assigned these rights.

[ 3 ] Environmental ethics explores the dialectic between human and nature exploring how the human configuration of nature may in turn reshape humans, their relationships and their conditions. Ideas that have emerged from the questions seeking to examine this dialectic include those of "post-domesticity and domesticity".

[ 6 ] Domesticity refers to societal dynamics produced in societies in which humans have daily contact with animals other than pets. In contrast, in post-domesticity people are quite distant from the animals they consume. In referencing the ideas of Bulliet (2005), Emel and Neo convey that a distance from witnessing the processes that govern animal life including births, deaths while consuming animals as food, impacts people differently than if they were to be interacting continuously with animals.

[ 6 ] They mention that post-domesticity may produce feelings of guilt however the continued distance between animal life brought by interacting with animals as a commodity may cause people to only distantly relate to them or think of them as packages in a store disassociating them from the life-cycles they embody.

[ 6 ] Therefore, environmental science has paved the way to multiple concepts, ideas and paradigms that differ among each other but all seek to intertwine issues related to the environment with other fields and issues in the social sciences.

Social epidemiology [ edit ] Social epidemiologists research how SES (socio-economic status) determines varying access to resources like income and prestige can generate stratification in health and quality of life.

[ 7 ] Often, their investigations relate to the social determinants of health which the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports as the "conditions in the places where people live, learn, work, and play ... that affect a wide range of health risks and outcomes".

[ 8 ] These epidemiologists must work in conjunction with environmental social scientists to understand the significance of different environments' effects on humans. Such work influences environmental and public health policies to better the living standards for humans globally. The Fifth European Ministerial Conference on Environment and Health agreed to work on improving low-income housing conditions with new urban planning , health equity , and environmental justice policies with a specific focus on preventing children from exposure to significant environmental health risks.

[ 9 ] Certain environments' affects on humans provides trends that social epidemiologists can investigate to determine if they are related to a divide of social status especially if only a certain part of the population is negatively affected.

Epidemiology uses a host-agent-environment triangle framework to understand why humans are falling ill and this three prong approach allows social epidemiologists to explore how the environment is contributing to the decline in health status for a subsection of or the entire population.

[ 10 ] It promotes the idea that the social, cultural, economic, political and environmental factors are all important factors to be considered, and health impact assessments (HIA) recommended by social epidemiologists working with environment social scientists are effectively making positive changes in the environment.

[ 10 ] The World Health Organization (WHO) worked with its members to compose the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) protocol in 2001 to ensure health impact assessments would be made with environmental assessments for policies relating to bettering the quality of life especially within low socioeconomic communities all around the world.

[ 11 ] As the environment can create stressors that are factors (i.e. low quality housing in areas of high pollution) that limit the quality of life of millions of people globally, environmental social scientists work collaboratively with the data social epidemiologists investigate and provide to understand the relationship between health status and environmental issues.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Climate justice Coupled human–environment system Human impact on the environment List of environmental social science journals List of environmental studies topics Social science Women and the environment References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Robbins, Paul (2012).

Political Ecology: A critical introduction . Wiley Blackbell. pp.

13– 14.

^ Robbins, Paul (2012).

Political Ecology: A critical Introduction . Wiley Blackbell. p. 13.

^ a b c d e f Shoreman-Ouimet, Eleanor and Helen; Kopnina (2016).

Culture and Conservation: Beyond Anthropocentrism . London, New York: Routledge. pp.

120– 147.

^ Shoreman-Ouimet, Eleanor and Helen; Kopnina (2016).

Culture and Conservation: Beyond Anthropocentrism . London, New York: Routledge. p. 146.

^ Milstein, T. & Castro-Sotomayor, J. (2020). "Routledge Handbook of Ecocultural Identity." London, UK: Routledge.

https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351068840 .

^ a b c Emel, Jodey & Harvey; Neo (2015).

Political Ecology of Meat . London, New York: Routledge. pp.

5– 6.

^ Berkman, Lisa F.; Kawachi, Ichirō; Glymour, M. Maria (2014).

Social Epidemiology . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195377903 .

^ "Social Determinants of Health | CDC" .

www.cdc.gov . 2017-07-28 . Retrieved 2017-11-20 .

^ "WHO | Housing and Health" .

www.who.int . Archived from the original on March 7, 2011 . Retrieved 2017-11-20 .

^ a b Gulis, Gabriel; Fujino, Yoshihisa (2015-03-05).

"Epidemiology, Population Health, and Health Impact Assessment" .

Journal of Epidemiology .

25 (3): 179– 180.

doi : 10.2188/jea.JE20140212 .

ISSN 0917-5040 .

PMC 4340993 .

PMID 25716580 .

^ "WHO | WHO activities in HIA" .

www.who.int . Archived from the original on July 1, 2004 . Retrieved 2017-11-20 .

^ Berkman, Lisa F.; Kawachi, Ichirō; Glymour, M. Maria (2014).

Social Epidemiology . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195377903 .

Further reading [ edit ] Berkhout, Frans, Melissa Leach, and Ian Scoones. 2003. "Shifting perspectives in environmental social science." pp. 1–31 in Negotiating Environmental Change: New Perspectives from Social Science . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

ISBN 978-1843761532 Folmer, Henk, and Olof Johansson-Stenman. 2011. "Does Environmental Economics Produce Aeroplanes Without Engines? On the Need for an Environmental Social Science," Environmental and Resource Economics 48 (3): 337-361.

Moran, Emilio. 2010.

Environmental Social Science: Human-Environment Interactions and Sustainability . Malden, MA: John Wiley.

ISBN 978-1405105743 Scoones, I. 1999. "New Ecology and the Social Sciences: What Prospects for a Fruitful Engagement?" Annual Review of Anthropology 28 : 479-507.

Vaccaro, Ismael, Eric Alden Smith, and Shankar Aswani, eds. 2010.

Environmental Social Sciences: Methods and Research Design . Cambridge, UK, and New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-12571-0 v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Environmental_social_science&oldid=1296080875 " Categories : Environmental social science Transdisciplinarity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 17:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Environmental social science 7 languages Add topic

