Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Government sanctioned deer culling 2 Types of hunting Toggle Types of hunting subsection 2.1 Chamois 2.2 Deer 2.3 Pigs 2.4 Tahr 2.5 Duck shooting 3 Legislation 4 Organisations 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hunting in New Zealand 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Deer culling" redirects here. For deer culling in other countries, see Culling § Deer .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Hunting in New Zealand" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A memorial on the Lindis Pass erected in 1971 commemorating the release of red deer in Otago in 1871.

Hunting is a popular recreational pursuit and a tourist activity in New Zealand with numerous books and magazines published on the topic. Unlike most other developed countries with a hunting tradition, there are no bag-limits or seasons for hunting large game in New Zealand. Hunting in national parks is allowed by permit. The wide variety of game animals and the limited restrictions means hunting is a popular pastime which has resulted in a high level of firearms ownership among civilians.

Prior to human settlement New Zealand had no land based mammals other than two species of bats , [ 1 ] one of which is now extinct, and two species of Otariidae .  European settlers introduced a wide range of animals including some specifically for game hunting.

Acclimatisation societies were active for a period of 60 years from the 1860s in having introduced animals established in New Zealand. The majority were introduced for food or sport.

[ 2 ] In the 1980s Recreational Hunting Areas (RHA's) were set up to support recreational hunting on conservation land. The RHA's are administered by the Department of Conservation .

[ 3 ] Guided or independent hunting is open to non-resident hunters with a firearms licence and permit issued by the Department of Conservation .  Because of the number of large game species and varied terrain available, New Zealand is a popular destination for hunting-based tourism.

[ 4 ] Government sanctioned deer culling [ edit ] By the 1950s red deer were recognised as an animal pest which damaged the natural environment and the government began employing hunters to cull the deer population to prevent this damage. Networks of tracks with bridges and huts were set up to gain easy access into the backcountry . These tracks and huts, now maintained by the Department of Conservation , are popular for tramping .

Types of hunting [ edit ] Chamois [ edit ] Chamois is a goat-antelope native to Europe. Alpine chamois arrived in New Zealand in 1907 as a gift from the Austrian Emperor, Franz Joseph I . The first surviving releases were made in the Aoraki / Mount Cook region and these animals gradually spread over much of the South Island .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] They are often referred to colloquially as "chamy" (pronounced "shamy").

In New Zealand, hunting of chamois is unrestricted and even encouraged by the Department of Conservation to limit the animal's impact on New Zealand's native alpine flora .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Deer [ edit ] Fallow deer ( Dama dama ) A smaller species of deer in New Zealand. Various genotypes exist with differing colour phases: (i) common, (ii) melanistic, (iii) menil and (iv) white. They are often found in bush closer to pasture/farmland, as they prefer grazing on grasses.

[ citation needed ] Major herds are found in the North and South Islands of New Zealand.

[ citation needed ] Red deer ( Cervus elaphus scoticus ) The red deer in New Zealand produce very large antlers and are regarded as amongst the best in the world by hunters.

[ citation needed ] Along with the other introduced deer species they are however regarded as a pest by the Department of Conservation and have at times been heavily culled using professional hunters . Additionally many hunters and outdoors enthusiasts class deer in NZ as a resource, for both food, hobbies, and an economic (tourist attraction). Ongoing issues over their pest status continue to be debated between parties.

Rusa deer ( Rusa timorensis ) A shy and challenging deer to find in New Zealand. Larger populations are found in Te Urewera National Park. Very elusive.

[ citation needed ] Sambar deer ( Rusa unicolor ) A large bodied deer, antlers of 6 points are standard for mature stags.

[ citation needed ] They are hunted on public and private land in the North Island of New Zealand.

Sika deer ( Cervus nippon ) Sika deer were confined to the Kaweka and Kaimanawa Ranges but have been discovered in the Tararua and in Coromandel Ranges . It is thought that they had been transferred by recreational hunters.

[ 8 ] In 2009 it was discovered that they had been illegally released in the Toatoa Valley.

[ 9 ] Sika deer are one of the most sought after deer species to hunt in New Zealand. They are smart, beautiful animals and very cunning. Found in the central North Island, many hunters and tourists enjoy chasing these noisy (have a squeak/squeal as an alarm call), elusive animals. The Department of Conservation have been working with hunters to target mainly hinds, which ensures stags can develop to trophy potential and allow hunters (and tourists) the chance to secure a lifetime trophy.

Moose ( Alces alces ) Ten moose (known in Britain and most of Europe as "elk") were introduced in Fiordland in 1910 but they were thought to have died off. Nevertheless, there have been reported sightings that were thought to be false until moose hair samples were found by a New Zealand scientist in 2002.

[ 10 ] Moose have had patchy sightings since the last was shot in 1956. There is still ongoing debate over their existence and likely will be until legitimate footage is taken, or an animal is shot.

Wapiti ( Cervus canadensis ) Wapiti , also known as elk, are found in Fiordland National Park. These are large animals, growing very large antlers. Length has exceeded 140 centimetres (55 inches) in historic herds, but interbreeding with red deer has reduced the pure wapiti genetics.

[ citation needed ] Antler length and spread often do not exceed 110 cm (45 in).

[ citation needed ] Fiordland Wapiti Foundation have been working with Department of Conservation to actively control and protect this historic herd for hunting, through management of the population. This involves culling of red deer through aerial recovery, and also culling of hybrid red/wapiti in selection for pure wapiti type animals. Slowly genetics are becoming more pure wapiti, and antler length/points/span is increasing once again to trophy status.

[ citation needed ] Whitetail deer ( Odocoileus virginianus ) These deer are found in the lower South Island, but predominantly on Stewart Island . They are challenging and elusive to hunt. They are much smaller in size compared to the American counterparts and do not produce trophy heads as large.

[ citation needed ] Often the environment itself is an attraction to hunters, where many native birds are present, including kiwi roaming the forest during the day.

Pigs [ edit ] They are widespread throughout New Zealand and commonly are hunted using dogs. Pigs range in size and in the wild can exceed 110 kilograms (250 lb).

[ citation needed ] They are sought after by hunters as they have a unique free range taste.

[ citation needed ] They can cause a large amount of damage to the environment through rooting up of native plants.

Tahr [ edit ] The Himalayan tahr sculpture unveiled in May 2014 at Lake Pukaki by Henrietta, Dowager Duchess of Bedford Himalayan tahr , often simply known as "tahr", were gifted to the New Zealand government by the 11th Duke of Bedford in 1903; of the three males and three females, five survived the journey from Woburn Abbey and were released near the Hermitage Hotel at Mount Cook Village . He sent a further shipment in 1909 of six males and two females. Himalayan tahr are near-threatened in their native India and Nepal, but are so numerous in New Zealand's Southern Alps that they are hunted recreationally.

[ 11 ] At their peak in 1970, some 40,000 were in New Zealand. By 1984, the numbers had fallen to between 1,000 and 2,000 due to demand for tahr meat, which triggered a moratorium on commercial harvest.

[ 12 ] The Department of Conservation controls numbers to below 10,000.

[ 13 ] A statue of a Himalayan tahr was unveiled in May 2014 at Lake Pukaki and dedicated by Henrietta, Dowager Duchess of Bedford .

[ 11 ] Tahr are sought after by hunters for their meat, horns and skin. During winter bull tahrs develop a heavy mane and coat that is attractive as skin or rugs.
Most hunters in New Zealand attempt to gain a trophy through climbing into the area where the tahr roam, upwards of 2,000 metres (6,600 ft), although hunting by helicopter has become more common in recent years.

Duck shooting [ edit ] See also: Waterfowl hunting The duck shooting season opens in the first weekend of May and runs for 3 months.

[ citation needed ] A licence must be obtained from Fish and Game New Zealand every season, at a cost of $80NZD (2010 Adult).

[ citation needed ] These can be purchased from most outdoor sporting stores. Strict laws govern the number of birds which are allowed to be taken daily and may change between provinces.

[ citation needed ] Laws also state that ducks must be shot with a shotgun while on the wing (flying). Although a mercy shot on the ground or water is an ethical responsibility of the hunter should a bird be injured during the initial shooting.

[ citation needed ] In 2006 lead shot was banned from use while using 10 or 12 gauge shot on game birds within 200 m of any waterway. Nontoxic shot, mainly steel, is being used as a replacement.

[ citation needed ] Hunters often build blinds known as "maimais" to conceal themselves from ducks, often these are permanent structures besides or on rivers, lakes, lagoons or ponds. They vary in size from small (3x3m), to two storied house sized buildings, complete with running water and electricity. These maimais are then elaborately camouflaged, usually using a combination of live and dead vegetation, camouflaged paint jobs and camouflaged netting. Hunters will also hide in the vegetation near a waterway as a temporary maimai.

To aid luring ducks in, a variety of decoy ducks and duck callers can be purchased commercially, although some hunters prefer to make their own.

Duck species which may be legally hunted are the mallard (and hybrids thereof), Pacific black duck (known as grey ducks), paradise shelduck , and Australasian shoveller .

[ 14 ] Most hunters use specially trained dogs to retrieve ducks which land on the water, and many discussions are held about the best breed for the job, although most will agree that almost any breed can be trained to retrieve.

Game birds in New Zealand are managed by Fish and Game New Zealand , previously the acclimatisation societies of New Zealand .

Legislation [ edit ] The Wild Animal Control Act 1977 regulates commercial and recreation hunting, and established the RHA's.

In 2012 the Game Animal Council Bill was opened up for submissions with the primary aim of establishing a Big Game Hunting Council as part of a national wild game management strategy.

[ 15 ] The bill is part of a support agreement between United Future and the National Party.

Organisations [ edit ] The Conservation Act 1987 established Fish and Game New Zealand as a statutory body to advocate for recreational hunting and fishing in New Zealand. It has statutory responsibility for the sports of freshwater sport-fishing and gamebird hunting. They are funded predominantly from the sale of hunting and fishing licenses.

The New Zealand Deerstalkers Association was established in 1937 to promote the interests of hunters in New Zealand.

[ 16 ] Outdoor Recreation New Zealand lobbies for the hunting and fishing community. From 2002 to 2007 it functioned as a registered political party.

In 2011 the New Zealand government established the Game Animal Council to manage game animals. As well as managing tahr, chamois, deer and pig the council will promote hunters' safety and improve hunting opportunities.

[ 17 ] The New Zealand Deerstalkers Association and Tourism Industry Association welcomed the formation of the Game Animal Council but Forest and Bird , a large nationwide conservation organisation, sees it as an impediment to recreational hunters.

[ 18 ] The New Zealand Game Industry Board is a statutory marketing authority established by regulations made under the Primary Products Marketing Act 1953 .

See also [ edit ] Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Muttonbirding 1080 usage in New Zealand Canada goose in New Zealand Invasive species in New Zealand Barry Crump , a popular New Zealand writer who often incorporated his experiences as a government deer-culler into his books References [ edit ] ^ "Conservation – Native Animals – Bats" . Department of Conservation, New Zealand . Retrieved 15 November 2010 .

^ King, Carolyn (1984).

Immigrant Killers . Auckland: Oxford.

ISBN 0-19-558121-0 .

^ "Recreational Hunting Areas (RHA): Hunting" . Department of Conservation . Retrieved 5 August 2013 .

^ "Permits and licences: Hunting Permit" . Department of Conservation . Retrieved 29 January 2015 .

^ A Note on the Chamois in New Zealand at New Zealand Ecological Society ^ a b Recreational hunting in Nelson/Marlborough – Chamois at the Department of Conservation ^ Heritage Preservation (p. 40 and 45) at the Department of Conservation ^ The State of New Zealand's Environment . Wellington: Ministry for the Environment. 1997. p. 9.31.

ISBN 0-478-09000-5 . Archived from the original on 9 October 2009 . Retrieved 18 August 2009 .

^ "Illegal release of sika deer" . Department of Conservation. 5 February 2009. Archived from the original on 7 November 2011 . Retrieved 18 August 2009 .

^ Oldham, Stu (6 October 2005).

"Hairs move NZ moose out of realm of Nessie" .

The New Zealand Herald . Archived from the original on 21 October 2012 . Retrieved 3 October 2011 .

^ a b "Duchess of Bedford to Dedicate Tahr Statue" (Press release). New Zealand: Scoop. 13 March 2014 . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ Birchfield, Daniel (12 March 2014).

"Tahr sculpture marks new bill" .

The Timaru Herald . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ "Tahr" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 30 December 2014 .

^ http://hunting.fishandgame.org.nz/sites/default/files/GameBird%20NI%202014-15.pdf Archived 9 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine [ bare URL PDF ] ^ "Game Animal Council Bill" . New Zealand Parliament . Retrieved 8 March 2012 .

^ "About the NZ Deerstalkers' Association" . New Zealand Deerstalkers Association. 2006. Archived from the original on 8 February 2013 . Retrieved 7 April 2011 .

^ "Game Animal Council to be established" . New Zealand Government. 6 April 2011. Archived from the original on 3 October 2011 . Retrieved 7 April 2011 .

^ Williams, David (8 April 2011).

"New game body deplored, welcomed" .

The Press . Retrieved 8 April 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hunting in New Zealand .

Hunting information at the Department of Conservation New Zealand Deerstalkers Association World of Deer Museum NZ Archived 22 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine Fishing and Hunting New Zealand – a hunting resource v t e Hunting in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐9x7xd
Cached time: 20250815221131
Cache expiry: 3600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.631 seconds
Real time usage: 0.765 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5551/1000000
Revision size: 19423/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 292520/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11944/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80275/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.336/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9453937/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  571.043      1 -total
 25.57%  146.031      1 Template:Reflist
 20.72%  118.334     11 Template:Navbox
 16.81%   95.993     16 Template:Citation_needed
 14.42%   82.354      7 Template:Cite_web
 14.26%   81.445     17 Template:Fix
 12.23%   69.840      1 Template:Oceania_topic
  9.92%   56.625      1 Template:Animal_rights
  9.48%   54.158      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.68%   49.590      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:23880116:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221131 and revision id 1304251145. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_in_New_Zealand&oldid=1304251145 " Categories : Hunting in New Zealand Animal culling Animal rights Cruelty to animals Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from March 2022 Articles with PDF format bare URLs for citations Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from May 2024 Use New Zealand English from August 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting in New Zealand 1 language Add topic

