Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and history 2 Principles 3 Development 4 Sources 5 Aspects Toggle Aspects subsection 5.1 Environmental education 5.2 Spirituality 6 Criticisms Toggle Criticisms subsection 6.1 Eurocentric bias 6.2 Knowledge of nonhuman interests 6.3 Deep versus Shallowness 6.4 Misanthropy 6.5 Sciencism 6.6 Utopianism 7 Links with other philosophies 8 See also 9 References 10 Additional sources 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Deep ecology 39 languages العربية تۆرکجه Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ecological and environmental philosophy Not to be confused with Ecology .

Environment Human impact on the climate Issues Environmentalism Stewardship Environmental studies Environment in Consulting Education Engineering Humanities Law Policy Science Social science Article index Lists Portal Category Commons v t e Part of a series on Green politics Core topics Climate change litigation Fossil fuels lobby Green party List of topics Politics of climate change Four pillars Ecological wisdom Social justice Grassroots democracy Nonviolence Perspectives Alter-globalization Bright green environmentalism Criticisms of globalization Deep ecology Degrowth Dirty hands Disinvestment Ecoauthoritarianism Eco-capitalism Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green Zionism Social ecology Queer ecology Intellectuals Abbey Albert Anderson Bari Best Beuys Berry Bookchin Brown (Lester) Brower Carson Dodds d'Eaubonne Gandhi George Hawken Jackson Khosla Klein Kovel LaDuke Latouche Linkola Löwy Maathai Mason Næss Negri Nussbaum Porritt Raworth Rendueles Salleh Sassen Schumacher Scruton Shiva Singer Snyder Sukhdev Thoreau Zerzan Politicians Bandt Bausch Benčić Bennett Betancourt Brélaz Brown (Bob) Camejo Cohn-Bendit Cuffe Emsis Fajardo Feinstein Fischer Frassoni Grodzka Habeck Halsema Harris Hourigan Joly Kelly Kogler Kretschmann Kuhn Lalonde Lipietz López Lucas Lunacek Martin Manning May Nader O'Gorman Roth Schmidt-Nielsen Silva Sirkis Stein Trittin Van der Bellen Vējonis Wall Organizations Asia Pacific Greens Federation European Green Party Federation of Green Parties of Africa Federation of the Green Parties of the Americas Federation of Young European Greens Global Greens Global Young Greens World Ecological Parties Related topics Carbon fee and dividend Carbon tax Circular economy Climate change mitigation Climate finance Climate justice Climate target Conservation movement Corporate political activism Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological modernization Ecomodernism Eco-tariff Ecotax Eco-terrorism Environmental conflict effects of agriculture effects of aviation finance issues justice movement planning pricing reform racism technology Environmentalism opposition Environmental skepticism Stewardship in music Fossil fuel phase-out Green development economy growth grabbing greening imperialism industrial policy infrastructure job New Deal recovery retrofit state theory transport hierarchy vehicle washing Localism Low-carbon economy List of environmental incidents conflicts killings Political ecology Progressivism Renewable energy Sustainable design development energy engineering refurbishment transport War on coal Water conflict Environment portal Politics portal v t e Deep ecology is an environmental philosophy that promotes the inherent worth of all living beings regardless of their instrumental utility to human needs, and argues that modern human societies should be restructured in accordance with such ideas.

Deep ecologists argue that the natural world is a complex of relationships in which the existence of organisms is dependent on the existence of others within ecosystems . They argue that non-vital human interference with or destruction of the natural world poses a threat not only to humans, but to all organisms that make up the natural order.

Deep ecology's core principle is the belief that the living environment as a whole should be respected and regarded as having certain basic moral and legal rights to live and flourish, independent of its instrumental benefits for human use. Deep ecology is often framed in terms of the idea of a much broader sociality: it recognizes diverse communities of life on Earth that are composed not only through biotic factors but also, where applicable, through ethical relations, that is, the valuing of other beings as more than just resources. It is described as "deep" because it is regarded as looking more deeply into the reality of humanity's relationship with the natural world, arriving at philosophically more  profound conclusions than those of mainstream environmentalism.

[ 1 ] The movement does not subscribe to anthropocentric environmentalism (which is concerned with conservation of the environment only for exploitation by and for human purposes), since deep ecology is grounded in a different set of philosophical assumptions. Deep ecology takes a holistic view of the world humans live in and seeks to apply to life the understanding that the separate parts of the ecosystem (including humans) function as a whole. The philosophy addresses core principles of different environmental and green movements and advocates a system of environmental ethics advocating wilderness preservation, non-coercive policies encouraging human population decline , animism and simple living .

[ 2 ] Origins and history [ edit ] In his original 1973 deep ecology paper, [ 3 ] Arne Næss stated that he was inspired by ecologists who were studying the ecosystems throughout the world. Næss also made clear that he felt the real motivation to 'free nature' was spiritual and intuitive. 'Your motivation comes from your total view or your philosophical, religious opinions,' he said, 'so that you feel, when you are working in favour of free nature, you are working for something within your self, that ... demands changes. So you are motivated from what I call 'deeper premises'.

[ 4 ] In a 2014 essay, [ 5 ] environmentalist George Sessions identified three people active in the 1960s whom he considered foundational to the movement: author and conservationist Rachel Carson , environmentalist David Brower , and biologist Paul R. Ehrlich . Sessions considers the publication of Carson's 1962 seminal book Silent Spring as the beginning of the contemporary deep ecology movement.

[ 5 ] Næss also considered Carson the originator of the movement, stating "Eureka, I have found it" upon encountering her writings.

[ 6 ] Another event in the 1960s which have been proposed as foundational to the movement are the images of the Earth floating in space taken by the Apollo astronauts.

[ 7 ] Principles [ edit ] Deep ecology proposes an embracing of ecological ideas and environmental ethics (that is, proposals about how humans should relate to nature).

[ 8 ] It is also a social movement based on a holistic vision of the world.

[ 1 ] Deep ecologists hold that the survival of any part is dependent upon the well-being of the whole, and criticise the narrative of human supremacy, which they say has not been a feature of most cultures throughout human evolution.

[ 7 ] Deep ecology presents an eco-centric (Earth-centred) view, rather than the anthropocentric (human-centred) view, developed in its most recent form by philosophers of the Enlightenment, such as Newton, Bacon, and Descartes. Proponents of deep ecology oppose the narrative that man is separate from nature, is in charge of nature, or is the steward of nature, [ 9 ] or that nature exists as a resource to be freely exploited. They cite the fact that indigenous peoples under-exploited their environment and retained a sustainable society for thousands of years, as evidence that human societies are not necessarily destructive by nature. They believe that the current materialist paradigm must be replaced - as Næss pointed out, this involves more than merely getting rid of capitalism and the concept of economic growth , or ' progress ', that is critically endangering the biosphere. 'We need changes in society such that reason and emotion support each other,' he said. '... not only a change in a technological and economic system, but a change that touches all the fundamental aspects of industrial societies.  This is what I mean by a change of 'system'.

[ 10 ] Deep ecologists believe that the damage to natural systems sustained since the industrial revolution now threatens social collapse and possible extinction of humans, and are striving to bring about the kind of ideological, economic and technological changes Næss mentioned. Deep ecology claims that ecosystems can absorb damage only within certain parameters, and contends that civilization endangers the biodiversity of the Earth. Deep ecologists have suggested that the human population must be substantially reduced, but advocate a gradual decrease in population rather than any apocalyptic solution [ 11 ] : 88 In a 1982 interview, Arne Næss commented that a global population of 100 million (0.1 billion) would be desirable.

[ 12 ] However, others have argued that a population of 1 - 2 billion would be compatible with the deep ecological worldview.

[ 11 ] Deep ecology eschews traditional left wing-right wing politics, but is viewed as radical ('Deep Green') in its opposition to capitalism, and its advocacy of an ecological paradigm. Unlike conservation, deep ecology does not advocate the controlled preservation of the landbase, but rather 'non-interference' with natural diversity except for vital needs. In citing 'humans' as being responsible for excessive environmental destruction,  deep ecologists actually refer to 'humans within civilization, especially industrial civilization', accepting the fact that the vast majority of humans who have ever lived did not live in environmentally destructive societies – the excessive damage to the biosphere has been sustained mostly over the past hundred years.

In 1985, Bill Devall and George Sessions summed up their understanding of the concept of deep ecology with the following eight points: [ 13 ] The well-being of human and nonhuman life on earth is of intrinsic value irrespective of its value to humans.

The diversity of life-forms is part of this value.

Humans have no right to reduce this diversity except to satisfy vital human needs The flourishing of human and nonhuman life is compatible with a substantial decrease in human population.

Humans have interfered with nature to a critical level already, and interference is worsening.

Policies must be changed, affecting current economic, technological and ideological structures.

This ideological change should focus on an appreciation of the quality of life rather than adhering to an increasingly high standard of living.

All those who agree with the above tenets have an obligation to implement them.

Development [ edit ] YPJ members in a greenhouse farm, for ecological cooperative farming in Rojava (AANES) The phrase "Deep Ecology" first appeared in a 1973 article by the Norwegian philosopher Arne Næss .

[ 3 ] Næss referred to "biospherical egalitarianism-in principle", which he explained was "an intuitively clear and obvious value axiom. Its restriction to humans is ... anthropocentrism with detrimental effects upon the life quality of humans themselves... The attempt to ignore our dependence and to establish a master-slave role has contributed to the alienation of man from himself." [ 3 ] Næss added that from a deep ecology point of view "the right of all forms [of life] to live is a universal right which cannot be quantified. No single species of living being has more of this particular right to live and unfold than any other species".

[ 14 ] Sources [ edit ] Old-growth forest in Biogradska Gora National Park , Montenegro Deep ecology is an eco-philosophy derived from intuitive ethical principles. It does not claim to be a science, although it is based generally on the new physics, which, in the early 20th century, undermined the reductionist approach and the notion of objectivity, demonstrating that humans are an integral part of nature; this is a common concept always held by primal peoples.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Devall and Sessions, however, note that the work of many ecologists has encouraged the adoption of an "ecological consciousness", quoting environmentalist Aldo Leopold's view that such a consciousness "changes the role of Homo sapiens from conqueror of the land community to plain member and citizen of it." [ 17 ] Though some detractors assert that deep ecology is based on the discredited idea of the " balance of nature ",  deep ecologists have made no such claim. They do not dispute the theory that human cultures can have a benevolent effect on the landbase, only the idea of the control of nature, or human supremacy, which is the central pillar of the industrial paradigm. The tenets of deep ecology state that humans have no right to interfere with natural diversity except for vital needs: the distinction between "vital" and "other needs" cannot be drawn precisely.

[ 18 ] Deep ecologists reject any mechanical or computer model of nature, and see the Earth as a living organism, which should be treated and understood accordingly.

[ 19 ] Aspects [ edit ] Environmental education [ edit ] In 2010, Richard Kahn promoted the movement of ecopedagogy , proposing using radical environmental activism as an educational principle to teach students to support "earth democracy" which promotes the rights of animals, plants, fungi, algae and bacteria. The biologist Dr. Stephan Harding has developed the concept of "holistic science", based on principles of ecology and deep ecology.  In contrast with materialist, reductionist science, holistic science studies natural systems as a living whole. He writes: We encourage ... students to use [their] sense of belonging to an intelligent universe (revealed by deep experience), for deeply questioning their fundamental beliefs, and for translating these beliefs into personal decisions, lifestyles and actions. The emphasis on action is important. This is what makes deep ecology a movement as much as a philosophy.

[ 8 ] Spirituality [ edit ] Deep ecologist and physicist Frijof Capra has said that '[Deep] ecology and spirituality are fundamentally connected because deep ecological awareness is, ultimately, spiritual awareness.' [ 20 ] Arne Næss commented that he was inspired by the work of Spinoza and Gandhi, both of whom based their values on grounds of religious feeling and experience. Though he regarded deep ecology as a spiritual philosophy, he explained that he was not a 'believer' in the sense of following any particular articles of religious dogma. ' ... it is quite correct to say that I have sometimes been called religious or spiritual, 'he said, 'because I believe that living creatures have an intrinsic worth of their own, and also that there are fundamental intuitions about what is unjust.'.

[ 21 ] Næss criticised the Judeo-Christian tradition, stating the Bible 's "arrogance of stewardship consists in the idea of superiority which underlies the thought that we exist to watch over nature like a highly respected middleman between the Creator and Creation".

[ 14 ] Næss further criticizes the reformation's view of creation as property to be put into maximum productive use.

However, Næss added that while he felt the word 'God' was 'too loaded with preconceived ideas', he accepted Spinoza's idea of God as 'immanent' - 'a single creative force'... 'constantly creating the world by being the creative force in Nature'. He did not, he said, 'exclude the possibility that Christian theological principles are true in a certain sense ...'.

[ 21 ] Joanna Macy in "the Work that Reconnects" integrates Buddhist philosophy with a deep ecological viewpoint.

Criticisms [ edit ] Eurocentric bias [ edit ] Guha and Martínez Alier critique the four defining characteristics of deep ecology. First, because deep ecologists believe that environmental movements must shift from an anthropocentric to an ecocentric approach, they fail to recognize the two most fundamental ecological crises facing the world: overconsumption in the global north and increasing militarization. Second, deep ecology's emphasis on wilderness provides impetus for the imperialist yearning of the West. Lastly, because deep ecology equates environmental protection with wilderness preservation its radical elements are confined within the American wilderness preservationist movement.

[ 22 ] While deep ecologists accept that overconsumption and militarization are major issues, they point out that the impulse to save wilderness is intuitive and has no connection with imperialism.  This claim by Guha and Martínez Alier, in particular, closely resembles statements made, for instance, by Brazilian president Jair Bolsonaro declaring Brazil's right to cut down the Amazon Rainforest. 'The Amazon belongs to Brazil and European countries can mind their own business because they have already destroyed their own environment.'  The inference is clearly that, since European countries have already destroyed their environment,  Brazil also has the right to do so:  deep ecological values should not apply to them, as they have not yet had their 'turn' at maximum economic growth.

[ 23 ] With regard to 'appropriating spiritual beliefs' Arne Næss pointed out that the essence of deep ecology is the belief that 'all living creatures have their own intrinsic value, a value irrespective of the use they might have for mankind.' [ 24 ] Næss stated that supporters of the deep ecology movement came from various different religious and spiritual traditions, and were united in this one belief, albeit basing it on various different values.

[ 24 ] Knowledge of nonhuman interests [ edit ] This section may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: No citations for the main argument. Reads like an opinion. Phrasing unclear.

Please help improve this section if you can.

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Animal rights activists state that for an entity to require intrinsic rights, it must have interests.

[ 25 ] Deep ecologists are criticised [ by whom?

] for insisting they can somehow understand the thoughts and interests of non-humans such as plants or protists, which they claim thus proves that non-human lifeforms have intelligence. For example, a single-celled bacteria might move towards a certain chemical stimulation, although such movement might be rationally explained, a deep ecologist might say that this was all invalid because according to his better understanding of the situation that the intention formulated by this particular bacteria was informed by its deep desire to succeed in life. One criticism of this belief is that the interests that a deep ecologist attributes to non-human organisms such as survival, reproduction, growth, and prosperity are really human interests. Deep ecologists [ who?

] refute this criticism by pointing out first that 'survival' 'reproduction' 'growth' and 'prosperity'(flourishing) are accepted attributes of all living organisms: 'to succeed in life', depending on how one defines 'success' could certainly be construed as the aim of all life.

[ 26 ] In addition, the plethora of recent work on mimesis [ clarification needed ] .

Thomas Nagel , in " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" (first published 1974) [ relevant?

] , suggests, "[B]lind people are able to detect objects near them by a form of a sonar, using vocal clicks or taps of a cane. Perhaps if one knew what that was like, one could by extension imagine roughly what it was like to possess the much more refined sonar of a bat." [ 27 ] Others such as David Abram have said that consciousness is not specific to humans, but a property of the totality of the universe of which humans are a manifestation.

[ 28 ] Deep versus Shallowness [ edit ] When Arne Næss coined the term deep ecology , he compared it favourably with shallow ecology which he criticized for its utilitarian and anthropocentric attitude to nature and for its materialist and consumer-oriented outlook, [ 29 ] describing its "central objective" as "the health and affluence of people in the developed countries." [ 3 ] William D. Grey believes that developing a non-anthropocentric set of values is "a hopeless quest". He seeks an improved "shallow" view.

[ 30 ] Deep ecologists point out, however, that "shallow ecology" (resource management conservation) is counter-productive, since it serves mainly to support capitalism, the means through which industrial civilization destroys the biosphere. The eco-centric view thus only becomes 'hopeless' within the structures and ideology of civilization. Outside it, however, a non-anthropocentric world view has characterised most 'primal' cultures since time immemorial, and, in fact, obtained in many indigenous groups until the industrial revolution and after.

[ 31 ] Some cultures still hold this view today. As such, the eco-centric narrative is not alien to humans, and may be seen as the normative ethos in human evolution.

[ 13 ] : 97 Grey's view represents the reformist discourse that deep ecology has rejected from the beginning.

[ 13 ] : 52 Misanthropy [ edit ] Social ecologist Murray Bookchin interpreted deep ecology as being misanthropic , due in part to the characterization of humanity by David Foreman , of the environmental advocacy group Earth First!

, as a "pathological infestation on the Earth".  Bookchin mentions that some, like Foreman, defend misanthropic measures such as organising the rapid genocide of most of humanity.

[ 32 ] In response, deep ecologists have argued that Foreman's statement clashes with the core narrative of deep ecology, the first tenet of which stresses the intrinsic value of both nonhuman and human life. Arne Næss suggested a slow decrease in human population over an extended period, not genocide.

[ 33 ] Bookchin's second major criticism is that deep ecology fails to link environmental crises with authoritarianism and hierarchy . He suggests that deep ecologists fail to recognise the potential for humans to solve environmental issues.

[ 32 ] In response, deep ecologists have argued that industrial civilization, with its class hierarchy, is the sole source of the ecological crisis.

[ 34 ] : 18 The eco-centric worldview precludes any acceptance of social class or authority based on social status.

[ 3 ] Deep ecologists believe that since ecological problems are created by industrial civilization the only solution is the deconstruction of the culture itself.

[ 34 ] Sciencism [ edit ] Daniel Botkin concludes that although deep ecology challenges the assumptions of western philosophy , and should be taken seriously, it derives from a misunderstanding of scientific information and conclusions based on this misunderstanding, which are in turn used as justification for its ideology. It begins with an ideology and is political and social in focus. Botkin has also criticized Næss's assertion that all species are morally equal and his disparaging description of pioneering species .

[ 35 ] Deep ecologists counter this criticism by asserting that a concern with political and social values is primary, since the destruction of natural diversity stems directly from the social structure of civilization, and cannot be halted by reforms within the system. They also cite the work of environmentalists and activists such as Rachel Carson , Aldo Leopold , John Livingston , and others as being influential, and are occasionally critical of the way the science of ecology has been misused.

[ 3 ] Utopianism [ edit ] Eco-critic Jonathan Bate has called deep ecologists 'utopians', pointing out that 'utopia' actually means 'nowhere' and quoting Rousseau 's claim that "the state of nature no longer exists and perhaps never did and probably never will."  Bate asks how a planet crowded with cities could possibly be returned to the state of nature? And ...who would want to return it there? ... Life in the state of nature, Thomas Hobbes reminded readers of Leviathan in 1650, is solitary, poor, ignorant, brutish and short. It may be necessary to critique the values of the Enlightenment, but to reject enlightenment altogether would be to reject justice, political liberty and altruism.

[ 36 ] Bates' criticism rests partly on the idea that industrial civilization and the technics it depends on are themselves 'natural' because they are made by humans. Deep ecologists have indicated that the concept of technics being 'natural' and therefore 'morally neutral' is a delusion of industrial civilization: there can be nothing 'neutral' about nuclear weapons, for instance, whose sole purpose is large scale destruction. Historian Lewis Mumford , [ 37 ] divides technology into 'democratic' and 'authoritarian' technics ('technics' includes both technical and cultural aspects of technology).  While 'democratic' technics, available to small communities, may be neutral, 'authoritarian' technics, available only to large-scale, hierarchical, authoritarian, societies, are not. Such technics are unsustainable, and need to be abandoned, as supported by point #6 of the deep ecology platform.

[ 38 ] With reference to the degree to which landscapes are natural, Peter Wohlleben draws a temporal line (roughly equivalent to the development of Mumford's 'authoritarian' technics) at the agricultural revolution , about 8000 BC, when "selective farming practices began to change species." [ 39 ] This is also the time when the landscape began to be intentionally transformed into an ecosystem completely devoted to meeting human needs.

[ 39 ] Links with other philosophies [ edit ] Peter Singer critiques anthropocentrism and advocates for animals to be given rights. However, Singer has disagreed with deep ecology's belief in the intrinsic value of nature separate from questions of suffering.

[ 40 ] Zimmerman groups deep ecology with feminism and civil rights movements .

[ 41 ] Nelson contrasts it with ecofeminism .

[ 42 ] The links with animal rights are perhaps the strongest, as "proponents of such ideas argue that 'all life has intrinsic value'".

[ 43 ] David Foreman, the co-founder of the radical direct-action movement Earth First!

, has said he is an advocate for deep ecology.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] At one point Arne Næss also engaged in direct action when he chained himself to rocks in front of Mardalsfossen , a waterfall in a Norwegian fjord , in a successful protest against the building of a dam.

[ 46 ] Some have linked the movement to green anarchism .

[ 47 ] Further, the movement is related to cosmopolitan localism that has been proposed as a structural framework to organize production by prioritising socio-ecological well-being over corporate profits, over-production and excess consumption.

[ 48 ] The object-oriented ontologist Timothy Morton has explored similar ideas in the books Ecology without Nature: Rethinking Environmental Aesthetics (2009) and Dark Ecology: For a Logic of Future Coexistence (2016).

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] See also [ edit ] Anarcho-primitivism Biocentrism (ethics) Biophilia hypothesis Coupled human-environment system Earth liberation Ecocentrism Ecofascism Ecological civilization Ecosocialism Ecosophy Gaianism Intrinsic value (animal ethics) Negative population growth OpenAirPhilosophy Voluntary human extinction movement Hierarchy theory Scale (analytical tool) References [ edit ] ^ a b Smith, Mick (2014).

"Deep Ecology: What is Said and (to be) Done?" .

The Trumpeter .

30 (2): 141– 156.

ProQuest 1958537477 .

^ Barry, John; Frankland, E. Gene (2002).

International Encyclopedia of Environmental Politics . Routledge. p. 161.

ISBN 9780415202855 .

^ a b c d e f Naess, Arne (January 1973). "The shallow and the deep, long-range ecology movement. A summary".

Inquiry .

16 ( 1– 4): 95– 100.

doi : 10.1080/00201747308601682 .

S2CID 52207763 .

^ Næss, Arne (June 1995).  Written at Hardangervidda, Norway.

"Interview with Norwegian eco-philosopher Arne Naess" (PDF) (Interview). Interviewed by van Boeckel, Jan. Blankenham, The Netherlands: Stichting ReRun Producties. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2011.

^ a b Sessions, George (2014).

"Deep Ecology, New Conservation, and the Anthropocene Worldview" .

The Trumpeter .

30 (2): 106– 114.

ProQuest 1958534297 .

^ Arne, Naess; Rothenberg, David (1993).

Is it Painful to Think?

. University of Minnesota Press. pp.

131– 132.

^ a b Drengson, Alan; Devall, Bill; Schroll, Mark A. (2011).

"The Deep Ecology Movement: Origins, Development, and Future Prospects (Toward a Transpersonal Ecosophy)" .

International Journal of Transpersonal Studies .

30 ( 1– 2): 101– 117.

doi : 10.24972/ijts.2011.30.1-2.101 .

^ a b Harding, Stephan.

Deep Ecology in the Holistic Science Programme . Schumacher College.

^ Margulis, Lynn .

Animate Earth .

^ Arne Naess 'Life's Philosophy - Reason & Feeling in a Deeper World' 2002 P6 ^ a b Sessions, George, ed. (1995).

Deep Ecology for the Twenty-First Century . Shambala Publications.

ISBN 9781570620492 .

^ Bodian, Stephan (1982).

"Simple in Means, Rich in Ends - A Conversation with Arne Naess" (PDF) .

^ a b c Devall, Bill; Sessions, George (1985).

Deep Ecology . Gibbs M. Smith. p. 70.

ISBN 978-0-87905-247-8 .

^ a b Næss, Arne (1989).

Ecology, community and lifestyle: outline of an ecosophy Translated by D. Rothenberg . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 166, 187.

ISBN 0521344069 .

LCCN 88005068 .

^ Fox, Warwick.

The Intuition of Deep Ecology .

, quoted in Devall, Bill; Sessions, George (1985).

Deep Ecology . Gibbs M. Smith. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-87905-247-8 .

^ Bohm, David (1980).

Wholeness and The Implicate Order . Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 37.

ISBN 9780710003669 .

^ "We are only fellow-voyagers with other creatures in the odyssey of evolution," states Aldo Leopold; quoted in Devall, Bill; Sessions, George (1985).

Deep Ecology . Gibbs M. Smith. p. 85.

ISBN 978-0-87905-247-8 .

^ McLaughlin, Andrew (1995). "The Heart of Deep Ecology". In Sessions, George (ed.).

Deep Ecology for the Twenty-First Century . Shambala Publications. p. 87.

ISBN 9781570620492 .

^ "There are no shortcuts to direct organic experiencing." Morris Berman, quoted in Devall, Bill; Sessions, George (1985).

Deep Ecology . Gibbs M. Smith. p. 89.

ISBN 978-0-87905-247-8 .

^ "TOP 25 QUOTES BY FRITJOF CAPRA (of 60)" .

A-Z Quotes .

^ a b Arne Naess 'Life's Philosophy - Reason & Feeling in a Deeper World 2002 P8 ^ Guha, R., and J. Martinez-Allier. 1997.

Radical American Environmentalism and Wilderness Preservation: A Third World Critique . Varieties of Environmentalism: Essays North and South, pp. 92-108 ^ "Bolsonaro declares 'the Amazon is ours' and calls deforestation data 'lies' " .

the Guardian . July 19, 2019.

^ a b Arne Naess 'Life's Philosophy - Reason and Feeling in a Deeper World' 2002 P6) ^ Feinberg, Joel .

"The Rights of Animals and Future Generations" . Retrieved 2006-04-25 .

^ Vierboom, Yana C. (2022-07-27). Idler, Ellen L. (ed.).

"How does it all end? Trends and disparities in health at the end of life" .

PLOS ONE .

17 (7): e0267551.

Bibcode : 2022PLoSO..1767551V .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0267551 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 9328500 .

PMID 35895597 .

^ Nagel, Thomas (1997). "What is it like to be a bat?".

The Philosophical Review .

83 (4): 442.

doi : 10.2307/2183914 .

JSTOR 2183914 .

^ Abram, David.

The Spell of the Sensuous . p. 262.

^ Devall, Bill; Sessions, George.

Deep Ecology: Environmentalism as if all beings mattered . Archived from the original on 2017-06-24 . Retrieved 2006-04-25 .

^ Grey, William (1993).

"Anthropocentrism and Deep Ecology" .

Australasian Journal of Philosophy .

71 (4): 463– 75.

doi : 10.1080/00048409312345442 . Archived from the original on 2001-04-14 . Retrieved August 6, 2021 .

^ Abrams, David.

The Spell of the Sensuous .

^ a b Bookchin, Murray (1987).

"Social Ecology versus Deep Ecology: A Challenge for the Ecology Movement" .

Green Perspectives/Anarchy Archives – via dwardmac.pitzer.edu.

^ Sessions, George, ed. (1995).

Deep Ecology for the 21st Century . Shambhala. p. 88.

ISBN 9781570620492 .

^ a b Jensen, Derrick (2006).

Endgame, Volume 2 .

^ Botkin, Daniel B. (2000).

No Man's Garden: Thoreau and a New Vision for Civilization and Nature . Shearwater Books. pp. 42 42, 39].

ISBN 978-1-55963-465-6 .

^ Bate, Jonathan (2000).

The Song of the Earth . p. 37.

^ Mumford, Lewis (1966).

The Myth of the Machine — Technics & Human Development .

^ Mumford, Lewis (1966).

The Myth of the Machine — Technics & Human Development .

^ a b Wohlleben, Peter (2019).

The Secret Wisdom of Nature: Trees, Animals and the Extraordinary Balance of All Living Things . Translated by Jane Billinghurst. David Suzuki Institute, Greystone Books.

ISBN 9781771643887 .

^ Kendall, Gillian (May 2011).

"The Greater Good: Peter Singer On How To Live An Ethical Life" .

Sun Magazine, the Sun Interview (425) . Retrieved 2011-12-02 .

^ AtKisson, Alan (Summer 1989).

"Introduction To Deep Ecology, an interview with Michael E. Zimmerman" .

Global Climate Change (22). Context Institute: 24. Archived from the original on 2012-01-23 . Retrieved 2021-08-05 – via Context.org.

^ Nelson, C. (August 2021).

Ecofeminism vs. Deep Ecology . Dialogue, San Antonio, Texas: Dept. of Philosophy, Saint Mary's University .

^ Wall, Derek (1994).

Green History .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-07925-9 .

^ Levine, David, ed. (1991).

Defending the Earth: a dialogue between Murray Bookchin and Dave Foreman .

^ Bookchin, Murray; Graham Purchase; Brian Morris; Rodney Aitchtey; Robert Hart; Chris Wilbert (1993).

Deep Ecology and Anarchism . Freedom Press.

ISBN 978-0-900384-67-7 .

^ Seed, J.; Macy, J.; Flemming, P.; Næss, A. (1988).

Thinking like a mountain: towards a council of all beings . Heretic Books.

ISBN 0-946097-26-7 .

^ Deep Ecology & Anarchism . Freedom Press. 1993.

^ Kostakis, Vasilis; Niaros, Vasilis; Giotitsas, Chris (2023-06-30).

"Beyond global versus local: illuminating a cosmolocal framework for convivial technology development" .

Sustainability Science .

18 (5): 2309– 2322.

Bibcode : 2023SuSc...18.2309K .

doi : 10.1007/s11625-023-01378-1 .

ISSN 1937-0709 .

S2CID 259749096 .

^ Morton, Timothy (2009).

Ecology without Nature: Rethinking Environmental Aesthetics . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674266162 .

^ Morton, Timothy (2016).

Dark Ecology: For a Logic of Future Coexistence . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231541367 .

Additional sources [ edit ] Bender, F. L. 2003.

The Culture of Extinction: Toward a Philosophy of Deep Ecology Amherst, New York: Humanity Books.

Katz, E., A. Light, et al. 2000.

Beneath the Surface: Critical Essays in the Philosophy of Deep Ecology Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

LaChapelle, D. 1992.

Sacred Land, Sacred Sex:  Rapture of the Deep Durango: Kivakí Press.

Passmore, J. 1974.

Man's Responsibility for Nature London: Duckworth.

Clark, John P (2014). "What Is Living In Deep Ecology?".

Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy .

30 (2): 157– 183.

Hawkins, Ronnie (2014). "Why Deep Ecology Had To Die".

Trumpeter: Journal of Ecosophy .

30 (2): 206– 273.

Drengson, Alan.

"The Deep Ecology Movement." The Green Majority , CIUT 89.5 FM, University of Toronto, 6 June 2008.

Further reading [ edit ] Gecevska, Valentina; Donev, Vancho; Polenakovik, Radmil (2016). "A Review Of Environmental Tools Towards Sustainable Development".

Annals of the Faculty of Engineering Hunedoara - International Journal of Engineering .

14 (1): 147– 152.

Glasser, Harold (ed.) 2005.

The Selected Works of Arne Næss , Volumes 1-10.

Springer , ISBN 1-4020-3727-9 . ( review ) Holy-Luczaj, Magdalena (2015). "Heidegger's Support For Deep Ecology Reexamined Once Again".

Ethics & the Environment .

20 (1): 45– 66.

doi : 10.2979/ethicsenviro.20.1.45 .

S2CID 141921083 .

Keulartz, Jozef 1998.

Struggle for nature : a critique of radical ecology , London [etc.] : Routledge.

Linkola, Pentti 2011.

Can Life Prevail?

UK: Arktos Media, 2nd Revised ed.

ISBN 1907166637 Marc R., Fellenz. "9. Ecophilosophy: Deep Ecology And Ecofeminism." The Moral Menagerie : Philosophy and Animal Rights. 158. Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 2007.

Orton, David (January 9, 2000).

"Deep Ecology and Animal Rights: A Discussion Paper" .

The Green Web .

Sylvan, Richard (1985a). "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part I".

Radical Philosophy .

40 : 2– 12.

Sylvan, Richard (1985b). "A Critique of Deep Ecology, Part II".

Radical Philosophy .

41 : 1– 22.

Tobias, Michael (ed.) 1988 (1984).

Deep Ecology . Avant Books.

ISBN 0-932238-13-0 .

Portals : Ecology Environment Evolutionary biology v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐z6lxp
Cached time: 20250812015421
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.889 seconds
Real time usage: 1.019 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6091/1000000
Revision size: 40684/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238599/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7422/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 252484/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.515/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9024408/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  790.147      1 -total
 40.62%  320.977      1 Template:Reflist
 18.81%  148.611     31 Template:Cite_book
 18.24%  144.131     16 Template:Cite_journal
  9.34%   73.774      1 Template:Environment_sidebar
  9.15%   72.337      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.72%   68.884      1 Template:Short_description
  6.89%   54.419      1 Template:Cleanup
  6.53%   51.618     10 Template:Main_other
  5.63%   44.484      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21490919:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015421 and revision id 1300375125. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deep_ecology&oldid=1300375125 " Categories : Deep ecology Environmental ethics Anti-capitalism Political ecology Arne Næss Hidden categories: CS1 location test CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from February 2024 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2024 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2024 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from February 2024 This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deep ecology 39 languages Add topic

