Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the phrase 2 Definition 3 Orthography 4 Spectrum Toggle Spectrum subsection 4.1 Religious life stances 4.2 Non-religious life stances 4.2.1 Humanism 5 Values and purposes 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Life stance 16 languages Alemannisch Dansk Español 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Livvinkarjala Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person's relation with what they accept as being of ultimate importance A person's life stance , or lifestance , is their relation with what they accept as being of ultimate importance . It involves presuppositions and commitment to exercise it in theory and practice in one's life .

[ 1 ] It can connote an integrated perspective on reality as a whole and how to assign valuations, thus being a concept similar or equivalent to that of a worldview ; with the latter word (derived from the German Weltanschauung ) being generally a more common and comprehensive term. Like the term worldview , the term life stance is a shared label encompassing both religious perspectives (for instance: "a Buddhist life stance"  or "a Christian life stance" or "a Pagan life stance"), as well as non-religious spiritual or philosophical alternatives (for instance: "a humanist life stance" or "a personist life stance" or "a Deep Ecology life stance"), without discrimination in favour of any.

[ 2 ] Origins of the phrase [ edit ] Humanists interested in educational matters apparently coined the neologism life stance in the mid-1970s; Harry Stopes-Roe of the Rationalist Press Association and British Humanist Association developed the concept originally in that context.

[ 3 ] The term originally arose in the context of debates over the controversial [ 4 ] content of the City of Birmingham's Agreed Syllabus for Religious Education , 1975.  That document referred to "non-religious stances for living". According to Barnes: It was the first syllabus to abandon the aim of Christian nurture and to embrace a multi-faith, phenomenological model of religious education; and it was also the first syllabus to require a systematic study of non-religious 'stances for living', such as Humanism, and for such study to begin in the primary school.

[ 5 ] In the late 1980s Harry Stopes-Roe initiated a successful campaign for the adoption of the term by the International Humanist and Ethical Union and by other organisations (see also his comments quoted below on its provenance).

[ 6 ] It was not an uncontroversial proposal among humanists.

[ 7 ] The term was introduced as part of an attempt to establish a clear identity for Humanism, in order to gain recognition and respect.

[ 8 ] According to Stopes-Roe: "Life stance" is an expression that has been current in Britain for more than ten years and is now gaining acceptance worldwide, to describe what is good in both Humanism and religion – without being encumbered by what is bad in religion.

[ 9 ] Definition [ edit ] Harry Stopes-Roe, who fought for the term's acceptance by the Humanist movement, defined "life stance" as follows: "Life stance" - The style and content of an individual's or a community's relationship with that which is of ultimate importance; the presuppositions and commitments of this, and the consequences for living which flow from it. (Each individual or community hopes that it has come to a good and well-founded relationship, but the word is usually used without implying that this really is so).

— Harry Stopes-Roe [ 2 ] The British Humanist Association, drawing in part on jurisprudence related to the term "religion or belief" in the European Convention on Human Rights, has put forward a more analytical definition: A collective belief that attains a sufficient level of cogency, seriousness, cohesion and importance and that relates the nature of life and the world to morality, values and/or the way its believers should live.

— British Humanist Association [ 10 ] Orthography [ edit ] A life stance may be distinguished from general support of a cause by capitalization of the first letter. For instance, the life stance of Humanism is distinguished from humanism generally.

[ 11 ] Many life stances may contain humanism to a greater or lesser extent as instrumental value in order to fulfill their own chosen intrinsic value(s) . However, Humanism regards it as having intrinsic value.

Not all life stances use this orthography.

Spectrum [ edit ] The term was intended to be a shared label encompassing both religions and alternatives to religion, without discrimination in favour of either.

[ 2 ] A life stance differs from a worldview or a belief system in that the term life stance emphasizes a focus on what is of ultimate importance. Life stance differs from eupraxsophy in that the latter typically implies a strictly non-theistic outlook, whereas a life stance can be theistic or non-theistic, supernaturalistic or naturalistic.

Religious life stances [ edit ] Main article: Religion A religion is a set of beliefs and practices, often centered upon specific supernatural and/or moral claims about reality , the cosmos , and human nature , and often codified as prayer , ritual , and law .  Religion also encompasses ancestral or cultural traditions , writings, history, and mythology , as well as personal faith and mystic experience . The term "religion" refers to both the personal practices related to communal faith and to group rituals and communication stemming from shared conviction.

In the frame of European religious thought , [ citation needed ] religions present a common quality, the "hallmark of patriarchal religious thought": the division of the world in two comprehensive domains, one sacred, the other profane .

[ 12 ] Religion is often described as a communal system for the coherence of belief focusing on a system of thought, unseen being, person, or object, that is considered to be supernatural , sacred, divine , or of the highest truth .

Moral codes , practices, values, institutions, tradition, philosophy , rituals, and scriptures are often traditionally associated with the core belief. Religion is also often described as a "way of life".

Non-religious life stances [ edit ] Further information: Irreligion and Secular religion Alternatives to religion include life stances based on atheism , agnosticism , deism , skepticism , freethought , pantheism , secular humanism , spiritual but not religious (SBNR), Objectivism , existentialism , modern incarnations of Hellenistic philosophies , or general secularism .

Humanism [ edit ] Humanism is an example of life stance which may be considered to be religious (usually in a non-theistic, ethical sense) or non-religious or anti-religious. One of Stopes-Roe's reasons for advocating the adoption of "life stance" as a label for the Humanist movement, was his hope that it would end the arguments between the different sides as to how best to characterise their position (note that Stopes-Roe uses the term "god-religious" to distinguish theists from non-theists in what follows): Humanists are divided into two camps... according to how they respond to the word "religion". Do they... respond negatively or positively? The ferocity of the antipathy on the one hand, and the power of the concern on the other, that is generated by this word quite obliterates reasoned discussion of many substantial and important questions on how we should develop Humanism. Likewise, our discussions with the god-religious are confused and frustrated. We need a new term for the idea and ideal of religion, opened out so that it is not discriminatory. Let this be "life stance". Could we, perhaps, bury the hatchet of "religion" and work together?

[ 2 ] Bill Cooke comments: Harry Stopes-Roe's contribution is significant because it makes clear humanism's value as a legitimate system of belief, without it being a pseudo-religion.

[ 13 ] Values and purposes [ edit ] Further information: Intrinsic value (ethics) § Life stances and intrinsic value Different life stances differ in what they hold as intrinsic values and purposes in life .

See also [ edit ] Intentional stance Lifestyle (sociology) Meaning of life Personal life World view Basic belief Belief References [ edit ] ^ Stopes-Roe, Harry (January 1996).

"Religion or Conviction" .

Humanist Society of NSW Inc . Humanist Society of New South Wales ( International Humanist and Ethical Union (IHEU)) . Retrieved 25 September 2024 .

^ a b c d Stopes-Roe (1988a, p. 21) ^ On "life stance education" see Stopes-Roe (1976), and Stopes-Roe (1983). Compare with the advocacy of "Education in Life Stances" in Cox (1975), on which also see Greer (1985, pp. 16–17)). The British Humanist Association pamphlet, Objective, Fair and Balanced (1975), includes the text of a letter by Stopes-Roe, printed in the Times Educational Supplement of 12 July 1974, which refers to "stances for living". It also cites the City of Birmingham's Agreed Syllabus of Religious Education , dated 7 May 1974: "it introduces the new term "stance for living". (British Humanist Association, 1975, p. 15). For the related "life stance education" offered to non-religious pupils in Finland, see Slotte (2008).

^ Barnes (2008, p. 75), notes that the controversy reached Parliament.  Hull (1984, p. 111) notes that "an attempt was made in the spring of 1976 to introduce a Private Members Bill into the House of Commons which would have replaced religious education by 'Education in Stances for Living'". The Bill was published in "Objective, Fair and Balanced – a new law for religion in education", written by Harry Stopes-Roe and David Pollock for the British Humanist Association (1975) ^ Barnes (2008, p. 75) ^ Stopes-Roe's advocacy of the term outside the literature of religious education was first published as Stopes-Roe (1987), but the article was in circulation at a Board meeting of the International Humanist and Ethical Union in October 1987 (See Walter 1988a, p. 4). The article was reprinted in New Humanist (Stopes Roe 1988a) and Kurtz (1989). Stopes-Roe revisited the subject in Stopes-Roe (1996), and wrote the article on "Life stance" for the New Encyclopedia of Unbelief (Stopes-Roe 2007). See also the statement " Humanism is eight letters, no more ", signed by Harold Blackham , Levi Fragell , Corliss Lamont , Harry Stopes-Roe , and Rob Tielman .

^ Stopes-Roe (1988a, p. 21) commented that "I have found the degree of opposition to the term "life stance" among Humanists more surprising than the religionist's objection." See also the overview of the debate between Walter (1988a and 1988b) and Stopes-Roe (1988a and 1988b) in Fowler (1999 pp. 3–4 ).

^ See "Humanism is eight letters, no more" ^ Stopes-Roe (1988a, p.19) ^ Memorandum from the BHA to the Charity Commission on Religion and Non-Religious Beliefs in Charity Law, August 2007: see http://www.humanism.org.uk/documents/3917 ^ Humanism Unmodified Archived 2008-05-05 at the Wayback Machine By Edd Doerr. Published in the Humanist (November/December 2002) ^ Durkheim 1976, p. 36 ^ Cooke 2003 (p. 223) Bibliography [ edit ] Barnes, L. Philip (2008). "The 2007 Birmingham Agreed Syllabus for Religious Education: a new direction for statutory religious education in England and Wales", Journal of Beliefs & Values , Vol. 29 (1), April, pp. 75–83.

British Humanist Association (1975).

Objective, fair and balanced: a new law for religion in education.

London: BHA.

Cooke, Bill (2003).

The Blasphemy Depot: a hundred years of the Rationalist Press Association . London: RPA.

Cox, E. (1975). "Principles behind Syllabus Making", Learning for Living , Vol. 4 (4), p. 132.

Fowler, Jeaneane D (1999).

Humanism: beliefs and practices , Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.

Greer, J.E. (1985). "Edwin Cox and Religious Education", British Journal of Religious Education , Vol. 8 (1), pp. 13–19 [1] .

Hull, John (1984).

Studies in Religion and Education , London: Falmer.

Kurtz, Paul et al. (ed) (1989).

Building a world community: humanism in the 21st century , Prometheus Books, pp. 166– Slotte, Pamela (2008). "Waving the ‘Freedom of Religion or Belief’ Card, or Playing It Safe: Religious Instruction in the Cases of Norway and Finland", Religion and Human Rights Vol. 3 (1), March, pp. 33–69.

[2] .

Stopes-Roe, H[arry].V. (1976). "The concept of a 'life stance' in education." Learning for living , Vol. 16 (1), Autumn, pp. 25–28.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (1983). "Moral Practice and Ultimate Reality", Journal of Moral Education , Vol. 12 (2), pp. 81–91.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (1987). "Humanism as a life stance", Free Inquiry , Vol. 8 (1), Winter 1987/88, pp. 7–9, 56.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (1988a), "Humanism as a life stance", New Humanist , Vol. 103, (2) October, pp. 19–21.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (1988b). "Controversy: In defence of a life stance", New Humanist , Vol. 103 (4), December, pp. 8–9.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (1996). "The Presuppositions of Dialogue: a fair vocabulary." Journal for the Critical Study of Religion, Ethics and Society , Vol. 1 (2), Summer/Fall, pp. 9–15.

Stopes-Roe, Harry (2007). "Life stance", in Flynn, Tom (ed.).

The New Encyclopedia of Unbelief . Amherst, New York: Prometheus, pp. 506–507.

Walter, Nicolas (1988a). "Rationally speaking: against Humanism as a life stance." New Humanist , Vol. 103 (3), October, p. 4.

Walter, Nicolas (1988b). "Rationally speaking: what kind of humanists?", New Humanist , Vol. 103 (4), December, p. 4.

v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vmddp
Cached time: 20250817231457
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.462 seconds
Real time usage: 0.637 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1687/1000000
Revision size: 14959/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 92145/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4469/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28469/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.285/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15821536/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  501.017      1 -total
 20.76%  104.035      1 Template:Reflist
 18.89%   94.655      1 Template:Lang
 18.29%   91.643      1 Template:World_view
 17.64%   88.368      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.99%   80.125      1 Template:Cite_web
 13.08%   65.534      1 Template:Short_description
  9.12%   45.705      1 Template:Citation_needed
  8.01%   40.112      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.86%   39.385      1 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4392610:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817231457 and revision id 1256390410. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Life_stance&oldid=1256390410 " Categories : Personal life Intention Belief Philosophical theories Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 This page was last edited on 9 November 2024, at 18:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Life stance 16 languages Add topic

