Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical conservative strains 2 Otto von Bismarck 3 Weimar Republic and Nazi oppression 4 Modern conservatism 5 Recent developments 6 See also 7 Notes 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Conservatism in Germany 7 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of conservatism in Germany This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conservatism in Germany" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Conservatism in Germany ( German : Konservatismus ) has encompassed a wide range of theories and ideologies in the last three hundred years, but most historical conservative theories supported the monarchical / hierarchical political structure.

Historical conservative strains [ edit ] During the pre-revolutionary Vormärz era, the label conservatism united a loose movement of intellectual and political forces without any party organisation comparable to the British Tories . The tradition of conservative theorists like Justus Möser (1720–1794) opposed the Enlightenment tendencies and the ideals of the French Revolution .

[ 1 ] While many of the conservative theorists are labelled "political Romantics" (most notably by Carl Schmitt , himself a conservative), at least four strains are distinguishable before 1945: Status quo ante Romantic conservatives , who wanted to restore the medieval as it was prior to the French Revolution. Notable theorists are Novalis , Friedrich Schelling , Karl Ludwig von Haller and Adam Müller .

Conservative Journalism defends the status quo of Metternichs System (the Restoration) and national conservatism . Notable theorists include Friedrich von Gentz , Friedrich Schlegel and Ernst Moritz Arndt .

Conservative writing in defense of the (constitutional) monarchy in Germany included theorists Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Heinrich Friedrich Karl vom und zum Stein and Friedrich Julius Stahl .

The conservative revolutionary movement and pre-Nazi radicals, such as Arthur Moeller van den Bruck , Oswald Spengler (adding pessimism and cultural conservatism ) and Carl Schmitt .

Also included are the anti-Enlightenment Romanticism of Friedrich Nietzsche , the conservative Realpolitik and statecraft of Otto von Bismarck and the anti-republican monarchism of the German National People's Party (DNVP) during the Weimar Republic .

Otto von Bismarck [ edit ] Conservative thought developed alongside nationalism in Germany , culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War , the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871 and the simultaneous rise to power of Chancellor Otto von Bismarck .  Bismarck's "balance of power" foreign policy model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century. His "revolutionary conservatism" was a conservative state-building strategy designed to make ordinary Germans—not just his own Junker elite—more loyal to state and emperor. He created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s. According to Kees van Kersbergen and Barbara Vis , his strategy was "granting social rights to enhance the integration of a hierarchical society, to forge a bond between workers and the state so as to strengthen the latter, to maintain traditional relations of authority between social and status groups, and to provide a countervailing power against the modernist forces of liberalism and socialism".

[ 2 ] Bismarck also enacted universal male suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871.

[ 3 ] He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890.

[ 4 ] After the Revolutions of 1848 , conservative parties were represented in several Landtag assemblies of the German states , particularly in the Prussian Landtag , from 1871 onwards also in the Reichstag parliament of the German Empire. The Prussian conservatives, mainly East Elbian landowners ( Junker ), who had been sceptical towards the Unification of Germany promoted by Minister President Bismarck, re-organised themselves within the German Conservative Party . In the Reichstag, they had to face the rivalry of the Free Conservative secession, which comprised bureaucratic elite leaders as well as Rhenish business magnates , who had supported Bismarck's politics from the beginning.

During Bismarck's time in office, German conservatives more and more turned to statism and paternalism in the rising conflict between economic liberalism as promoted by the National Liberals and the labour movement represented by the Social Democratic Party . They supported the Chancellor's Anti-Socialist Laws , but also strongly embraced the implementation of a social insurance (pensions, accident insurance and medical care) that laid the ground for the German welfare state . Likewise, conservative politicians appreciated the enforcement of what they called national interests during the Kulturkampf against the Catholic Church and the Centre Party . Though Bismarck's domestic policies did not prevail against his opponents, they further strengthened the power of the state.

At the same time, the influence of the parliament on those policy guidelines remained limited.

Universal suffrage (for men) had been implemented already in the 1867 Reichstag election of the North German Confederation , but the MPs had few legislative powers. The German government remained responsible only to the Emperor and the Chancellor used to rule by alternating majorities. Not until the late days of World War I a parliamentary reform was carried out, instigated by the Oberste Heeresleitung (Supreme Army Command) in view of the German defeat. Biased by particular interests and reserved towards political parties espousing an ideology or vision in general, German conservatives up to then had not been able to install a big tent in the sense of a people's party.

Weimar Republic and Nazi oppression [ edit ] Conservatism in Germany was shaken by the lost World War I and the German Revolution of 1918–1919 . The thinkers of the conservative revolution, a reaction to the lapse of the once venerated monarchical tradition, strived for an inventive realignment ( new world order ) based on continuous principles while in the late 1920s the DNVP under press baron Alfred Hugenberg turned towards far-right nationalist policies, culminating in the co-operation with the Nazi Party on the eve of the Machtergreifung in 1933. Several conservative politicians like Hugenberg himself, Franz von Papen and Konstantin von Neurath became members of the Hitler Cabinet and some like Franz Seldte even joined the NSDAP.

During the period of Nazi rule , all other political parties, including conservative, were outlawed. The "national revolution" of the Nazis had priority and the racist and social changes in German society were not allowed to be stopped by the conservative forces of "reaction" ( Reaktion , see " Horst-Wessel-Lied "), like for instance the Catholic, Christian-democratic Zentrum and the Prussian monarchists . Several conservative opponents of the Nazi regime like former Chancellor Kurt von Schleicher or Edgar Julius Jung were murdered during the Night of the Long Knives in 1934. After a period of pacification in the Third Reich, notable conservatives were involved in the German Resistance , most notably in the 20 July plot .

Modern conservatism [ edit ] After World War II , conservatism in Germany had to deal with the experience of totalitarianism and its own involvement. Its protagonists finally adopted the ideals of a liberal constitutional ( Rechtsstaat ) democracy and in turn eliminated themselves as a separate political power.

In modern Germany , the post-war Christian Democratic Union (CDU) along with the Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) claim to represent all forms of conservatism in Germany.

National conservative new establishments like the German Party did not last while up to today there remain some marginal parties to the right of the CDU and CSU, difficult to distinguish from the far-right -parties, e.g.

The Republicans . There also exist marginal movements to restore the German monarchy, most notably Tradition und Leben . During the German student movement of the late 1960s, CDU/CSU politicians called for a "strong state" and the restriction of individual rights in order to put down the disturbances.

Notable modern (" technocratic ") conservative theorists included Ernst Jünger (1895–1998) and his brother Friedrich Georg Jünger (1898–1977), Hans Freyer (1887–1969), Helmut Schelsky (1912–1984) and Arnold Gehlen (1904–1976). They stressed the subjection of political decisions to the circumstances determined by a technologically advanced civilisation, denying ideological claims to overcome social alienation , which would remain an illusion only advocated by demagogues .

Recent developments [ edit ] Like most political parties in Germany, the CDU and the CSU to a lesser extent has turned to centrist policies after German reunification . This has led to an emphasis on economic liberalism and social justice (in the tradition of Catholic social teaching ) compared to firm conservative positions. However, the party's claimed conservative feature remains a non-defined iridescent term, oscillating between national and social manifestation.

Since West Germany Chancellor Helmut Kohl formed a coalition government of the CDU and the liberal Free Democratic Party (FDP) in 1982, both parties have often been frequently referred to as belonging to a larger centre-right ( bürgerlich , "civic") faction within the German party system . However, this distinction has been criticised for neglecting not only social liberal trends, but also conservative tendencies within centre-left parties like the Social Democrats or The Greens .

See also [ edit ] conservatism portal Alternative for Germany CDU/CSU Conservatism Free Democratic Party of Germany Agrarian Conservatism in Germany Conservative Party (Prussia) Liberalism in Germany Far-right politics in Germany Notes [ edit ] ^ James N. Retallack (2006).

The German Right, 1860–1920: Political Limits of the Authoritarian Imagination . University of Toronto Press.

^ Kersbergen, Kees van; Vis, Barbara (2013).

Comparative Welfare State Politics: Development, Opportunities, and Reform . Cambridge UP. p. 38.

^ Moore, Robert Laurence; Vaudagna, Maurizio (2003).

The American Century in Europe . Cornell University Press. p. 226.

^ Richard E. Frankel, "From the Beer Halls to the Halls of Power: The Cult of Bismarck and the Legitimization of a New German Right, 1898–1945," German Studies Review, Vol. 26, No. 3 (Oct., 2003), pp. 543–560 in JSTOR Further reading [ edit ] Berdahl, Robert M. "Conservative Politics and aristocratic landholders in Bismarckian Germany." Journal of Modern History 44#1 (1972): 2-20.

in JSTOR .

von Beyme, Klaus (2002).

Politische Theorien im Zeitalter der Ideologien . Westdeutscher Verlag.

Epstein, Klaus (1975).

Genesis of German Conservatism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-05121-6 .

Jones, Larry Eugene. James Retallack (ed.).

Between Reform, Reaction, and Resistance: Studies in the History of German Conservatism from 1789 to 1945 . Berg Publishers.

ISBN 0-85496-787-7 .

Muller, Jerry Z. (1988).

The Other God that Failed: Hans Freyer and the Deradicalization of German Conservatism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-00823-X .

Nipperdey, Thomas .

Germany from Napoleon to Bismarck: 1800–1866 (1996).

excerpt .

Retallack, James. "'What Is to Be Done?' The Red Specter, Franchise Questions, and the Crisis of Conservative Hegemony in Saxony, 1896–1909." Central European History 23#4 (1990): 271–312.

online .

Retallack, James.

The German Right, 1860–1920: Political Limits of the Authoritarian Imagination (2006).

v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Conservatism in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservatism_in_Germany&oldid=1304201356 " Category : Conservatism in Germany Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 16:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservatism in Germany 7 languages Add topic

