Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modern Western philosophy Toggle Modern Western philosophy subsection 1.1 Renaissance philosophy 1.2 Rationalism 1.3 Empiricism 1.4 Political philosophy 1.5 Idealism 1.6 Existentialism 1.7 Phenomenology 1.8 Pragmatism 1.9 Analytic philosophy 2 Modern Asian philosophy 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Modern philosophy 43 languages አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latina Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy in recent times For the book by Roger Scruton, see Modern Philosophy: An Introduction and Survey .

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Modern philosophy is philosophy developed in the modern era and associated with modernity . It is not a specific doctrine or school (and thus should not be confused with Modernism ), although certain assumptions are common to much of it, which helps to distinguish it from earlier philosophy.

[ 1 ] The 17th and early 20th centuries roughly mark the beginning and the end of modern philosophy. How much of the Renaissance should be included is a matter of dispute, as is whether modernity ended in the 20th century and has been replaced by postmodernity . How one answers these questions will determine the scope of one's use of the term "modern philosophy." Modern Western philosophy [ edit ] See also: Early modern philosophy and Late modern philosophy How much of Renaissance intellectual history is part of modern philosophy is disputed: [ 2 ] The Early Renaissance is often considered less modern and more medieval compared to the later High Renaissance . Later, by the 17th and 18th centuries, the major figures in philosophy of mind , epistemology , and metaphysics were roughly divided into two main groups. The " Rationalists ," mostly in France and Germany, argued all knowledge must begin from certain " innate ideas " in the mind. Major rationalists were Descartes , Baruch Spinoza , Gottfried Leibniz , and Nicolas Malebranche . The " Empiricists ," by contrast, held that knowledge must begin with sensory experience. Major figures in this line of thought are John Locke , George Berkeley , and David Hume (These are retrospective categories, for which Kant is largely responsible). Ethics and political philosophy are usually not subsumed under these categories, though all these philosophers worked in ethics , in their own distinctive styles. Other important figures in political philosophy include Thomas Hobbes and Jean-Jacques Rousseau .

In the late 18th century Immanuel Kant set forth a groundbreaking philosophical system that claimed to bring unity to rationalism and empiricism. Whether or not he was right, he did not entirely succeed in ending philosophical disputes. Kant sparked a storm of philosophical work in Germany in the early nineteenth century, beginning with German idealism . The characteristic theme of idealism was that the world and the mind equally must be understood according to the same categories; it culminated in the work of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , who among many other things said in the Preface to his Elements of the Philosophy of Right that "The real is rational; the rational is real." Hegel's work was carried in many directions by his followers and critics.

Karl Marx appropriated both Hegel's philosophy of history and the empirical ethics dominant in Britain, transforming Hegel's ideas into a strictly materialist form, setting the grounds for the development of a science of society .

Søren Kierkegaard , in contrast, dismissed all systematic philosophy as an inadequate guide to life and meaning. For Kierkegaard, life is meant to be lived, not a mystery to be solved.

Arthur Schopenhauer took idealism to the conclusion that the world was nothing but the futile endless interplay of images and desires, and advocated atheism and pessimism . Schopenhauer's ideas were taken up and transformed by Nietzsche , who seized upon their various dismissals of the world to proclaim " God is dead " and to reject all systematic philosophy and all striving for a fixed truth transcending the individual. Nietzsche found this not grounds for pessimism, but the possibility of a new kind of freedom.

Nineteenth-century British philosophy came increasingly to be dominated by strands of British Idealism , which incorporated neo-Hegelian and German Idealist thought. As a reaction to this, philosophers such as Bertrand Russell and George Edward Moore began moving in the direction of analytic philosophy , which was essentially an updating of traditional empiricism to accommodate the new developments in logic of the German mathematician Gottlob Frege .

Renaissance philosophy [ edit ] Renaissance humanism emphasized the value of human beings (see Oration on the Dignity of Man ) and opposed dogma and scholasticism . This new interest in human activities led to the development of political science with The Prince of Niccolò Machiavelli .

[ 3 ] Humanists differed from Medieval scholars also because they saw the natural world as mathematically ordered and pluralistic, instead of thinking of it in terms of purposes and goals. Renaissance philosophy is perhaps best explained by two propositions made by Leonardo da Vinci in his notebooks: All of our knowledge has its origins in our perceptions There is no certainty where one can neither apply any of the mathematical sciences nor any of those which are based upon the mathematical sciences.

In a similar way, Galileo Galilei based his scientific method on experiments but also developed mathematical methods for application to problems in physics . These two ways to conceive human knowledge formed the background for the principle of Empiricism and Rationalism respectively.

[ 4 ] List of Renaissance philosophers: Pico della Mirandola Nicolas of Cusa Giordano Bruno Galileo Galilei Niccolò Machiavelli Michel de Montaigne Francisco Suárez Rationalism [ edit ] Main article: Rationalism Modern philosophy traditionally begins with René Descartes and his aphorism " I think, therefore I am ". In the early 17th century, the bulk of philosophy was dominated by Scholasticism , written by theologians and drawing upon Plato , Aristotle , and early Church writings. Descartes argued that many predominant Scholastic metaphysical doctrines were meaningless or false. In short, he proposed to begin philosophy from scratch. In his most important work, Meditations on First Philosophy , he attempts just this, over six brief essays. He tries to set aside as much as he possibly can of all his beliefs, to determine what if anything he knows for certain . He finds that he can doubt nearly everything: the reality of physical objects, God , his memories, history, science, even mathematics, but he cannot doubt that he is, in fact, doubting. He knows what he is thinking about, even if it is not true, and he knows that he is there thinking about it. From this basis, he builds his knowledge back up again. He finds that some of the ideas he has could not have originated from him alone, but only from God; he proves that God exists. He then demonstrates that God would not allow him to be systematically deceived about everything; in essence, he vindicates ordinary methods of science and reasoning, as fallible but not false.

List of rationalist philosophers: Christian Wolff René Descartes Baruch Spinoza Gottfried Leibniz Empiricism [ edit ] Main article: Empiricism Empiricism is a theory of knowledge that, in contrast to other theories of knowledge, such as rationalism, idealism , and historicism , asserts that knowledge comes (only or primarily) via sensory experience .  Rationalism asserts instead that knowledge comes (also) from pure thinking. Both empiricism and rationalism are individualist theories of knowledge, whereas historicism is a social epistemology . While historicism also acknowledges the role of experience, it differs from empiricism by assuming that sensory data cannot be understood without considering the historical and cultural circumstances in which observations are made. Empiricism should be distinguished from empirical research, because even adherents of epistemologies other than empiricism generally agree that research should be empirical.

Empiricism is first and foremost characterized by the ideal to let observational data "speak for themselves", while the competing views oppose this ideal. The term empiricism should thus not just be understood in relation to how this term has been used in the history of philosophy. It should also be constructed in a way that makes it possible to distinguish empiricism from other epistemological positions in contemporary science and scholarship. In other words, empiricism as a concept has to be constructed along with other concepts, which together make it possible to make important discriminations between different ideals underlying contemporary science.

Empiricism is one of several competing views that predominate in the study of human knowledge, known as epistemology. Empiricism emphasizes the role of experience and evidence , especially sensory perception , in the formation of ideas, over the notion of innate ideas or tradition [ 5 ] in contrast to, for example, rationalism which relies upon reason and can incorporate innate knowledge.

List of empiricist philosophers: Francis Bacon John Locke George Berkeley David Hume Political philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Political philosophy Political philosophy is the study of such topics as politics , liberty , justice , property , rights , law , and the enforcement of a legal code by authority : their nature and purpose; what (if anything) makes a government legitimate ; what rights and freedoms (if any) it should protect and how and why it should do so; what duties (if any) citizens owe to a legitimate government; and when (if ever) it may be legitimately overthrown. In a vernacular sense, the term "political philosophy" often refers to a general view, or specific ethic, political belief, or attitude, about politics that does not necessarily belong to the technical discipline of philosophy .

[ 6 ] List of political philosophers by country: United Kingdom Jeremy Bentham Thomas Carlyle Thomas Hobbes John Locke James Mill John Stuart Mill France Montesquieu Jean-Jacques Rousseau Voltaire Italy Cesare Beccaria Giambattista Vico Giuseppe Mazzini Germany Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Idealism [ edit ] Main article: Idealism Idealism refers to the group of philosophies that assert that reality, or reality as we can know it, is fundamentally a construct of the mind or otherwise immaterial.

Epistemologically , idealism manifests as a skepticism about the possibility of knowing any mind-independent thing. In a sociological sense, idealism emphasizes how human ideas—especially beliefs and values—shape society.

[ 7 ] As an ontological doctrine, idealism goes further, asserting that all entities are composed of mind or spirit.

[ 8 ] Idealism thus rejects physicalist and dualist theories that fail to ascribe priority to the mind. An extreme version of this idealism can exist in the philosophical notion of solipsism .

List of idealist philosophers: Immanuel Kant Johann Gottlieb Fichte Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Arthur Schopenhauer T. H. Green Francis Herbert Bradley Josiah Royce J. M. E. McTaggart John Foster Existentialism [ edit ] Main article: Existentialism Existentialism is generally considered to be the philosophical and cultural movement that holds that the starting point of philosophical thinking must be the individual and the experiences of the individual. Building on that, existentialists hold that moral thinking and scientific thinking together do not suffice to understand human existence, and, therefore, a further set of categories, governed by the norm of authenticity , is necessary to understand human existence.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] List of existentialist philosophers: Søren Kierkegaard Friedrich Nietzsche Jean-Paul Sartre Simone de Beauvoir Karl Jaspers Gabriel Marcel Martin Heidegger Alexander Solzhenitsyn Phenomenology [ edit ] Main articles: Phenomenology (philosophy) and Existential phenomenology Phenomenology is the study of the structure of experience. It is a broad philosophical movement founded in the early years of the 20th century by Edmund Husserl , expanded upon by a circle of his followers at the universities of Göttingen and Munich in Germany . The philosophy then spread to France , the United States , and elsewhere, often in contexts far removed from Husserl's early work.

[ 12 ] List of phenomenologists: Edmund Husserl Martin Heidegger Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Scheler Pragmatism [ edit ] Main article: Pragmatism Pragmatism is a philosophical tradition centered on the linking of practice and theory. It describes a process where theory is extracted from practice and applied back to practice to form what is called intelligent practice .

[ citation needed ] Important positions characteristic of pragmatism include instrumentalism , radical empiricism , verificationism , conceptual relativity , and fallibilism .

[ citation needed ] There is general consensus among pragmatists that philosophy should take the methods and insights of modern science into account.

[ 13 ] Charles Sanders Peirce (and his pragmatic maxim ) deserves most of the credit for pragmatism, [ 14 ] along with later twentieth century contributors William James and John Dewey .

[ 13 ] List of pragmatist philosophers: Charles Sanders Peirce William James John Dewey Richard Rorty Analytic philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Analytic philosophy Analytic philosophy came to dominate English-speaking countries in the 20th century. In the United States , United Kingdom , Canada , Scandinavia , Australia , and New Zealand , the overwhelming majority of university philosophy departments identify themselves as "analytic" departments.

[ 15 ] The term generally refers to a broad philosophical tradition [ 16 ] [ 17 ] characterized by an emphasis on clarity and argument (often achieved via modern formal logic and analysis of language ) and a respect for the natural sciences .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] List of analytic philosophers: Rudolf Carnap Gottlob Frege George Edward Moore Bertrand Russell Moritz Schlick Ludwig Wittgenstein Modern Asian philosophy [ edit ] Various philosophical movements in Asia arose in the modern period including: New Confucianism Maoism Buddhist modernism Kyoto school Neo-Vedanta Notes [ edit ] ^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008).

From Plato to Derrida . Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1 .

^ Brian Leiter (ed.), The Future for Philosophy , Oxford University Press, 2006, p. 44 n. 2.

^ "Niccolo Machiavelli | Biography, Books, Philosophy, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2019-05-30 .

^ "Western philosophy - Renaissance philosophy" .

^ Baird, Forrest E.; Walter Kaufmann (2008).

From Plato to Derrida . Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-158591-1 .

^ Hampton, Jean (1997).

Political philosophy . p. xiii.

ISBN 9780813308586 .

Charles Blattberg , who defines politics as "responding to conflict with dialogue," suggests that political philosophies offer philosophical accounts of that dialogue. See his Blattberg, Charles (2009). "Political Philosophies and Political Ideologies".

SSRN 1755117 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) in Patriotic Elaborations: Essays in Practical Philosophy , Montreal and Kingston: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2009.

^ Macionis, John J. (2012).

Sociology 14th Edition . Boston: Pearson. p.

88 .

ISBN 978-0-205-11671-3 .

^ Daniel Sommer Robinson, "Idealism", Encyclopædia Britannica , https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/281802/idealism ^ Mullarkey, John, and Beth Lord (eds.).

The Continuum Companion to Continental Philosophy . London, 2009, p. 309 ^ Stewart, Jon.

Kierkegaard and Existentialism . Farnham, England, 2010, p. ix ^ Crowell, Steven (October 2010).

"Existentialism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2012-04-12 .

^ Zahavi, Dan (2003), Husserl's Phenomenology , Stanford: Stanford University Press ^ a b Biesta, G.J.J. & Burbules, N. (2003).

Pragmatism and educational research . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

^ Susan Haack; Robert Edwin Lane (11 April 2006).

Pragmatism, old & new: selected writings . Prometheus Books. pp.

18– 67.

ISBN 978-1-59102-359-3 . Retrieved 12 February 2011 .

^ "Without exception, the best philosophy departments in the United States are dominated by analytic philosophy, and among the leading philosophers in the United States, all but a tiny handful would be classified as analytic philosophers. Practitioners of types of philosophizing that are not in the analytic tradition—such as phenomenology, classical pragmatism, existentialism, or Marxism—feel it necessary to define their position in relation to analytic philosophy." John Searle (2003) Contemporary Philosophy in the United States in N. Bunnin and E.P. Tsui-James (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy , 2nd ed., (Blackwell, 2003), p. 1.

^ See, e.g., Avrum Stroll, Twentieth-Century Analytic Philosophy (Columbia University Press, 2000), p. 5: "[I]t is difficult to give a precise definition of 'analytic philosophy' since it is not so much a specific doctrine as a loose concatenation of approaches to problems."  Also, see ibid., p. 7: "I think Sluga is right in saying 'it may be hopeless to try to determine the essence of analytic philosophy.'  Nearly every proposed definition has been challenged by some scholar. [...]  [W]e are dealing with a family resemblance concept." ^ See Hans-Johann Glock , What Is Analytic Philosophy (Cambridge University Press, 2008), p. 205: "The answer to the title question, then, is that analytic philosophy is a tradition held together both by ties of mutual influence and by family resemblances." ^ Brian Leiter (2006) webpage “Analytic” and “Continental” Philosophy .
Quote on the definition: "'Analytic' philosophy today names a style of doing philosophy, not a philosophical program or a set of substantive views. Analytic philosophers, crudely speaking, aim for argumentative clarity and precision; draw freely on the tools of logic; and often identify, professionally and intellectually, more closely with the sciences and mathematics, than with the humanities." ^ H. Glock, "Was Wittgenstein an Analytic Philosopher?", Metaphilosophy , 35:4 (2004), pp. 419–444.

^ Colin McGinn, The Making of a Philosopher: My Journey through Twentieth-Century Philosophy (HarperCollins, 2002), p. xi.: "analytical philosophy [is] too narrow a label, since [it] is not generally a matter of taking a word or concept and analyzing it (whatever exactly that might be).  [...]  This tradition emphasizes clarity, rigor, argument, theory, truth. It is not a tradition that aims primarily for inspiration or consolation or ideology. Nor is it particularly concerned with 'philosophy of life,' though parts of it are. This kind of philosophy is more like science than religion, more like mathematics than poetry – though it is neither science nor mathematics." External links [ edit ] Philosophy portal Media related to Modern philosophy at Wikimedia Commons Modern philosophy at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qtd5w
Cached time: 20250816102901
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.590 seconds
Real time usage: 0.805 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2402/1000000
Revision size: 21542/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 168640/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2123/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80739/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.369/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7158632/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  663.806      1 -total
 24.70%  163.967      1 Template:Reflist
 16.87%  111.974      5 Template:Cite_book
 15.78%  104.773      1 Template:Histphil
 12.25%   81.286      1 Template:For
 10.43%   69.248      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 10.11%   67.095      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.37%   62.178      1 Template:Short_description
  8.66%   57.453      1 Template:Globalize
  7.93%   52.644      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:806467:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816102901 and revision id 1304242255. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Modern_philosophy&oldid=1304242255 " Category : Modern philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2022 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Modern philosophy 43 languages Add topic

