Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Principal works 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Antoine Arnauld 29 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Саха тыла Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic theologian, philosopher and mathematician (1612–1694) Not to be confused with his father Antoine Arnauld (lawyer) or his nephew Antoine Arnauld (1616–1698) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Antoine Arnauld" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Antoine Arnauld Born ( 1612-02-06 ) 6 February 1612 Paris , Kingdom of France Died 8 August 1694 (1694-08-08) (aged 82) [ 1 ] Liège , Prince-Bishopric of Liège , Holy Roman Empire Nationality French Education Education University of Paris ( Collège de Calvi and Collège de Lisieux [ fr ] [ 2 ] ) Philosophical work Era 17th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Rationalism Augustinianism Jansenism Cartesianism Main interests Theology , metaphysics , epistemology , theodicy Antoine Arnauld ( French: [ɑ̃twan aʁno] ; 6 February 1612 – 8 August 1694) was a French Catholic theologian , priest, philosopher and mathematician . He was one of the leading intellectuals of the Jansenist group of Port-Royal and had a very thorough knowledge of patristics . Contemporaries called him le Grand to distinguish him from his father.

Biography [ edit ] Antoine Arnauld was born in Paris to the Arnauld family . The twentieth and youngest child of the original Antoine Arnauld , he was originally intended for the bar, but decided instead to study theology at the Sorbonne .  Here he was brilliantly successful, and his career was flourishing when he came under the influence of Jean du Vergier de Hauranne , the spiritual director and leader of the convent of Port-Royal, and was drawn in the direction of Jansenism .

[ 3 ] His book, De la fréquente Communion (1643), was an important step in making the aims and ideals of this movement intelligible to the general public. It attracted controversy by being against frequent communion . Furthermore, in the frame of the controversy around Jansenius ' Augustinus , during which the Jesuits attacked the Jansenists claiming they were heretics similar to Calvinists , Arnauld wrote in defense the Théologie morale des Jésuites (Moral Theology of Jesuits), which would put the base of most of the arguments later used by Pascal in his Provincial Letters denouncing the "relaxed moral" of Jesuit casuistry .

[ 4 ] Pascal was assisted in this task by Arnauld's nephew Antoine Le Maistre .

[ 5 ] The Jesuit Nicolas Caussin , former penitentiary to Louis XIII , was charged by his order of writing a defense against Arnauld's book, titled Réponse au libelle intitulé La Théologie morale des Jésuites (1644). Other libels published against Arnauld's Moral Theology of Jesuits included the one written by the Jesuit polemist François Pinthereau (1605–1664), under the pseudonym of the abbé de Boisic, titled Les Impostures et les ignorances du libelle intitulé: La Théologie Morale des Jésuites ( 1644 ), who was also the author of a critical history of Jansenism titled La Naissance du Jansénisme découverte à Monsieur le Chancelier (The Birth of Jansenism Revealed to Sir the Chancellor, Leuven, 1654 ).

[ 3 ] During the formulary controversy which opposed Jesuits to Jansenists concerning the orthodoxy of Jansenius' propositions, Arnauld was forced to go into hiding. In 1655 two very outspoken Lettres à un duc et pair on Jesuit methods in the confessional brought a motion of censorship voted against him in the Sorbonne, in quite an irregular manner. This motion prompted Pascal to anonymously write the Provincial Letters . For more than twenty years Arnauld dared not appear publicly in Paris, hiding in religious retreat.

[ 3 ] Pascal, however, failed to save his friend, and in February 1656 Arnauld was ceremonially degraded. Twelve years later the so-called "peace" of Pope Clement IX put an end to his troubles; he was graciously received by Louis XIV , and treated almost as a popular hero.

[ 3 ] He now set to work with Pierre Nicole on a great work against the Calvinist Protestants : La perpétuité de la foi de l'Église catholique touchant l'eucharistie . Ten years later, however, persecution resumed. Arnauld was compelled to leave France for the Netherlands , finally settling down at Brussels . Here the last sixteen years of his life were spent in incessant controversy with Jesuits, Calvinists and heretics of all kinds. Arnauld gradually evolved away from the rigorous Augustinianism professed by Port-Royal and closer to Thomism , which also postulated the centrality of the " efficacious grace ," under the influence of Nicole.

[ 3 ] His inexhaustible energy is best expressed by his famous reply to Nicole, who complained of feeling tired. "Tired!" echoed Arnauld, "when you have all eternity to rest in?" [ citation needed ] His energy was not exhausted by purely theological questions. He was one of the first to adopt the philosophy of René Descartes , though with certain orthodox reservations relating to Meditations on First Philosophy ; and between 1683 and 1685 he had a long battle with Nicolas Malebranche on the relation of theology to metaphysics . On the whole, public opinion leant to Arnauld's side. When Malebranche complained that his adversary had misunderstood him, Boileau silenced him with the question: "My dear sir, whom do you expect to understand you, if M. Arnauld does not?" [ citation needed ] Next  Arnauld was engaged in an extensive correspondence with Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , regarding the latter's views detailed in his " Discourse on Metaphysics " (1686).  Arnauld died, aged 82, in Brussels .

[ 3 ] Popular record for Arnauld's penetration was much increased in his L'Art de penser , commonly known as the Port-Royal Logic , [ 3 ] which kept its place as an elementary text-book until the 20th century and is considered a paradigmatical work of term logic .

Arnauld came to be regarded as important among the mathematicians of his time; one critic described him as the Euclid of the 17th century. After his death, his reputation began to wane. Contemporaries admired him as a master of intricate reasoning; on this, Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet , the greatest theologian of the age, agreed with Henri François d'Aguesseau , the greatest lawyer .  However, his eagerness to win every argument endeared him to no one.  "In spite of myself," Arnauld once said regretfully, "my books are seldom very short." [ citation needed ] . Despite Arnauld's achievements in various fields, his name is mostly known because of Pascal's acclaimed writings, which were more fit for the general public than Arnauld's technical essays. Boileau wrote for him a famous epitaph , consecrating his memory as “Au pied de cet autel de structure grossière Gît sans pompe, enfermé dans une vile bière, Le plus savant mortel qui jamais ait écrit;” ...

(“At the foot of this rough structure altar Lies without pomp, locked in a vile casket, The most learned mortal who ever wrote;”) … Antoine Arnauld's complete works (thirty-seven volumes in forty-two parts) were published in Paris, 1775–1781. There is a study of his philosophy in Francisque Bouillier , Histoire de la philosophie cartésienne (Paris, 1868); and his mathematical achievements are discussed by Franz Bopp in the 14th volume of the Abhandlung zur Geschichte der mathematischen Wissenschaften (Leipzig, 1902).

Principal works [ edit ] The links are to the Gallica version.

Œuvres complètes , Lausanne, 42 vol in-4°, 1775-1781.

List of volumes online, on wikisource De la fréquente communion où les sentimens des Pères, des papes et des Conciles touchant l'usage des sacremens de pénitence et d'Eucharistie sont fidèlement exposez.

Paris : A. Vitré, 1643. Full text in original French : [1] Grammaire générale et raisonnée contenant les fondemens de l'art de parler, expliqués d'une manière claire et naturelle . Paris : Prault fils l'aîné, 1754. Full text in original French : [2] La logique ou l'art de penser contenant outre les règles communes, plusieurs observations nouvelles, propres à former le jugement . Paris : G. Desprez, 1683. Full text in original French : [3] La perpétuité de la Foy de l'Eglise catholique touchant l'Eucharist deffendue contre le livre du sieur Claude . Paris: Charles Savreux, 1669.

See also [ edit ] Portals : Biography Catholicism France Notes [ edit ] ^ The new Schaff–Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge . Vol. 1. Baker, 1960 ^ Walter Farquhar Hook, An ecclesiastical biography, containing the lives of ancient fathers and modern divines, interspersed with notices of heretics and schismatics , Volume 1, 1844 p. 284.

^ a b c d e f g Chisholm 1911 .

^ Vincent Carraud (author of Pascal et la philosophie , PUF, 1992), Le jansénisme Archived 2007-10-17 at the Wayback Machine , Société des Amis de Port-Royal , on-line since June 2007 (in French) ^ Arnauld Family at concise.britannica.com, accessed 25 June 2008 References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Arnauld s.v. Antoine—le grand Arnauld ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

626– 627.

Further reading [ edit ] Nathan, Henry (1970). "Arnauld, Antoine".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

291– 292.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Antoine Arnauld .

Works by or about Antoine Arnauld at the Internet Archive Kremer, Elmer.

"Antoine Arnauld" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Eric Stencil.

"Antoine Arnauld" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Antoine Arnauld" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews The Leibniz-Arnauld correspondence, slightly modified for easier reading "Arnauld" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . 1913.

- Has a significant section on Antoine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef 2 SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antoine_Arnauld&oldid=1305353657 " Categories : 1612 births 1694 deaths 17th-century Christian mystics 17th-century French Catholic theologians 17th-century French essayists 17th-century French male writers 17th-century French mathematicians 17th-century French non-fiction writers 17th-century French philosophers Cartesianism Catholic philosophers French male essayists French male non-fiction writers French religious writers French Roman Catholic writers French textbook writers Jansenists Roman Catholic mystics University of Paris alumni Writers from Paris Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2007 Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antoine Arnauld 29 languages Add topic

