Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Author and date of Tantrasamgraha 2 Synopsis of the book 3 Some noteworthy features of Tantrasamgraha 4 Conference on 500 years of Tantrasamgraha 5 Other works of the same author 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tantrasamgraha 5 languages Español हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Norsk bokmål Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Astronomical treatise written by Nilakantha Somayaji Tantrasamgraha Opening verses of Tantrasamgraha (in Devanagari ) Author Nilakantha Somayaji Language Sanskrit Subject Astronomy / Mathematics Publication date 1500-01 CE Publication place India Tantrasamgraha , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or Tantrasangraha , [ 3 ] (literally, A Compilation of the System ) is an important astronomical treatise written by Nilakantha Somayaji , an astronomer / mathematician belonging to the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics . 
The treatise was completed in 1501 CE. It consists of 432 verses in Sanskrit divided into eight chapters.

[ 4 ] Tantrasamgraha had spawned a few commentaries: Tantrasamgraha-vyakhya of anonymous authorship and Yuktibhāṣā authored by Jyeshtadeva in about 1550 CE.
Tantrasangraha, together with its commentaries, bring forth the depths of the mathematical accomplishments the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics , in particular the achievements of the remarkable mathematician of the school Sangamagrama Madhava . 
In his Tantrasangraha , Nilakantha revised Aryabhata 's model for the planets Mercury and Venus . According to George G Joseph his equation of the centre for these planets remained the most accurate until the time of Johannes Kepler in the 17th century.

[ 5 ] It was C.M. Whish , a civil servant of East India Company , who brought to the attention of the western scholarship the existence of Tantrasamgraha through a paper published in 1835.

[ 6 ] The other books mentioned by C.M. Whish in his paper were Yuktibhāṣā of Jyeshtadeva , Karanapaddhati of Puthumana Somayaji and Sadratnamala of Sankara Varman .

Author and date of Tantrasamgraha [ edit ] Main article: Nilakantha Somayaji Nilakantha Somayaji , the author of Tantrasamgraha, was a Nambudiri belonging to the Gargya gotra and a resident of Trikkantiyur, near Tirur in central Kerala . The name of his Illam was Kelallur. He studied under Damodara , son of Paramesvara . The first and the last verses in Tantrasamgraha contain chronograms specifying the dates, in the form Kali days, of the commencement and of the completion of book. These work out to dates in 1500–01.

[ 1 ] Synopsis of the book [ edit ] A brief account of the contents of Tantrasamgraha is presented below.

[ 4 ] A descriptive account of the contents is available in Bharatheeya Vijnana/Sastra Dhara.

[ 7 ] Full details of the contents are available in an edition of Tantrasamgraha published in the Indian Journal of History of Science .

[ 1 ] Chapter 1 (Madhyama-prakaranam): The purpose of the astronomical computation, civil and sidereal day measurements, lunar month, solar month, intercalary month, revolutions of the planets, theory of intercalation, planetary revolution in circular orbits, computation of kali days, mathematical operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, squaring and determining square root, fractions, positive and negative numbers, computation of mean planets, correction for longitude, longitudinal time, positions of the planets at the beginning of Kali era, planetary apogees in degrees. (40 slokas) Chapter 2 (Sphuta-prakaranam (On true planets)): Computation of risings, and arcs, construction of a circle of diameter equal to the side of a given square, computation of the circumference without the use of square and roots, sum of series, sum of the series of natural numbers, of squares of numbers, of cubes of numbers, processes relating to Rsines and arcs, computation of the arc of a given Rsine, computation of the circumference of a circle, derivation of Rsines for given Rversed sine and arc, computation of Rsine and arcs, accurate computation of the 24 ordained Rsines, sectional Rsines and Rsine differences, sum of Rsine differences, summation of Rsine differences, computation of the arc of an Rsine according to Madhava, computation of Rsine and Rversed sine at desired point without the aid of the ordained Rsines, rules relating to triangles, rules relating to cyclic quadrilaterals, rules relating to the hypotenuse of a quadrilateral, computation of the diameter from the area of the cyclic quadrilateral, surface area of a sphere, computation of the desired Rsine, the ascensional difference, sun's daily motion in minutes of arc, application of ascensional difference to true planets, measure of day and night on applying ascensional difference, conversion of the arc of Rsine of the ascensional difference, etc. (59 slokas) Chapter 3 (Chhaya-prakaranam (Treatise on shadow)): Deals with various problems related with the sun's position on the celestial sphere, including the relationships of its expressions in the three systems of coordinates, namely ecliptic, equatorial and horizontal coordinates. (116 slokas) Chapter 4 (Chandragrahana-prakaranam (Treatise on the lunar eclipse)): Diameter of the Earth's shadow in minutes, Moon's latitude and Moon's rate of motion, probability of an eclipse, total eclipse and rationale of the explanation given for total eclipse, half duration and first and last contacts, points of contacts and points of release in eclipse, and their method of calculation, visibility of the contact in the eclipse at sunrise and sunset, contingency of the invisibility of an eclipse, possibility of the deflection, deflection due to latitude and that due to declination. (53 slokas) Chapter 5 (Ravigrahana-prakaranam (Treatise on the solar eclipse)): Possibility of a solar eclipse, minutes of parallax in latitude of the sun, minutes of parallax in latitude of the moon,. maximum measure of the eclipse, middle of the eclipse, time of first contact and last contact, half duration and times of submergence and emergence, reduction to observation of computed eclipse, mid eclipse, non prediction of an eclipse. (63 slokas) Chapter 6 (Vyatipata-prakaranam (On vyatipata)): Deals with the complete deviation of the longitudes of the sun and the moon. (24 slokas) Chapter 7 (Drikkarma-prakaranam (On visibility computation)): Discusses the rising and setting of the moon and planets. (15 slokas) Chapter 8 (Sringonnati-prakaranam (On elevation of the lunar cusps)): Examines the size of the part of the moon which is illuminated by the sun and gives a graphical representation of it. (40 slokas) Some noteworthy features of Tantrasamgraha [ edit ] "A remarkable synthesis of Indian spherical astronomical knowledge occurs in a passage in Tantrasamgraha." [ 8 ] In astronomy, the spherical triangle formed by the zenith , the celestial north pole and the Sun is called the astronomical triangle . Its sides and two of its angles are important astronomical quantities. The sides are 90° – φ where φ is the observer's terrestrial latitude , 90° – δ where δ is the Sun's declination and 90° – a where a is the Sun's altitude above the horizon . The important angles are the angle at the zenith which is the Sun's azimuth and the angle at the north pole which is the Sun's hour angle . The problem is to compute two of these elements when the other three elements are specified. There are precisely ten different possibilities and Tantrasamgraha contains discussions of all these possibilities with complete solutions one by one in one place .

[ 9 ] "The spherical triangle is handled as systematically here as in any modern textbook." [ 8 ] The terrestrial latitude of an observer's position is equal to the zenith distance of the Sun at noon on the equinoctial day . The effect of solar parallax on zenith distance was known to Indian astronomers right from Aryabhata . But it was Nilakantha Somayaji who first discussed the effect of solar parallax on the observer's latitude. Tantrasamgraha gives the magnitude of this correction and also a correction due to the finite size of the Sun.

[ 10 ] In his Aryabhatiyabhasya , a commentary on Aryabhata's Aryabhatiya , Nilakantha developed a computational system for a partially heliocentric planetary model in which Mercury, Venus, Mars , Jupiter and Saturn orbit the Sun , which in turn orbits the Earth , similar to the Tychonic system later proposed by Tycho Brahe in the late 16th century. Most astronomers of the Kerala school who followed him accepted this planetary model.

[ 5 ] [ 11 ] Conference on 500 years of Tantrasamgraha [ edit ] A Conference to celebrate the 500th Anniversary of Tantrasangraha was organised by the Department of Theoretical Physics, University of Madras, in collaboration with the Inter-University Centre of the Indian Institute of Advanced Study, Shimla, during 11–13 March 2000, at Chennai.

[ 12 ] The Conference turned out to be an important occasion for highlighting and reviewing the recent work on the achievements in Mathematics and Astronomy of the Kerala school and the new perspectives in History of Science, which are emerging from these studies. A compilation of the important papers presented at this Conference has also been published.

[ 13 ] Other works of the same author [ edit ] The following is a brief description of the other works by Nilakantha Somayaji.

[ 1 ] Jyotirmimamsa Golasara : Description of basic astronomical elements and procedures Sidhhantadarpana : A short work in 32 slokas enunciating the astronomical constants with reference to the Kalpa and specifying his views on astronomical concepts and topics.

Candrachayaganita : A work in 32 verses on the methods for the calculation of time from the measurement of the shadow of the gnomon cast by the moon and vice versa.

Aryabhatiya-bhashya : Elaborate commentary on Aryabhatiya.

Sidhhantadarpana-vyakhya : Commentary on his own Siddhantadarapana.

Chandrachhayaganita-vyakhya : Commentary on his own Chandrachhayaganita.

Sundaraja-prasnottara : Nilakantha's answers to questions posed by Sundaraja, a Tamil Nadu-based astronomer.

Grahanadi-grantha : Rationale of the necessity of correcting old astronomical constants by observations.

Grahapariksakrama : Description of the principles and methods for verifying astronomical computations by regular observations.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d K.V. Sarma (ed.).

"Tantrasamgraha with English translation" (PDF) (in Sanskrit and English). Translated by V.S. Narasimhan. Indian National Academy of Science. p. 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 January 2010 .

^ Tantrasamgraha , ed. K.V. Sarma, trans. V. S. Narasimhan in the Indian Journal of History of Science, issue starting Vol. 33, No. 1 March 1998 ^ Open Library Reference: Nīlakaṇṭha Somayājī (1985). "Anantaśayanasaṃskr̥tagranthāvaliḥ; granthāṅkaḥ 188".

Tantrasaṅgrahaḥ gaṇitam : savyākhyaḥ (in Sanskrit). Kerala University, Thiruvananthapuram.

OL 2697994M . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ a b J J O'Connor; E F Robertson (November 2000).

"Nilakantha Somayaji" . School of Mathematics and Statistics University of St Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 17 January 2010 .

^ a b George G. Joseph (2000).

The Crest of the Peacock: Non-European Roots of Mathematics , p. 408.

Princeton University Press .

^ C.M. Whish (1835). "On the Hindu quadrature of the circle and the infinite series of the proportion of the circumference to the diameter exhibited in the four Sastras, the Tantra Sahgraham, Yucti Bhasha, Carana Padhati and Sadratnamala".

Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland .

III (iii): 509– 23.

^ N. Gopalakrishnan (2004).

Baharatheeya Vijnana / Sastra Dhaara ( Handbbok of Ancient Indian Scientific Books) (PDF) . Heritage Publication Series. Vol. 78. Thiruvanannthapuram, India: Indian Institute of Scientific Heritage. pp.

18– 20 . Retrieved 12 January 2010 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b Glen van Brummelen (2009).

The mathematics of the heavens and the earth: The early history of trigonometry .

Princeton University Press . pp.

128– 129.

ISBN 9780691129730 .

^ Radaha Charan Gupta.

"Solution of the astronomical triangle as found in Tantrsasamgraha (A.D.1500)" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

9 (1). Indian National Academy of Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ * K. Ramasubramanian & M.S. Sriram (2003).

"Corrections to the terrestrial latitude in Tantrasamgraha" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

38 (2): 129– 144. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

^ K. Ramasubramanian, M. D. Srinivas, M. S. Sriram (1994). " Modification of the earlier Indian planetary theory by the Kerala astronomers (c. 1500 AD) and the implied heliocentric picture of planetary motion ", Current Science 66 , p. 784-790.

^ M.S. Sriram (25 July 2000).

"Meeting reports : Five hundred years of Tantrasangraha – A landmark in the history of astronomy" (PDF) .

Current Science .

79 (2): 150– 151 . Retrieved 1 February 2010 .

^ M. S. Sriram; K. Ramasubramanian & M. D. Srinivas (2002).

500 years of Tantrasangraha – A landmark in the history of astronomy . Shimla: Inter-University Center, Indian Institute of Advanced Study. p. 185.

ISBN 81-7986-009-4 .

"Indian Institute of Advanced Study" . Archived from the original on 16 January 2010 . Retrieved 18 January 2010 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ramasubramanian, K (1998). "Model of planetary motion in the works of Kerala astronomers".

Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of India .

26 ( 11– 31): 11.

Bibcode : 1998BASI...26...11R .

Ranjan Roy, R. (December 1990).

"The discovery of the series formula for π by Leibniz, Gregory and Nilakantha" (PDF) .

Mathematics Magazine .

63 (5).

Mathematical Association of America : 291– 306.

doi : 10.2307/2690896 .

JSTOR 2690896 .

v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians (Complete list) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ Citrabhānu Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi Devācārya Govinda Bhattathiri Govindasvāmin Haridatta Jyeṣṭhadeva Kochukrishnan Asan Madhava of Sangamagrama Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji Nīlakaṇṭha II Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam Putumana Somayāji Śankara Vāriyar Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ Udayadivākara Vararuci I Vidyamadhava Treatises Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) Candrachayaganita Dasādhyāyi Drigganita Dṛkkaraṇa Gaṇitayuktayah Golavada Golasara Grahacāraṇinibandhana Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha Jyotirmimamsa Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha Kanakkusāraṃ Karaṇapaddhati Kriyakramakari Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) Madhyamanayanaprakara Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya Pañcabodha Sadratnamālā Sidhhantadarpana Spuṭanirṇaya Tantrasamgraha Venvaroha Yuktibhāṣā Concepts/Topics Chandravakyas Drigganita system Kaṭapayādi system Madhava's correction terms Madhava series Madhava's sine table Parahita system Places associated with members of the school Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) Tirunavaya (Haridatta) v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna v t e Scientific Research in Kerala Pre 19th Century Achyuta Pisharati Candravakyas Citrabhanu Damodara Ganita-yukti-bhasa Govinda Bhattathiri Haridatta Jyā, koti-jyā and utkrama-jyā Jyeṣṭhadeva Jyotirmimamsa Karanapaddhati Katapayadi system Kriyakramakari Madhava of Sangamagrama Madhava series Madhava's sine table Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Nilakantha Somayaji Parameshvara Sadratnamala Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Tantrasamgraha Organizations C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram Centre for Development Studies Centre for Earth Science Studies Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Kerala) Centre for Rural Management Centre of Science and Technology for Rural Development Cyberpark Kerala Mathematical Association Kerala Science and Technology Museum Kerala Science Congress Kerala Soil Museum Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment Krishi Vigyan Kendra Kannur Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Regional Agricultural Research Station, Pattambi Rice Research Station, Moncombu Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre Institutions Agricultural Research Station, Anakkayam Agricultural Research Station, Mannuthy Agronomic Research Station, Chalakudy Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre Aromatic and Medicinal Plants Research Station, Odakkali Banana Research Station, Kannara Cashew Research Station, Madakkathara Central Institute of Fisheries Technology Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute Central Tuber Crops Research Institute Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology College of Horticulture Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre Institute of Handloom and Textile Technology Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Indian Institute of Spices Research Jubilee Mission Medical College and Research Institute Kerala Forest Research Institute Kerala School of Mathematics, Kozhikode Mar Athanasios College for Advanced Studies, Tiruvalla National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology National Institute of Speech and Hearing National Research Institute for Panchakarma Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology Srinivasa Ramanujan Institute of Basic Sciences St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute Vadakke Madham Brahmaswam Vedic Research Centre Scientists Ajit Varki C. V. Subramanian Dileep George E. C. George Sudarshan G. Madhavan Nair George Varghese K. R. Ramanathan K. Radhakrishnan M. G. K. Menon Matthew Pothen Thekaekara P. N. Vinayachandran Pisharoth Rama Pisharoty Pulickel Ajayan R. S. Krishnan Sainudeen Pattazhy T. A. Venkitasubramanian Thanu Padmanabhan Thomas Zacharia Vainu Bappu Varghese Mathai Vinod Scaria Assorted articles A Passage to Infinity FORV Sagar Sampada Swatantra 2014 Techno-lodge Technology Business Incubator TBI-NITC A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy Templates Category WikiProject India portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tantrasamgraha&oldid=1223535579 " Categories : Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Hindu astronomy Astronomy books Indian mathematics Hindu astrological texts 1501 books Indian astronomy texts Hidden categories: CS1 Sanskrit-language sources (sa) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2013 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 This page was last edited on 12 May 2024, at 19:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tantrasamgraha 5 languages Add topic

