Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life, family, and education 2 Political career Toggle Political career subsection 2.1 Italian Socialist Party 2.2 Communist Party of Italy 2.3 Under arrest 2.4 Opposition 2.5 International Communist Party 3 Theories and beliefs Toggle Theories and beliefs subsection 3.1 On Marxism–Leninism 3.2 On democracy 3.3 On the united front 3.4 On communism 4 Legacy 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Amadeo Bordiga 21 languages العربية Català Cebuano Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian communist politician and Marxist theoretician (1889–1970) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Amadeo Bordiga" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Amadeo Bordiga Bordiga c.

1920s General Secretary Communist Party of Italy In office January 1921 – January 1924 Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Antonio Gramsci Personal details Born ( 1889-06-13 ) 13 June 1889 Resina , Kingdom of Italy Died 23 July 1970 (1970-07-23) (aged 81) Formia , Italy Political party PSI (1910–1921) PCdI (1921–1930) PCInt (1952–1970) Spouses Ortensia De Meo ​ ​ ( m.

1914; died 1955) ​ Antonietta De Meo ​ ​ ( m.

1965⁠–⁠1970) ​ Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Amadeo Bordiga (13 June 1889 – 25 July 1970) was an Italian Marxist theorist. A revolutionary socialist , Bordiga was the founder of the Communist Party of Italy (PCdI), a member of the Communist International (Comintern), and later a leading figure of the Internationalist Communist Party (PCInt). He was originally associated with the PCdI but was expelled in 1930 after being accused of Trotskyism . Bordiga is viewed as one of the most notable representatives of left communism in Europe.

Early life, family, and education [ edit ] Bordiga was born at Resina in the province of Naples in 1889. His father, Oreste Bordiga, was an esteemed scholar of agricultural science , whose authority was especially recognized in regard to the centuries-old agricultural problems of Southern Italy . His mother, Zaira degli Amadei, was descended from an ancient Florentine family and his maternal grandfather Count Michele Amadei was a conspirator in the struggles of the Risorgimento . His paternal uncle, Giovanni Bordiga , another militant of the Risorgimento , was a mathematician and professor at the University of Padua .

[ 1 ] Bordiga's upbringing, while being thoroughly radical, was also of a highly scientific nature. An opponent of the Italo-Turkish War as an Italian colonial war in Libya , Bordiga was introduced to the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) by his high-school physics teacher in 1910. Bordiga eventually founded the Karl Marx Circle in 1912, where he would meet his first wife, Ortensia De Meo. Bordiga graduated with a degree in engineering from University of Naples Federico II in 1912. Bordiga married De Meo in 1914. They had two children, Alma and Oreste. Ortensia died in 1955, and Bordiga married Ortensia's sister, Antonietta De Meo, ten years later in 1965.

[ 2 ] Political career [ edit ] Italian Socialist Party [ edit ] Within the newly founded Karl Marx Circle, Bordiga rejected a pedagogical approach to political work and developed a "theory of the Party", whereby the organization was meant to display non-immediate goals as a rally of similarly minded people and not necessarily a body of the working class . Bordiga was deeply opposed to representative democracy , which he associated with bourgeois electoralism . In a 1914 issue of Il Socialista , he wrote: "Thus if there is a complete negation of the theory of democratic action it is to be found in socialism." Bordiga opposed the parliamentary faction of the PSI being autonomous from central control. In common with most socialists in Latin countries , Bordiga campaigned against Freemasonry , which he identified as a non- secular group.

Following the October Revolution , Bordiga rallied to the communist movement and formed the communist abstentionist faction within the PSI, abstentionist in that it opposed participation in bourgeois elections. The group would form with the addition of the former L'Ordine Nuovo grouping in Turin around Antonio Gramsci the backbone of the Communist Party of Italy (PCdI). This came after a long internal struggle in the PSI as it had voted as early as 1919 to affiliate with the Comintern but had refused to purge its reformist wing. In the course of the conflict, Bordiga attended the 2nd Comintern Congress in 1920, where he added two points to the Twenty-one Conditions of membership proposed by Vladimir Lenin . Nevertheless, he was criticised by Lenin in his work "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) over a disagreement regarding parliamentary abstentionism.

Victor Serge , who witnessed the 2nd Comintern Congress, remembered Bordiga as "exuberant and energetic, features blunt, hair thick, black and bristly, a man quivering under his encumbrance of ideas, experiences and dark forecasts." [ 3 ] Communist Party of Italy [ edit ] Bordiga in a 1920 drawing by Soviet painter Isaak Brodsky When the PSI held its congress at Livorno in January 1921, representatives sent by Comintern, all insisted that the party must expel its reformist wing led by Filippo Turati but were divided over whether to continue to work with Giacinto Menotti Serrati , who advised delaying the split. Bordiga advocated an immediate break with both Serrati and Turati, and hence with the majority of the PSI, and prevailed against the opposition of the leading Comintern representative Paul Levi but also with the backing of others, including Matyas Rakosi , the future Stalinist dictator of Hungary.

[ 4 ] After the congress, Bordiga emerged as leader of the newly formed Communist Party of Italy. He was one of five members of the executive but was "the actual director of all party activity".

[ 5 ] For Bordiga, the party was the social brain of the proletariat whose task was not to seek majority support but to concentrate on working for an armed insurrection in the course of which it would seize power and then use it to abolish capitalism and impose a communist society by force. Bordiga identified with the dictatorship of the proletariat and the dictatorship of the party, and argued that establishing its own dictatorship should be the party's immediate and direct aim.

[ citation needed ] This position was accepted by the majority of the members of the PCdI but was to bring them into conflict with the Comintern when in 1921 the latter adopted a new tactic, i.e. that of the united front with reformist organisations to fight for social reforms and even to form a workers' government. Bordiga regarded this as a reversion to the failed tactics which the pre-war social democrats had adopted and which had led to them becoming reformists.

Out of a regard for discipline, Bordiga and his comrades (who became known as the Italian communist left ) accepted the Comintern decision but were in an increasingly difficult position. When Bordiga was arrested in February 1923 on a trumped-up charge by the new government of Benito Mussolini , he had to give up his post as a member of the Central Committee of the PCdI. On his acquittal later that year, Bordiga decided not to reclaim it, therefore implicitly accepting that he was now an oppositionist.

At the Fifth Congress of Comintern in Moscow held in June–July 1924, Bordiga was the sole voice of the ultra-left who opposed any cooperation with socialist parties in favour of a "united front from below, not from above", which received support except within the Italian delegation. He argued that the rise of Mussolini and the Italian fascists was only "a change in the governing personnel of the bourgeois class." [ 6 ] Also in 1924, the Italian communist left lost control of the PCdI to a pro-Moscow group whose leader Gramsci became the party's General Secretary in June. In March 1925, Bordiga refused to go to Moscow to attend a plenum of Comintern's executive, and in his absence was accused of taking up a "hostile position against Comintern by declaring his complete solidarity with Trotsky ".

[ 7 ] At the Third Congress of the PCdI held in exile in Lyons in January 1926, the manoeuvre of the pro-Moscow group was completed. Without the support of the Communist International to escape from Fascist control, [ citation needed ] few members of the Italian communist left were able to arrive at the Congress, so the theses drawn up by Bordiga were rejected. Those of the Stalinist minority group accepted.

[ citation needed ] Under arrest [ edit ] In December 1926, Bordiga was again arrested by Mussolini and sent to prison in Ustica , an Italian island in the Tyrrhenian Sea , where he met with Gramsci and they renewed their friendship and worked alongside each other despite their political differences. Bordiga was concerned about Gramsci's ill health but nothing came of a plan to help him escape the island. In 1928, Bordiga was moved to the Isle of Ponza , where he built several houses, returning after his detention in 1929 to finish them.

[ 8 ] Opposition [ edit ] Following his release, Bordiga did not resume his activities in the PCdI and was in fact expelled in March 1930, accused of having "supported, defended and endorsed the positions of the Trotskyist opposition" and been organisationally disruptive.

[ 8 ] With his expulsion, Bordiga left political activity until 1943 and he was to refuse to comment on political affairs even when asked by trusted friends; many of his former supporters in the PCdI went into exile and founded a political tendency often referred to as Italian communist left.

In 1928, its members in exile in France and Belgium formed themselves into the Left Fraction of the Communist Party of Italy, which became, in 1935, the Italian Fraction of the Communist Left. This change of name was a reflection of the Italian communist left's view that the PCdI and the other Communist parties had now become counter-revolutionary. A faction of the party, with their theory of the party and their opposition to any form of frontism , held that the program was everything and a gate-receipt notion of numbers was nothing. Bordiga would again work with many of these comrades following the end of World War II .

According to the reports of Angelo Alliotta, a secret informant of the fascist police in Italy who visited Bordiga's home in Formia where he holidayed with his wife, Bordiga showed support for the Axis powers . According to Alliotta, Bordiga believed Nazi Germany was weakening the "English giant", which to him was "the greatest exponent of capitalism", and thus the defeat of Britain would bring about revolutionary conditions in Europe. Bordiga also criticised Joseph Stalin for allying with the western Allies against the Axis in April 1943.

[ 9 ] Other sources cast doubt on the analysis that Bordiga supported Nazi Germany or Fascist Italy, citing ‘contradictory’ testimony on the issue. He supported the ‘proletarian’ partisan movements, as well as the anti-fascist Warsaw uprisings of 1943 (Warsaw ghetto) and 1944.

[ 10 ] International Communist Party [ edit ] After 1944, Bordiga first returned to political activity in the Naples -based Fraction of Socialists and Communists. When this grouping was dissolved into the Internationalist Communist Party (PCInt), Bordiga did not initially join; despite this, he contributed anonymously to its press, primarily Battaglia Comunista and Prometeo , in keeping with his conviction that revolutionary work was collective in nature and his opposition to any form of even incipient personality cult . Bordiga joined the PCInt in 1949. When the current split in two in 1951, he took the side of the grouping that took on the name International Communist Party , publishing its Il Programma Comunista . Bordiga devoted himself to the party, contributing extensively. Bordiga remained with the ICP until his death at Formia in 1970.

Theories and beliefs [ edit ] Bordigism is a variant of left communism espoused by Bordiga. Bordigists in the Italian Socialist Party would be the first to refuse on principle any participation in parliamentary elections .

[ 11 ] On Marxism–Leninism [ edit ] On the theoretical level, Bordiga developed an understanding of the Soviet Union as a capitalist society .

[ 12 ] Bordiga's writings on the capitalist nature of the Soviet economy in contrast to those produced by the Trotskyists also focused on the agrarian sector. In analyzing the agriculture in the Soviet Union , Bordiga sought to display the capitalist social relations that existed in the kolkhoz and sovkhoz , one a cooperative farm and the other a wage-labor state farm.

[ 13 ] In particular, he emphasized how much of the national agrarian produce came from small privately owned plots (writing in 1950) and predicted the rates at which the Soviet Union would start importing wheat after Imperial Russia had been such a large exporter from the 1880s to 1914.

[ 14 ] In Bordiga's conception of Marxism–Leninism , Joseph Stalin , and later Mao Zedong , Ho Chi Minh , and so on, were great Romantic revolutionaries, i.e.

bourgeois revolutionaries . He felt that the Marxist–Leninist states that came into existence after 1945 were extending the bourgeois nature of prior revolutions that degenerated as all had in common a policy of expropriation and agrarian and productive development, which he considered negations of previous conditions and not the genuine construction of socialism.

[ 15 ] On democracy [ edit ] Bordiga defined himself as anti-democratic , believing himself to be following the tradition of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . Bordiga's hostility toward democracy was unrelated to the Stalinist narrative of the single-party state , as he saw fascism and Stalinism as the culmination of bourgeois democracy . Followers of Bordiga often state that there is no functional difference between democracy and dictatorship, as one class will inevitably establish control. To Bordiga, democracy meant above all the manipulation of society as a formless mass. To this, he counterposed the dictatorship of the proletariat , to be implemented by the Communist party based on the principles and program enunciated in The Communist Manifesto (1848). He often referred to the spirit of Engels' remark that "on the eve of the revolution all the forces of reaction will be against us under the banner of 'pure democracy'" as every factional opponent of the Bolsheviks in 1921 from the monarchists (the White movement ) to the anarchists , such as the Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine , called for soviets without Bolsheviks—or soviet workers councils not dominated by Bolsheviks. As such, Bordiga opposed the idea of revolutionary theory being the product of a democratic process of pluralist views, believing that the Marxist perspective has the merit of underscoring the fact that, like all social formations , communism is above all about the expression of programmatic content. This enforces the fact that, for Marxists, communism is not an ideal to be achieved but a real movement born from the old society with a set of programmatic tasks.

[ 16 ] On the united front [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bordiga resolutely opposed the Comintern 's turn to the right in 1921. As leader of the Communist Party of Italy , he refused to implement the united front strategy of the Third Congress. He also refused to fuse the newly formed party with the left-wing of the Italian Socialist Party from which it had just broken away. Bordiga had a completely different view of the party from the Comintern, [ 17 ] which was adapting to the revolutionary ebb that was announced in 1921 by the Anglo-Soviet Trade Agreement , the Kronstadt rebellion , the implementation of the New Economic Policy , the banning of factions , and the defeat of the March Action in Germany. For Bordiga, the Western European Communist parties' strategy of fighting this ebb by absorbing a mass of left-wing social democrats through the united front was a complete capitulation to the period of counter-revolutionary ebb he saw setting in. This was the base of his critique of democracy, for it was in the name of conquering the masses that the Comintern seemed to be making all kinds of programmatic concessions to left-wing social democrats. For Bordiga, program was everything, a gate-receipt notion of numbers was nothing. The role of the party in the period of ebb was to preserve the program and to carry on the propaganda work possible until the next turn of the tide, not to dilute it while chasing ephemeral popularity.

Bordiga's analysis provided a way of seeing a fundamental degeneration in the world communist movement in 1921 ( instead of in 1927 with the defeat of Trotsky) without simply calling for more democracy. The abstract formal perspective of bureaucracy/democracy, with which the Trotskyist tradition treats this crucial period in Comintern history, became separated from any content. Bordiga throughout his life called himself a Leninist and never polemicised against Lenin directly; his totally different appreciation of the 1921 conjuncture, its consequences for the Comintern and his opposition to Lenin and Trotsky on the united front issue illuminates a turning point that is generally obscured by the heirs of the Trotskyist wing of the international left opposition of the 1920s.

On communism [ edit ] Although most Leninists distinguish between socialism and communism and he did consider himself a Leninist, Bordiga did not distinguish between the two in the same way Leninists do. Bordiga did not see socialism as a separate mode of production from communism but rather just as how communism looks as it emerges from capitalism before it has "developed on its own foundations". Bordiga used socialism to mean what Marx called the lower-phase communism . Sticking to Marx's concept of communism, for Bordiga both stages of socialist or communist society —with stages referring to historical materialism —were characterised by the absence of money, capital, the market, and so on, the difference between them being that earlier in the first stage rationing would be done in a way in which "a given amount of labor in one form is exchanged for an equal amount of labor in another form", [ 18 ] with deductions being made from said labor to fund public projects, and difference in interests between the rural and urban proletariat would exist, whilst in communism "bourgeoisie law" would be no more, hence the equal standard applied to all peoples no longer would apply, and the alienated man "will not aim to win back his person" but rather become a new "Social Man".

[ 19 ] Arguing against what Bordiga saw as the bourgeois idea of "free producer economies", he instead declared that under communism, whether it be the lower stage or higher stage, production and consumption are both enslaved to society.

[ 20 ] This view distinguished Bordiga from other Leninists and especially the Trotskyists, who tended and still tend to telescope the first two stages and so have money and the other exchange categories surviving into socialism; Bordiga would have none of this. For him, no society in which money, buying, and selling and the rest survived could be regarded as either socialist or communist—these exchange categories would die out before the socialist rather than the communist stage was reached. Within the Marxist movement, socialism was popularised during the Russian Revolution by Lenin.

[ 21 ] This view is consistent with and helped to inform early concepts of socialism in which the law of value no longer directs economic activity. Monetary relations in the form of exchange-value , profit , interest , and wage labour would not operate and apply to Marxist socialism.

[ 22 ] Legacy [ edit ] An older Bordiga Jacques Camatte began corresponding with Bordiga from the age of 19 in 1954, and Bordiga developed a long-standing relationship with Camatte and ideological influence over him. Camatte's early work very much reads in line with the Bordigist current, and Bordiga frequently contributed to Camatte's journal Invariance near the end of his life. Even after Camatte's break with Marxism following Bordiga's death, Camatte's preoccupation within the subject of Gemeinwesen (community, commonwealth) within Marx's work was consistent with Bordiga's emphasis on the anti-individualist and collectivist aspects of Marxism.

[ 23 ] Bordiga also influenced Gilles Dauvé , and had great influence over the ultra-leftist currents of the 20th and 21st centuries.

[ 24 ] The Amadeo Bordiga Foundation was established in 1998 in Formia, in the house where Bordiga spent the last several months of his life. The foundation organizes publications of Bordiga's works and encourages further expansions upon his ideas.

[ 25 ] In August 2020, Historical Materialism published The Science and Passion of Communism , an anthology of English translations of Bordiga's work.

[ 26 ] References [ edit ] ^ Cortesi, Luigi, ed. (1999).

Amadeo Bordiga nella storia del comunismo . Napoli: Edizioni scientifiche italiane.

ISBN 978-88-8114-824-0 .

OCLC 42041262 .

^ "Avanti Barbari!" . Archived from the original on 15 November 2016 . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Serge, Victor (1984).

Memoirs of a Revolutionary . London: Writers and Readers Co-operative. p. 105.

ISBN 0-86316-070-0 .

^ Milorad M. Drachkovitch, and Branko Lazitch (1966).

The Comintern - Historical Highlights . New York: Frederick A. Praeger. pp.

275– 81.

^ Drachkovitch, and Lazitch.

Historical Highlights . p. 359.

^ Carr, E.H. (1972).

Socialism in One Country, 1924-26, volume 3 . Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin. pp.

78– 80, 84.

^ Carr.

Socialism in One Country, volume 3 . p. 380.

^ a b Peregalli, Arturo; Saggioir, Sandro (1998).

La sconfitta e gli anni oscuri (1926-1945 . Milan: Edizioni Colibri.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 12 April 2014 .

^ "Storia. Bordiga, il leninista che sperava nell'Asse" .

Avvenire (in Italian). 9 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2023 .

^ "An important book on the unknown Bordiga (1926-1946) - Philippe Bourrinet" .

Libcom . 26 December 2010 . Retrieved 26 August 2024 .

^ "Bordigism" . International Communist Current.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2006 . Retrieved 5 November 2016 .

^ Goldner 1995 , p. 76.

^ Goldner 1995 , p. 77.

^ Goldner 1995 , pp. 73–100.

^ Goldner 1995 , p. 78.

^ Goldner 1995 , p. 81.

^ "Bordiga: Communist Organisation and Discipline" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 7 January 2025 .

^ Karl Marx (1970) [1875].

"Critique of the Gotha Programme, Part I" .

Marx/Engels Selected Works . Vol. 3. Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

13– 30.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 June 2024 – via marxists.org.

^ Bordiga, Amadeo (11–25 March 1960).

"Tavole immutabili della teoria comunista del partito" [Immutable tablets of the communist theory of the party].

Il programma comunista [ it ] (in Italian). Milan: Internationalist Communist Party .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2024 . Retrieved 11 June 2024 .

^ Bordiga, Amadeo (1957).

"The Fundamentals of Revolutionary Communism" .

Il programma comunista [ it ] . Milan: Internationalist Communist Party .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2024 . Retrieved 11 June 2024 .

^ Steele, David (1992).

From Marx to Mises: Post-Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court Publishing Company. pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-87548-449-5 .

By 1888, the term 'socialism' was in general use among Marxists, who had dropped 'communism', now considered an old fashioned term meaning the same as 'socialism'. ... At the turn of the century, Marxists called themselves socialists. ... The definition of socialism and communism as successive stages was introduced into Marxist theory by Lenin in 1917 ..., the new distinction was helpful to Lenin in defending his party against the traditional Marxist criticism that Russia was too backward for a socialist revolution.

^ Bockman, Johanna (2011).

Markets in the name of Socialism: The Left-Wing origins of Neoliberalism . Stanford University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-8047-7566-3 .

According to nineteenth-century socialist views, socialism would function without capitalist economic categories – such as money, prices, interest, profits and rent – and thus would function according to laws other than those described by current economic science. While some socialists recognized the need for money and prices at least during the transition from capitalism to socialism, socialists more commonly believed that the socialist economy would soon administratively mobilize the economy in physical units without the use of prices or money.

^ El-Ojeili 2015 , p. 93.

^ La Banquise.

"Re-collecting our past" .

Libcom .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ "Chi Siamo" . Fondazione Amadeo Bordiga.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ Bordiga 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Bordiga, Amadeo (2020).

The Science and Passion of Communism: Selected Writings of Amadeo Bordiga (1912-1965) . Translated by Giacomo Donis. Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9789004234505 .

De Clementi, Andreina (1971).

Amadeo Bordiga . Einaudi.

El-Ojeili, Chamsy (2015).

Beyond Post-Socialism: Dialogues With the Far-left . Houndsmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-349-50157-1 .

Goldner, Loren (1995).

"Amadeo Bordiga, the agrarian question and the international revolutionary movement" (PDF) .

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory .

23 (1): 73– 100.

doi : 10.1080/03017609508413387 . Retrieved 1 August 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Amadeo Bordiga .

The International Library of the Communist Left – Bordiga Page .

Bordiga Archive at Marxists.org.

Archives of "Sinistra comunista 'italiana'" – Hundreds texts of Bordiga at "n+1" Review.

Libertarian Communist Library Amadeo Bordiga archive .

Antagonism Bordiga Archive .

Archived 25 October 2009).

Bordigism – Adam Buick .

Archived 25 October 2009.

Loren Goldner, Communism is the Material Human Community: Amadeo Bordiga Today .

International Communist Party .

Earlene Craver The Third Generation: The Young Socialists in Italy, 1907–1915 .

Philippe Bourrinet, The "Bordigist" Current, (1912–1952) at "Left Wing" Communism – an infantile disorder?

.

Immutable tablets of the communist theory of the party Critique of the Gotha Programme – I The Fundamentals of Revolutionary Communism v t e Italian Communist Party Leadership General Secretary Amadeo Bordiga (1922–1923) Executive Committee (1923–1924) Antonio Gramsci (1924–1927) Camilla Ravera (1927–1930) Palmiro Togliatti (1930–1934) Ruggero Grieco (1934–1938) Palmiro Togliatti (1938–1964) Luigi Longo (1964–1972) Enrico Berlinguer (1972–1984) Alessandro Natta (1984–1988) Achille Occhetto (1988–1991) President Luigi Longo (1972–1980) Alessandro Natta (1989–1990) Aldo Tortorella (1990–1991) Leader in the Chamber of Deputies Luigi Longo (1946–1947) Palmiro Togliatti (1947–1964) Pietro Ingrao (1964–1972) Alessandro Natta (1972–1979) Fernando Di Giulio (1979–1981) Giorgio Napolitano (1981–1986) Renato Zangheri (1986–1990) Giulio Quercini (1990–1991) Leader in the Senate Mauro Scoccimarro (1948–1958) Umberto Terracini (1958–1973) Edoardo Pema (1973–1986) Gerardo Chiaromonte (1983–1986) Ugo Pecchioli (1986–1991) Leader in the European Parliament Giorgio Amendola (1979–1980) Guido Fanti (1980–1984) Giovanni Cervetti (1984–1989) Luigi Alberto Colajanni (1989–1991) Publications l'Unità (1924–1991) Vie Nuove (1946–1978) Pattuglia (1948–1953) Rinascita (1944–1991) Related articles Italian Socialist Party Culturalists XII International Brigade ( Garibaldi Battalion ) Italian resistance movement National Liberation Committee May 1947 crises AvtoVAZ Tolyatti Italian Communist Youth Federation Marxism–Leninism Bordigism Eurocommunism Migliorismo Derivatives Internationalist Communist Party International Communist Party Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) / Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Italian (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party Democratic Party of the Left / Democrats of the Left / Democratic Party Communist Refoundation Party / Party of Italian Communists Alliances Popular Democratic Front (1947–1948) Historic Compromise (1976–1980) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Italian People Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amadeo_Bordiga&oldid=1303335882 " Categories : Bordigism 1889 births 1970 deaths 20th-century Italian engineers 20th-century Italian journalists 20th-century Italian politicians Critics of Freemasonry Anti-Stalinist left Executive Committee of the Communist International Italian anti-capitalists Italian atheists Italian male journalists Italian Marxists Italian Communist Party politicians Italian Socialist Party politicians Italian socialists Left communists Marxist theorists People from Formia People from the Metropolitan City of Naples Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia external links cleanup from December 2023 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from July 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Articles needing additional references from July 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amadeo Bordiga 21 languages Add topic

