Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Ropes 3 Biomechanics 4 Famous tightrope artists 5 Metaphorical use 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Tightrope walking 26 languages العربية Asturianu བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Tightrope walker ) Skill of walking along a taut wire or rope "Tightrope" redirects here. For other uses, see Tightrope (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tightrope walking" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The feet of a tightrope walker Tightrope walking , also called funambulism , is the skill of walking along a thin wire or rope . It has a long tradition in various countries and is commonly associated with the circus . Other skills similar to tightrope walking include slack rope walking and slacklining .

Types [ edit ] Tightrope walking, Armenian manuscript, 1688 Tightwire is the skill of maintaining balance while walking along a tensioned wire between two points. It can be done either using a balancing tool (umbrella, fan, balance pole, etc.) or "freehand", using only one's body to maintain balance. Typically, tightwire performances either include dance or object manipulation . Object manipulation acts include a variety of props in their acts, such as clubs , rings, hats, or canes. Tightwire performers have even used wheelbarrows with passengers, ladders, and animals in their act. The technique to maintain balance is to keep the performer's centre of mass above their support point—usually their feet.

Highwire is a form of tightwire walking but performed at much greater height. Although there is no official height when tightwire becomes highwire, generally a wire over 20 feet (6 m) high are regarded as a highwire act.

Skywalk is a form of highwire which is performed at great heights and length. A skywalk is performed outdoors between tall buildings, gorges, across waterfalls or other natural and man-made structures.

Ropes [ edit ] If the "lay" of the rope (the orientation of the constituent strands, the "twist" of a rope) is in one direction, the rope can twist on itself as it stretches and relaxes. Underfoot, this could be hazardous to disastrous in a tightrope. One solution is for the rope core to be made of steel cable, laid in the opposite direction to the outer layers, so that twisting forces balance each other out.

Biomechanics [ edit ] Acrobats maintain their balance by positioning their centre of mass directly over their base of support, i.e. shifting most of their weight over their legs, arms, or whatever part of their body they are using to hold them up. When they are on the ground with their feet side by side, the base of support is wide in the lateral direction but narrow in the sagittal (back-to-front) direction. In the case of highwire-walkers, their feet are parallel with each other, one foot positioned in front of the other while on the wire. Therefore, a tightwire walker's sway is side to side, their lateral support having been drastically reduced.  In both cases, whether side by side or parallel, the ankle is the pivot point .

A wire-walker may use a pole for balance or may stretch out their arms perpendicular to their trunk in the manner of a pole. This technique provides several advantages. It distributes mass away from the pivot point, thereby increasing the moment of inertia . This reduces angular acceleration , so a greater torque is required to rotate the performer over the wire. The result is less tipping. In addition, the performer can also correct sway by rotating the pole. This will create an equal and opposite torque on the body.

Tightwire-walkers typically perform in very thin and flexible, leather-soled slippers with a full-length suede or leather sole to protect the feet from abrasions and bruises, while still allowing the foot to curve around the wire. Though very infrequent in performance, amateur, hobbyist, or inexperienced funambulists will often walk barefoot so that the wire can be grasped between the big and second toe. This is more often done when using a rope, as the softer and silkier fibres are less taxing on the bare foot than the harder and more abrasive braided wire.

Famous tightrope artists [ edit ] Maria Spelterini crossing Niagara Falls on July 4, 1876 Jultagi , the Korean tradition of tightrope walking Charles Blondin , a.k.a. Jean-François Gravelet, crossed the Niagara Falls many times Robert Cadman , early 18th-century British highwire walker and ropeslider Jay Cochrane, Canadian, set multiple records for skywalking, including The Great China Skywalk [ 1 ] in Qutang Gorge , China, 639-metre-long (2,098 ft), 410-metre-high (1,340 ft) from one cliff wall to the opposite side above the Yangtze River ; the longest blindfolded skywalk , 800-foot-long (240 m), 300-foot-high (91 m) in 1998, between the towers of the Flamingo Hilton in Las Vegas, Nevada , and broadcast on FOX Network's Guinness World Records Primetime on Tuesday, February 23, 1999; In 2001, he became the first person to perform a skywalk in Niagara Falls, Canada , in more than a hundred years. His final performances took place during Skywalk 2012 [ 2 ] with a world record submission [ 3 ] of 11.81 miles (19.01 km) in cumulative distance skywalking from the Skylon Tower at a height of 520 feet (160 m) traversing the 1,300 feet (400 m) highwire to the pinnacle of the Hilton Fallsview Hotel at 581 feet (177 m).

Con Colleano , Australian, "the Wizard of the Wire" David Dimitri , Swiss highwire walker Pablo Fanque , 19th-century British tightrope walker and "rope dancer", among other talents, although best known as the first black circus owner in Britain, and for his mention in the Beatles song, " Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!

" The Great Farini , a.k.a. Willie Hunt, crossed the Niagara Falls many times Farrell Hettig, American highwire walker, started as a Wallenda team member, once held record for steepest incline for a wire walk he completed in 1981 [ 4 ] Henry Johnson (1806–1910), British tightrope walker with Sanger's and Hughes' circuses (also equestrian gymnast and acrobat ) Denis Josselin, a French tightrope walker, completed on 6 April 2014 a walk over the river Seine in Paris. It took him 30 minutes to walk over 150 m (490 feet) of rope, 25 m (82 feet) meters above the river. He covered his eyes halfway through without harness or safety net but police boats were on hand in case he fell.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Jade Kindar-Martin and Didier Pasquette , an American-French highwire duo, most notable for their world-record setting skywalk over the River Thames in London Henri L'Estrange , 19th-century Australian; first person to tightrope walk across Sydney harbour and early balloonist Elvira Madigan , Danish 19th-century tightwire walker Bird Millman , American star of Ringling Brothers & Barnum and Bailey Circus Fyodor Molodtsov (1855–1919), a Russian rope walker. Was known to perform numerous tricks such as rope walking while shooting, carrying another person, wearing stilts, dancing, and even being unbalanced by pyrotechnical explosions. Known to have defeated Blondin during a tightrope crossing of the Neva river , by braving it at a wider place.

Jorge Ojeda-Guzman, Ecuadorian highwire walker, set The Guinness Book of World Records, Tightrope Endurance Record, for living 205 days on the wire, from January 1 to July 25, 1993 in Orlando, Florida.

[ 7 ] Rudy Omankowski Jr., French-Czech highwire walker, holds record for skywalk distance Stephen Peer , after several previous successful crossings, fell to his death at the Niagara Falls in 1887 Susanna Bokoyni , Hungarian centenarian and circus performer who was listed in Guinness World Records as the longest-lived dwarf on record.

Philippe Petit , French highwire-walker, famous for his walk between the towers of the World Trade Center in New York City in 1974 Eskil Rønningsbakken , Norwegian balancing artist whose feats include tightrope walking between hot air balloons in flight Maria Spelterini , Italian highwire walker, first woman to cross the Niagara Falls Falko Traber , German tightwire walker, walked to the Sugarloaf Mountain in Rio de Janeiro Vertelli , British-Australian tightrope walker, nicknamed "the Australian Blondin" The Flying Wallendas , famous for their seven- and eight-person pyramid wire-walks Karl Wallenda , founder of the Flying Wallendas , died after falling from a wire on March 22, 1978, at age 73, while attempting to cross between the two towers of the Condado Plaza Hotel in San Juan, Puerto Rico .

Nik Wallenda , great-grandson of Karl, second person to walk from the United States to Canada over the Horseshoe Falls at the Niagara Falls on June 15, 2012; with his mother Delilah (Karl's granddaughter), completed his great-grandfather's final attempt between the two towers of the Condado Plaza Hotelon June 4, 2011. On June 23, 2013, he successfully walked over a gorge in the area of the Grand Canyon. On November 2, 2014, he crossed over the Chicago River from the west tower of Marina City to the Leo Burnett building, following it with a blindfolded trip from the west tower to the east tower of Marina City.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] performed a record-breaking skywalk of 2,000 feet (610 m) at Kings Island on July 4, 2008, breaking Karl Wallenda's record walk [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Adili Wuxor , Chinese ( Uyghur ), from Xinjiang , performer of the Uyghur tradition of highwire-walking called dawaz ; record-holder for highest wire-walk, [ citation needed ] in 2010 he lived on wire for 60 days, at Beijing's Bird Nest Stadium .

[ 12 ] Maurizio Zavatta, Holder of highest tightrope walk while blindfolded. Set on 16 November 2016 in Wulong, Chongqing (China).

[ 13 ] Metaphorical use [ edit ] The word funambulism , the phrase walking a tightrope , and associated variants also occur in metaphorical contexts not referring to any actual acrobatic acts. For instance, politicians are said to "walk a tightrope" when trying to balance two opposing views with little room for compromise. The idea can also appear in satirical or acidic contexts.

Nicholas Taleb uses the concept in his book The Black Swan : "You get respect for doing funambulism or spectator sports [...]." [ 14 ] Taleb is criticising scientists who prefer popularism [ citation needed ] to vigorous research and those who walk a fixed and narrow path rather than explore a large field of empirical study.

See also [ edit ] Sports portal Rope-dancing References [ edit ] ^ Blumenfeld, Jeff (2013).

You Want To Go Where?: How to Get Someone to Pay for the Trip of Your Dreams . Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.

ISBN 978-1626369658 – via Google Books.

^ nurun.com.

"Cochrane raises $10K for charity" . Archived from the original on 2014-07-15 . Retrieved 2014-07-14 .

^ www.unicorndesigners.co.uk, Unicorn Designers.

"The book of alternative records – Longest Cumulative Distance on a Highwire (>100 m)" .

^ Mark Zaloudek (August 27, 2006).

"Farrell Hettig found success on high wire and in business" .

Sarasota Herald-Tribune . Retrieved June 16, 2012 .

^ Staff.

"Tightrope walker Denis Josselin completes walk over the river Seine in Paris" .

^ ITN, Source (7 April 2014).

"Paris tightrope walker crosses river Seine – video" .

The Guardian .

^ Reuters Editorial.

"China tightrope walker set up for a fall" .

U.S . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

{{ cite news }} : |author= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Live blog: Nik Wallenda's Chicago skyscraper walks" .

www.chicagotribune.com . November 2, 2014 . Retrieved November 2, 2014 .

^ "Daredevil Wallenda successfully completes 2 Chicago skyscraper tightrope walks" .

Fox News . November 2, 2014 . Retrieved November 2, 2014 .

^ "Wallenda Enterprises Inc. – Exceeding The Limits of Tradition" . Retrieved July 30, 2008 .

^ Rossiter, Marie.

"Tight-rope walker breaks record at Kings Island" .

Dayton Daily News . Retrieved July 7, 2008 .

^ Tightrope Walking, A Uyghur Tradition Radio Free Asia, retrieved December 13, 2010.

^ "Highest blindfolded tightrope walk" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

^ Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (11 May 2010). "Postscript Essay: On robustness and fragility, deeper philosophical and empirical reflections".

The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable (2 ed.). New York: Random House Publishing Group. p. 368.

ISBN 9780679604181 . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

Science [...] has never liked negative results. The reward system is not set up for it. You get respect for doing funambulism or spectator sports - following the right steps to become 'the Einstein of Economics' or 'the next Darwin' rather than give society something real by debunking myths or by cataloguing where our knowledge stops.

Tightwire Training Notes Maximal dynamic forces exerted by acrobats on nine circus apparatuses Wire Walking Video Tutorial v t e Circus skills Acrobatics , balance , and contortion Acrobalance Adagio Aerial hoop Aerial silk Aerial straps Balance board Chair acrobatics Chinese pole Cloud swing Contortion Corde lisse Cradle Cyr wheel Hair hang Hand to hand Human pyramid Perch Risley Rolling globe Roman ladders Russian bar Russian swing Slacklining Slackwire Spanish web Tightrope Trapeze Flying Static Trick riding Juggling and object manipulation Bullwhip Cigar box manipulation Contact juggling Diabolo Hat manipulation Twirling Baton Hoop Plate Fire performance Fire breathing Fire eating Firewalking Toss juggling Vaulting Equestrian vaulting Human cannonball Teeterboard Trampoline Other Animal trainer Lion taming Clown Circus clown Globe of death Human firecracker Puppeteer Ringmaster Strongman Target girl Wheel of Death Related Carny Circus school Roustabout Showman Sideshow Flea circus Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tightrope_walking&oldid=1303291029 " Categories : Tightrope walking Circus skills Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2007 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tightrope walking 26 languages Add topic

