Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Career at Lehigh University 1.3 Awards and research 2 Published works 3 References Toggle the table of contents Ferdinand P. Beer 6 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Malagasy Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ferdinand Beer ) French mechanical engineer (1915–2003) Ferdinand P. Beer Born ( 1915-08-08 ) August 8, 1915 Binic, France Died April 30, 2003 (2003-04-30) (aged 87) Bethlehem, Pennsylvania Nationality French Education M.S.

University of Paris Sc.D University of Geneva Spouse Vivienne C.M. Beer Children Marguerite V. Schaeffer, Dr. Michelle C.M. Beer Engineering career Discipline Mechanics Institutions Lehigh University , Williams College Ferdinand Pierre Beer (August 8, 1915 – April 30, 2003) was a French mechanical engineer and university professor. He spent most of his career as a member of the faculty at Lehigh University , where he served as the chairman of the mechanics and mechanical engineering departments. His most significant contribution was the co-authorship of several textbooks in the field of mechanics , which have been widely cited and utilized in engineering education.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Beer was born in Binic, France in 1915.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] He received a Masters of Science degree from the Sorbonne and conducted post-graduate work at Brown University . From the University of Geneva in Switzerland, he earned a mathematics license in 1935 and a Doctor of Science degree in 1937.

[ 1 ] Beer served in the French Army during the Second World War before moving to the United States and took a job at Williams College . He remained there for four years, where he taught as part of the school's collaborative arts/engineering program with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

[ 4 ] Career at Lehigh University [ edit ] In 1947, he arrived at Lehigh University , where he taught for 37 years.

[ 4 ] When a department of mechanics was formed in 1957, Beer was named its first chairman. In 1968, Beer became the chairman of the Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics Department after the two separate fields were merged into one department. He served in that capacity until 1977. In 1970, Beer was named the chairman of the newly formed University Forum, which was composed of 125 students and faculty members with the goal of promoting discussion between the two bodies. Lehigh professor Fazil Erdogan said that, while "at other universities around the country, students were rioting and conducting sit-ins ... [Beer] gained the confidence of the students. He had a calming effect on students and, in this critical time, he offered a not inconsiderable service to Lehigh." [ 1 ] Alongside University of Connecticut professor E. Russell Johnston, Jr.

, Beer co-wrote three bestselling engineering textbooks: Vector Mechanics for Engineers , Mechanics of Materials , and Mechanics for Engineers: Statics and Dynamics , which won the 1976 Printing Industries of America Graphic Arts Award. He also authored numerous articles published in technical journals.

[ 1 ] Awards and research [ edit ] In 1974, the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) Middle Atlantic chapter awarded him the Western Electric Fund Award for engineering education. The Mechanics Division of the Science Society, in 1980, awarded him its Distinguished Educator Award. Beer's research studied the application of random loads to mechanical systems. His work in this field included support by Boeing , NASA , the Chemical Corps of the U.S. Army , the Army Corps of Engineers , and the Federal Civil Defense Administration .

[ 1 ] Beer was a member of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) and the American Association of University Professors (AAUP). He was also a member of the ASEE and served as its mechanics division chairman and Middle Atlantic chapter chairman.

[ 1 ] Beer was married to Vivienne C.M. Beer who died before him. Together they had two daughters, Marguerite V. Schaeffer and Dr. Michelle C.M. Beer.

[ 1 ] He died in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania on April 30, 2003, at the age of 87.

[ 1 ] It was partly in his honor that the ASEE named the Ferdinand P. Beer and E. Russell Johnston Jr. Outstanding New Educator Awards.

[ 5 ] Published works [ edit ] F.P. Beer, E.R. Johnston Jr., J.T. DeWolf, Mechanics of Materials , New York: McGraw-Hill, 1981, ISBN 0-07-121060-1 .

F.P. Beer, E.R. Johnston Jr., et al., Vector Mechanics for Engineers , New York: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-293110-8 .

F.P. Beer, E.R. Johnston Jr., et al., Mechanics for Engineers: Statics and Dynamics , New York: McGraw-Hill, ISBN 0-07-004584-4 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Pfitzer, Kurt (2003-05-02).

"In memoriam: Ferdinand P. Beer, professor" .

Lehigh University . Retrieved 2019-05-18 .

^ "Ferdinand P. Beer" .

Lehigh University . Archived from the original on 2020-08-04 . Retrieved 2019-05-18 .

^ Ferdinand Beer, E. Russel Johnston, Jr., and John T. DeWolf, Mechanics of Materials , 1981, p. iv, New York: McGraw Hill.

^ a b Vector Mechanics for Engineers: Statics - About the author Archived 2009-12-12 at the Wayback Machine , McGraw Hill .

^ Professor Fisher receives ASEE’s Beer and Johnston Award Archived 2012-02-22 at the Wayback Machine , Stevens News Service , Stevens Institute of Technology , July 8, 2009.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ferdinand_P._Beer&oldid=1288199693 " Categories : Lehigh University faculty Williams College faculty People from Côtes-d'Armor 1915 births 2003 deaths University of Geneva alumni University of Paris alumni Brown University alumni 20th-century French engineers French mechanical engineers French Army soldiers French military personnel of World War II French expatriates in Switzerland French expatriate academics in the United States Scientists from Brittany Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 03:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ferdinand P. Beer 6 languages Add topic

