Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Noteworthy examples Toggle Noteworthy examples subsection 1.1 Employment and discrimination 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Unspoken rule 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Español Esperanto 日本語 Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rules that are not written down This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in Linguistics . The specific problem is: Requires more examples and consequences for the understanding of non-natives.

See the talk page for details.

WikiProject Linguistics may be able to help recruit an expert.

( July 2022 ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Unwritten rules , also called unspoken rules , are behavioral constraints imposed in organizations or societies that are not typically voiced or written down. They usually exist in unspoken and unwritten format because they form a part of the logical argument or course of action implied by tacit assumptions . Examples involving unspoken rules include unwritten and unofficial organizational hierarchies, organizational culture , and acceptable behavioral norms governing interactions between organizational members. These rules typically align with the behaviors of the local majority group and seem normal to them, but can be obscure, invisible, and exclusionary to minority groups.

[ 1 ] Noteworthy examples [ edit ] For example, the captain of a ship is always expected to be the last to evacuate it in a disaster. Or, as Vince Waldron wrote, "A pet, once named, instantly becomes an inseparable member of the family".

[ 2 ] The Harvard Business Review considers it good business practice to bring unwritten rules to the surface and document them.

Unwritten rules can cause uncertainty and stress for newer employees, and great clarity can improve productivity and profitability.

[ 3 ] Employment and discrimination [ edit ] In the workplace, some unspoken rules can have a significant impact on one's job satisfaction, advancement opportunities, and career trajectory.

[ 3 ] In sports, Scottish football club, Rangers until 1989 had an unwritten rule of not signing any player who was openly Catholic.

[ 4 ] Yorkshire County Cricket Club also historically had an unwritten rule that cricketers could only play for them if they were born within the historical county boundaries of Yorkshire .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Shibboleth Lex non scripta Unenumerated rights Unwritten rules of baseball References [ edit ] ^ Pensky, Jennifer; Richardson, Christina; Serrano, Araceli; Gorski, Galen; Price, Adam N.; Zimmer, Margaret (August 2021).

"Disrupt and demystify the unwritten rules of graduate school" .

Nature Geoscience .

14 (8): 538– 539.

doi : 10.1038/s41561-021-00799-w .

^ Vince Waldron, The Official Dick Van Dyke Show Book , Hal Leonard, 2001, p. 176.

^ a b Fosslien, Liz; Duffy, Mollie West (26 October 2020).

"Write Down Your Team's Unwritten Rules" .

Harvard Business Review .

^ Murray, Ewan (10 July 2009).

"Why Mo Johnston still stirs emotions across Glasgow" .

The Guardian .

^ Tim Rich (19 July 2009).

" 'New' Yorkshire ready to restore forgotten glories - Cricket, Sport" .

Independent.co.uk . Archived from the original on 19 July 2009.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unspoken_rule&oldid=1292110232 " Categories : Logic Rules Rights 2001 neologisms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing context from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup Articles needing expert attention from July 2022 All articles needing expert attention Linguistics articles needing expert attention Wikipedia articles in need of updating from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unspoken rule 15 languages Add topic

