Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Earth sciences 2 Tracing ocean waters 3 Popular science 4 References Toggle the table of contents Andy Watson (scientist) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Andrew Watson (scientist) ) British scientist Andrew Watson Born 1952 Alma mater Imperial College London University of Reading Scientific career Institutions University of Exeter University of East Anglia Thesis Consequences for the Biosphere of Forest and Grassland Fires (1978) Doctoral advisor James Lovelock Doctoral students Tim Lenton [ 1 ] Andrew James Watson FRS (born 1952) is a British marine and atmospheric scientist and an expert in processes affecting atmospheric carbon dioxide and oxygen concentrations. He was formerly a Professor of biogeochemistry in the School of Environmental Sciences at the University of East Anglia , in 2013 he moved to a position as Professor at the College of Life and Environmental Sciences at the University of Exeter .

Earth sciences [ edit ] Watson graduated with a first class BSc in physics from Imperial College London in 1975. He then became a PhD student of James Lovelock , originator of the Gaia hypothesis of Earth regulation, at the University of Reading . He and Lovelock introduced the Daisyworld model in 1983, showing how ecological competition between hypothetical "daisies" could affect planetary albedo and regulate environmental temperature.

[ 2 ] Watson and his students have subsequently developed a priori models for the regulation of atmospheric composition through geological time. He has applied the weak Anthropic Principle to evolution on Earth, [ 3 ] suggesting that long-term regulation of the Earth’s temperature and environment may be a necessary pre-requisite to allow sufficient time for the evolution of complex life and intelligence, rather than an intrinsic property of the biosphere as Lovelock proposed.

Tracing ocean waters [ edit ] While at the Marine Biological Association and Plymouth Marine Laboratory in the 1980s, he developed techniques for tracking ocean water bodies using tracers such as sulphur hexafluoride and perfluorodecalin .

[ 4 ] He and colleagues applied these to measure the slow mixing vertical rates in the ocean, [ 5 ] and to trace the movement of patches of surface water.

[ 6 ] He also applied the technology to enable iron fertilization experiments.

[ 7 ] More than a dozen such experiments have now been carried out [ 8 ] and have proved that iron is an essential limiting nutrient in important areas of the world ocean.

Popular science [ edit ] Watson published the popular book Revolutions that Made the Earth [ 9 ] with colleague Tim Lenton in 2011. In 2015, Watson appeared on Charlie Brooker's Weekly Wipe Series 3 , interviewed by the character, Philomena Cunk .

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Professor Tim Lenton Chair in Climate Change/Earth Systems Science" . University of Exeter . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

^ Watson, A. J. and J. E. Lovelock (1983). Biological homeostasis of the global environment: the parable of Daisyworld. Tellus 35B, 284-289 ^ Watson, A. J., (2004). Gaia and observer self-selection. In Scientists debate Gaia: the next century,  eds Schneider, S. H., Miller, J. R., Crist, E., and Boston, P. J.  pp201-208. MIT press, Cambridge,  Mass, USA.

^ Watson, A. J., Liddicoat, M. I. and J. R. Ledwell (1987). "Perfluorodecalin and sulphur hexafluoride as purposeful marine tracers: some deployment and analysis techniques." Deep-Sea Research, 34, 19-31.

^ Ledwell, J. R., Watson, A. J., and Law, C. S. (1993). Evidence of slow mixing across the pycnocline from an open ocean tracer release experiment. Nature. 364, 701-703 ^ Watson, A. J., Upstill-Goddard R. C. and P. S. Liss (1991). Air- sea gas exchange in rough and stormy seas measured by a dual- tracer technique. Nature 349, 145-147.

^ Watson, A. J., P. S. Liss, and R. A. Duce (1992). Design of a small-scale iron fertilisation experiment. Limnology and Oceanography 36, 1960-1965 ^ . Boyd, P. W., et al., (2007). Mesoscale iron-enrichment experiments 1993-2005: synthesis and future directions. Science 315, 612-61 ^ Lenton, Tim; Watson, Andrew (20 January 2011).

Revolutions that Made the Earth .

ISBN 978-0199587049 .

^ "Watson interviewd by Cunk" .

BBC2 . 19 February 2015 – via YouTube .

v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 2003 Fellows John D. Barrow Jocelyn Bell Burnell Mariann Bienz William Bonfield John Milton Brown Mark Wayne Chase Michael Coey Kay Davies Anthony Dickinson Eleanor Dodson Peter Dornan Ann Dowling Jeffery Errington Roger Fletcher Roderick Flower Melvyn Greaves Peter Green Keith Gull Peter Holland James Hough Malcolm Irving Jonathan D. G. Jones Michael L. Klein Alan MacDiarmid Stephen Mann Richard John Nelmes Stephen O'Rahilly Bridget Ogilvie Tim Palmer John Papaloizou Venki Ramakrishnan Elizabeth Robertson John Gair Robson John Donald Scott Richard H. Sibson Leon Simon Geoffrey L. Smith Adrian Sutton Karen Vousden Andrew Watson Fiona Watt Peter N. T. Wells Foreign Denis Baylor Fotis Kafatos Klaus von Klitzing Donald Knuth José Sarukhán Valentine Telegdi v t e University of Exeter People Chancellor Sir Michael Barber Vice-Chancellor Professor Lisa Roberts List of academics List of alumni List of honorary graduates Departments and centres Bill Douglas Centre Business School Camborne School of Mines Institute of Cornish Studies Campus Exeter Science Park Penryn Campus St Luke's Campus Streatham Campus Halls of Residence University Chapel (Holy Trinity) University Chapel (St Luke) Student life Exeposé (newspaper) Hockey Club Northcott Theatre Rugby Football Club Xpression FM XTV Bottle Match Affiliates eSTAR Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital University of St Mark & St John Other Academic dress CSM Association Exoniensis University of Exeter Press Category Portals : United Kingdom Biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Czech Republic Greece Israel Academics ORCID Scopus Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andy_Watson_(scientist)&oldid=1258111065 " Categories : 1952 births Living people Alumni of Imperial College London Alumni of the University of Reading Academics of the University of Exeter Academics of the University of East Anglia Fellows of the Royal Society 21st-century British earth scientists British atmospheric scientists British oceanographers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2018 Use British English from February 2018 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 18 November 2024, at 05:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andy Watson (scientist) 1 language Add topic

