Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Organization 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences 2 languages Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Largest of the twelve faculties that constitute Harvard University Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences Houghton Library , which serves Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences Established 1890 ; 135 years ago ( 1890 ) Parent institution Harvard University Endowment $17.5 billion (2019) Budget $1.6 billion (2019) Dean Hopi Hoekstra (2023 - present) Academic staff 1,221 (2019) Undergraduates 6,800 Postgraduates 4,500 Location Cambridge , Massachusetts , U.S.

42°22′27.15″N 71°06′59.62″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3742083°N 71.1165611°W ﻿ / 42.3742083; -71.1165611 Schools Harvard College Graduate School of Arts and Sciences School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Division of Continuing Education Website Official website Location in Massachusetts The Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences ( FAS ) is a faculty at Harvard University . It administers the undergraduate Harvard College , the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , and the Division of Continuing Education .

History [ edit ] While Harvard College traces its origins to 1636, the body called the Faculty of Arts and Sciences only came into existence in the late nineteenth century. From 1820 until 1872, Harvard University consisted of the college and three professional schools (in law , medicine , and divinity ). The governing boards established a Graduate Department in 1872 to administer and recommend candidates for the degrees of Master of Arts , Master of Science , Doctor of Philosophy , and Doctor of Science . In 1890, the governing boards merged separate faculties of the Lawrence Scientific School and the College into a single Faculty of Arts and Sciences. The Graduate Department later became the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences .

The Lawrence Scientific School opened in 1847 and marked Harvard's first major effort to offer a formal program in science and engineering. In 1948, the School merged with the Department of Engineering Sciences and Applied Physics in FAS to form the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences. In 2007, the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences formally became the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences.

[ 1 ] On June 3, 2015, the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences was renamed the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences , following a $400 million gift by Harvard Business School alumnus John A. Paulson .

[ 2 ] As of Fall 2019, FAS comprised 1221 total faculty, including 719 tenured and tenure-track professors as well as 502 other professors, lecturers, preceptors, and visiting faculty in some 30 academic departments in the arts and humanities, the social sciences, the natural sciences, and the engineering and applied sciences.

[ 3 ] There are approximately 6,800 undergraduates (Harvard College) and 4,500 graduate students (Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Science). The Harvard Division of Continuing Education has 795 admitted undergraduate students and 3,100 admitted graduate students.

[ 4 ] Furthermore the Harvard Division of Continuing Education welcomes more than 30,000 students annually in its open enrollment courses. In 2019, FAS had a budget of $1.6 billion and a revenue of $1.6 billion.

[ 3 ] As of 2019, the FAS endowment had a market value of $17.5 billion.

[ 3 ] Harvard's total endowment stands at $40.9 billion.

[ 5 ] In 2023, following a $300 million unrestricted donation by hedge fund manager Kenneth Griffin , the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences was renamed Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Science (GSAS) .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The faculty was headed by interim dean Emma Dench until August 1, 2023, when Hopi Hoekstra became Dean of FAS.

[ 8 ] On July 10, 2025, Faculty of Arts and Sciences internally announced that it would shutter Harvard College's diversity office and replace it with an Office for Academic Culture and Community.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Organization [ edit ] FAS consists of the following divisions: Harvard College (established 1636) Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Science (GSAS) (established 1872) The John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences (SEAS) (established 1847) The Division of Continuing Education (DCE) (established 1871) [ 11 ] Arts & Humanities Division (established 2004) Division of Science (established 2007) Division of Social Science (established 2004) Athletics (established 1780) Harvard Library (established 1638) Museums of Science and Culture (established 2012) In addition, FAS includes 35 research centers, institutes, and interdisciplinary programs, eleven museums, and numerous libraries.

[ 12 ] The dean of FAS serves as the chief administrative and academic officer, responsible to the president and provost of Harvard University for all aspects of the division's operations, including budgets, planning, support services, faculty appointments, curricula, student affairs, and fundraising. The dean is appointed by the president with the approval of the university's two governing boards, the Harvard Corporation and the Harvard Board of Overseers , and serves at the pleasure of the president. The dean of FAS is invariably drawn from the ranks of the tenured faculty in the division.

The deans of Harvard College , GSAS, SEAS, and DCE report to the dean of FAS, as do various academic deans, administrative deans (including those responsible for finance, development, faculty personnel policy, undergraduate admissions and financial aid), and the directors of various research centers and institutes.

From 2018 to 2023, the FAS was headed by Claudine Gay . Following Gay's ascension to president of the university, Hopi Hoekstra was announced to become the new dean of FAS beginning August 1st, 2023.

References [ edit ] ^ "Harvard proposes to transform Engineering Division into a school" .

Harvard Gazette . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ "Harvard receives its largest gift" . Retrieved 2015-07-17 .

^ a b c "2019 Dean's Annual Report" (PDF) . Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ "Fact Book: Student Enrollment" .

Harvard University Office of Institutional Research & Analytics . Harvard University.

^ "Harvard Endowment Returns 6.5 Percent for Fiscal Year 2019" . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ "Kenneth C. Griffin makes gift to FAS" .

Harvard Gazette . 2023-04-11 . Retrieved 2023-07-05 .

^ Shaw, Jonathan (2023-04-11).

"Ken Griffin's Naming Gift for the Graduate School" .

Harvard Magazine .

^ "Hopi Hoekstra named next FAS dean" .

Harvard Gazette . 2023-06-26 . Retrieved 2023-07-05 .

^ Samuel A. Church; Cam N. Srivastava (July 10, 2025).

"Harvard College, Faculty of Arts and Sciences Replace Diversity Offices Amid DEI Purge" .

The Crimson .

^ Dakin Andone (July 10, 2025).

"Websites serving Harvard undergrad women, minority and LGBTQ students taken down, Crimson reports" .

CNN .

^ "What is FAS?" . Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved December 13, 2019 .

^ Harvard Media Relations.

"Quick Facts" . Archived from the original on November 12, 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Portugal Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Faculty_of_Arts_and_Sciences&oldid=1303610422 " Categories : Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using infobox university This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 00:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences 2 languages Add topic

