Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Scope 3 Units 4 Publications 5 See also 6 Further reading 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ekistics 19 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Қазақша 日本語 Polski Português Русский ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science of human settlements This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ekistics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ekistics Terms Neighbourhood Town City Conurbation Metropolis Megacity Megalopolis Settlement hierarchy Lists Largest cities Densest neighborhoods Densest cities proper Densest metro areas Cities portal v t e Ekistics is the science of human settlements [ 1 ] [ 2 ] including regional, city , community planning and dwelling design. Its major incentive was the emergence of increasingly large and complex conurbations , tending even to a worldwide city .

[ 3 ] The study involves every kind of human settlement , with particular attention to geography , ecology , human psychology , anthropology , culture , politics , and occasionally aesthetics .

As a scientific mode of study, ekistics currently relies on statistics and description, organized in five ekistic elements or principles: nature, anthropos, society, shells, and networks. It is generally a more scientific field than urban planning , and has considerable overlap with some of the less restrained fields of architectural theory .

In application, conclusions are drawn aimed at achieving harmony between the inhabitants of a settlement and their physical and socio-cultural environments.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term ekistics was coined by Constantinos Apostolos Doxiadis in 1942. The word is derived from the Greek adjective οἰκιστικός more particularly from the neuter plural οἰκιστικά . The ancient Greek adjective οἰκιστικός meant ' concerning the foundation of a house, a habitation, a city or colony; contributing to the settling ' . It was derived from οἰκιστής ( oikistēs ), an ancient Greek noun meaning ' the person who installs settlers in place ' . This may be regarded as deriving indirectly from another ancient Greek noun, οἴκισις ( oikisis ), meaning ' building, housing, habitation ' , and especially ' establishment of a colony, a settlement, or a town ' (used by Plato ), or ' filling with new settlers, settling, being settled ' . All these words grew from the verb οἰκίζω ( oikizō ), ' to settle ' , and were ultimately derived from the noun οἶκος ( oikos ), ' house, home, habitat ' .

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary defines an ecist, oekist or oikist as: "the founder of an ancient Greek ... colony". The English equivalent of oikistikē is ekistics (a noun). In addition, the adjectives ekistic and ekistical , the adverb ekistically , and the noun ekistician are now also in current use.

Scope [ edit ] In the context of outdoor recreation, one's relationship with the natural world and how one views the resources within it is an ekistic relationship.

The notion of ekistics implies that understanding the interaction between and within human groups—infrastructure, agriculture, shelter, function (job)—in conjunction with their environment directly affects their well-being (individual and collective). The subject begins to elucidate the ways in which collective settlements form and how they inter-relate. By doing so, humans begin to understand how they 'fit' into a species, i.e.

Homo sapiens , and how Homo sapiens 'should' be living in order to manifest our potential—at least as far as this species is concerned (as the text stands now).  Ekistics in some cases argues that in order for human settlements to expand efficiently and economically we must reorganize the way in which the villages, towns, cities, metropolises are formed.

As Doxiadis put it, "... This field (ekistics) is a science, even if in our times it is usually considered a technology and an art, without the foundations of a science - a mistake for which we pay very heavily." [ 2 ] Having recorded very successfully the destructions of the ekistic wealth in Greece during WWII, Doxiadis became convinced that human settlements are subjectable to systematic investigation. Doxiadis, being aware of the unifying power of systems thinking and particularly of the biological and evolutionary reference models as used by many famous biologists-philosophers of his generation, especially Sir Julian Huxley (1887–1975), Theodosius Dobzhansky (1900–75), Dennis Gabor (1900–79), René Dubos (1901–82), George G. Simpson (1902–84), and Conrad Waddington (1905–75), used the biological model to describe the "ekistic behavior" of anthropos (the five principles) and the evolutionary model to explain the morphogenesis of human settlements (the eleven forces, the hierarchical structure of human settlements, dynapolis, ecumenopolis ). Finally, he formulated a general theory which considers human settlements as living organisms capable of evolution, an evolution that might be guided by Man using "ekistic knowledge".

Units [ edit ] See also: Settlement hierarchy Doxiadis believed that the conclusion from biological and social experience was clear: to avoid chaos we must organize our system of life from anthropos (individual) to ecumenopolis (global city) in hierarchical levels, represented by human settlements. So he articulated a general hierarchical scale with fifteen levels of ekistic units: [ 1 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] anthropos – 1 room – 2 house – 5 housegroup ( hamlet ) – 40 small neighborhood (village) – 250 neighborhood – 1,500 small polis (town) – 10,000 polis (city) – 75,000 small metropolis – 500,000 metropolis – 4 million small megalopolis – 25 million megalopolis – 150 million small eperopolis – 750 million eperopolis – 7.5 billion ecumenopolis – 50 billion The population figures above are for Doxiadis' ideal future ekistic units for the year 2100, at which time he estimated (in 1968) that Earth would achieve zero population growth at a population of 50,000,000,000 with human civilization being powered by fusion energy .

Publications [ edit ] The Ekistics and the New Habitat , printed from 1957 to 2006 [ 7 ] and began calling for new papers to be published online in 2019.

[ 8 ] Ekistics is a 1968 book by Konstantinos Doxiadis , often titled Introduction to Ekistics .

See also [ edit ] Arcology Conurbation Consolidated city-county Global city Human ecosystem Megacity Megalopolis Metropolitan area Permaculture Principles of intelligent urbanism Further reading [ edit ] Doxiadis, Konstantinos Ekistics 1968 References [ edit ] ^ a b Doxiadis, Konstantinos Ekistics 1968 ^ a b Doxiadis, Constantinos A. (1970-10-23).

"Ekistics, the Science of Human Settlements" (PDF) .

Science .

170 (3956): 393– 404.

Bibcode : 1970Sci...170..393D .

doi : 10.1126/science.170.3956.393 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 5460051 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-11-23 . Retrieved 2021-04-08 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 215.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica ^ City of the Future ^ ACTION for Human Settlements , p. 186, C.A. Doxiadis, Athens Center of Ekistics, 1976 ^ "Ekistics on JSTOR" .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

^ "Athens Center of Ekistics on JSTOR" .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Look up ekistics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Institute of Ekistics World Society for Ekistics Ekistics at the Encyclopædia Britannica Ekistic Units City of the Future v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ekistics&oldid=1303553026 " Categories : Urban studies and planning terminology Architectural terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ekistics 19 languages Add topic

