Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dialects Toggle Dialects subsection 1.1 History 1.2 Related languages 2 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 2.1 Differences from Proto-Indo-European 2.2 Phonemic inventory 2.2.1 Consonants 2.2.2 Vowels 3 Morphology Toggle Morphology subsection 3.1 Augment 3.2 Reduplication 4 Writing system 5 Sample texts 6 Modern use Toggle Modern use subsection 6.1 In education 6.2 Modern real-world usage 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle External links subsection 11.1 Grammar learning 11.2 Classical texts Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek 129 languages Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Удмурт Українська اردو Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 West-Vlams 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Kumoring ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikifunctions Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient forms of the Greek language This article is about the language. For the civilization, see Ancient Greece .

"Classical Greek" redirects here. For the culture, see Classical Greece .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ancient Greek" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ancient Greek Ἑλληνική Hellēnikḗ An inscription about the construction of the statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon , 440/439 BC Region Eastern Mediterranean Language family Indo-European Hellenic Ancient Greek Early form Proto-Greek Writing system Greek alphabet Language codes ISO 639-2 grc ISO 639-3 grc (includes all pre-modern stages) Glottolog anci1242 Map of Ancient (Homeric) Greece This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

Beginning of Homer 's Odyssey Ancient Greek ( Ἑλληνῐκή , Hellēnikḗ ; [hellɛːnikɛ́ː] ) [ 1 ] includes the forms of the Greek language used in ancient Greece and the ancient world from around 1500 BC to 300 BC. It is often roughly divided into the following periods: Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1400–1200 BC ), Dark Ages ( c.

1200–800 BC ), the Archaic or Homeric period ( c.

800–500 BC ), and the Classical period ( c.

500–300 BC ).

[ 2 ] Ancient Greek was the language of Homer and of fifth-century Athenian historians, playwrights, and philosophers . It has contributed many words to English vocabulary and has been a standard subject of study in educational institutions of the Western world since the Renaissance . This article primarily contains information about the Epic and Classical periods of the language, which are the best-attested periods and considered most typical of Ancient Greek.

From the Hellenistic period ( c.

300 BC ), Ancient Greek was followed by Koine Greek , which is regarded as a separate historical stage, though its earliest form closely resembles Attic Greek , and its latest form approaches Medieval Greek , and Koine may be classified as Ancient Greek in a wider sense – being an ancient rather than medieval form of Greek, though over the centuries increasingly resembling Medieval and Modern Greek.

Ancient Greek comprised several regional dialects , such as Attic, Ionic , Doric , Aeolic , and Arcadocypriot ; among them, Attic Greek became the basis of Koine Greek. Just like Koine is often included in Ancient Greek, conversely, Mycenaean Greek is usually treated separately and not always included in Ancient Greek – reflecting the fact that Greek in the first millennium BC is considered prototypical of Ancient Greek.

Dialects Main article: Ancient Greek dialects Ancient Greek was a pluricentric language , divided into many dialects. The main dialect groups are Attic and Ionic , Aeolic , Arcadocypriot , and Doric , many of them with several subdivisions. Some dialects are found in standardized literary forms in literature , while others are attested only in inscriptions.

There are also several historical forms.

Homeric Greek is a literary form of Archaic Greek (derived primarily from Ionic and Aeolic) used in the epic poems , the Iliad and the Odyssey , and in later poems by other authors.

[ 3 ] Homeric Greek had significant differences in grammar and pronunciation from Classical Attic and other Classical-era dialects.

History The origins, early form and development of the Hellenic language family are not well understood because of a lack of contemporaneous evidence. Several theories exist about what Hellenic dialect groups may have existed between the divergence of early Greek-like speech from the common Proto-Indo-European language and the Classical period. They have the same general outline but differ in some of the detail. The only attested dialect from this period [ a ] is Mycenaean Greek , but its relationship to the historical dialects and the historical circumstances of the times imply that the overall groups already existed in some form.

Scholars assume that major Ancient Greek period dialect groups developed not later than 1120 BC, at the time of the Dorian invasions —and that their first appearances as precise alphabetic writing began in the 8th century BC. The invasion would not be "Dorian" unless the invaders had some cultural relationship to the historical Dorians . The invasion is known to have displaced population to the later Attic-Ionic regions, who regarded themselves as descendants of the population displaced by or contending with the Dorians.

The Greeks of this period believed there were three major divisions of all Greek people – Dorians, Aeolians, and Ionians (including Athenians), each with their own defining and distinctive dialects. Allowing for their oversight of Arcadian, an obscure mountain dialect, and Cypriot, far from the center of Greek scholarship, this division of people and language is quite similar to the results of modern archaeological-linguistic investigation.

One standard formulation for the dialects is: [ 4 ] Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 5 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic West Group Northwest Greek Doric Aeolic Group Aegean/Asiatic Aeolic Thessalian Boeotian Ionic-Attic Group Attic Ionic Euboean and colonies in Italy Cycladic Asiatic Ionic Arcadocypriot Greek Arcadian Cypriot West vs. non-West Greek is the strongest-marked and earliest division, with non-West in subsets of Ionic-Attic (or Attic-Ionic) and Aeolic vs. Arcadocypriot, or Aeolic and Arcado-Cypriot vs. Ionic-Attic. Often non-West is called 'East Greek'.

Arcadocypriot apparently descended more closely from the Mycenaean Greek of the Bronze Age.

Boeotian Greek had come under a strong Northwest Greek influence, and can in some respects be considered a transitional dialect, as exemplified in the poems of the Boeotian poet Pindar who wrote in Doric with a small Aeolic admixture.

[ 6 ] Thessalian likewise had come under Northwest Greek influence, though to a lesser degree.

Pamphylian Greek , spoken in a small area on the southwestern coast of Anatolia and little preserved in inscriptions, may be either a fifth major dialect group, or it is Mycenaean Greek overlaid by Doric, with a non-Greek native influence.

[ 7 ] Regarding the speech of the ancient Macedonians diverse theories have been put forward, but the epigraphic activity and the archaeological discoveries in the Greek region of Macedonia during the last decades has brought to light documents, among which the first texts written in Macedonian , such as the Pella curse tablet , as Hatzopoulos and other scholars note.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Based on the conclusions drawn by several studies and findings such as Pella curse tablet , Emilio Crespo and other scholars suggest that ancient Macedonian was a Northwest Doric dialect , [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 9 ] which shares isoglosses with its neighboring Thessalian dialects spoken in northeastern Thessaly .

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] Some have also suggested an Aeolic Greek classification.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The Lesbian dialect was Aeolic. For example, fragments of the works of the poet Sappho from the island of Lesbos are in Aeolian.

[ 14 ] Most of the dialect sub-groups listed above had further subdivisions, generally equivalent to a city-state and its surrounding territory, or to an island. Doric notably had several intermediate divisions as well, into Island Doric (including Cretan Doric ), Southern Peloponnesus Doric (including Laconian , the dialect of Sparta ), and Northern Peloponnesus Doric (including Corinthian ).

All the groups were represented by colonies beyond Greece proper as well, and these colonies generally developed local characteristics, often under the influence of settlers or neighbors speaking different Greek dialects.

After the conquests of Alexander the Great in the late 4th century BC, a new international dialect known as Koine or Common Greek developed, largely based on Attic Greek , but with influence from other dialects. This dialect slowly replaced most of the older dialects, although the Doric dialect has survived in the Tsakonian language , which is spoken in the region of modern Sparta. Doric has also passed down its aorist terminations into most verbs of Demotic Greek . By about the 6th century AD, the Koine had slowly metamorphosed into Medieval Greek .

Related languages Main article: Phrygian language Phrygian is an extinct Indo-European language of West and Central Anatolia , which is considered by some linguists to have been closely related to Greek .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Among Indo-European branches with living descendants, Greek is often argued to have the closest genetic ties with Armenian [ 18 ] (see also Graeco-Armenian ) and Indo-Iranian languages (see Graeco-Aryan ).

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Phonology Differences from Proto-Indo-European Main article: Proto-Greek language Ancient Greek differs from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) and other Indo-European languages in certain ways. In phonotactics , ancient Greek words could end only in a vowel or /n s r/ ; final stops were lost, as in γάλα "milk", compared with γάλακτος "of milk" (genitive). Ancient Greek of the classical period also differed in both the inventory and distribution of original PIE phonemes due to numerous sound changes, [ 21 ] notably the following: PIE * s became /h/ at the beginning of a word ( debuccalization ): Latin sex , English six , ancient Greek ἕξ /héks/ .

PIE * s was elided between vowels after an intermediate step of debuccalization: Sanskrit janasas , Latin generis (where s > r by rhotacism ), Greek * genesos > * genehos > ancient Greek γένεος ( /ɡéneos/ ), Attic γένους ( /ɡénoːs/ ) "of a kind".

PIE * y /j/ became /h/ (debuccalization) or /(d)z/ ( fortition ): Sanskrit yas , ancient Greek ὅς /hós/ "who" (relative pronoun); Latin iugum , English yoke , ancient Greek ζυγός /zyɡós/ .

PIE * w , which occurred in Mycenaean and some non-Attic dialects, was lost: early Doric ϝέργον /wérɡon/ , English work , Attic Greek ἔργον /érɡon/ .

PIE and Mycenaean labiovelars changed to plain stops (labials, dentals, and velars) in the later Greek dialects: for instance, PIE * kʷ became /p/ or /t/ in Attic: Attic Greek ποῦ /pôː/ "where?", Latin quō ; Attic Greek τίς /tís/ , Latin quis "who?".

PIE "voiced aspirated" stops bʰ dʰ ǵʰ gʰ gʷʰ were devoiced and became the aspirated stops φ θ χ /pʰ tʰ kʰ/ in ancient Greek.

Phonemic inventory Main article: Ancient Greek phonology The pronunciation of Ancient Greek was very different from that of Modern Greek . Ancient Greek had long and short vowels ; many diphthongs ; double and single consonants; voiced, voiceless, and aspirated stops ; and a pitch accent . In Modern Greek, all vowels and consonants are short. Many vowels and diphthongs once pronounced distinctly are pronounced as /i/ ( iotacism ). Some of the stops and glides in diphthongs have become fricatives , and the pitch accent has changed to a stress accent . Many of the changes took place in the Koine Greek period. The writing system of Modern Greek, however, does not reflect all pronunciation changes.

The examples below represent Attic Greek in the 5th century BC. Ancient pronunciation cannot be reconstructed with certainty, but Greek from the period is well documented, and there is little disagreement among linguists as to the general nature of the sounds that the letters represent.

Consonants Labial Alveolar Velar Glottal Nasal μ m ν n γ ( ŋ ) 1 Plosive voiced β b δ d γ ɡ voiceless π p τ t κ k aspirated φ pʰ θ tʰ χ kʰ Fricative σ s 2 h 3 Approximant λ l Trill ρ r 4 1 [ŋ] occurred as an allophone of /n/ that was used before velars and as an allophone of /ɡ/ before nasals.

2 /s/ was assimilated to [z] before voiced consonants.

3 /h/ was earlier written Η , but when the same letter ( eta ) was co-opted to stand for a vowel, /h/ was dropped from writing, to be restored later in the form of a diacritic, the rough breathing .

4 /r/ was probably a voiceless /r̥/ when word-initially and geminated (written ῥ and ῥῥ ).

Vowels Front Back unrounded rounded Close ι i iː υ y yː Close-mid ε ει e eː ο ου o oː Open-mid η ɛː ω ɔː Open α a aː /oː/ raised to [uː] , probably by the 4th century BC.

Morphology Main article: Ancient Greek grammar Ostracon bearing the name of Cimon , Stoa of Attalos Greek, like all of the older Indo-European languages , is highly inflected. It is highly archaic in its preservation of Proto-Indo-European forms. In ancient Greek, nouns (including proper nouns) have five cases ( nominative , genitive , dative , accusative , and vocative ), three genders ( masculine , feminine , and neuter ), and three numbers (singular, dual , and plural ).

Verbs have four moods ( indicative , imperative , subjunctive , and optative ) and three voices (active, middle, and passive ), as well as three persons (first, second, and third) and various other forms.

Verbs are conjugated through seven combinations of tenses and aspect (generally simply called "tenses"): the present , future , and imperfect are imperfective in aspect; the aorist , present perfect , pluperfect and future perfect are perfective in aspect. Most tenses display all four moods and three voices, although there is no future subjunctive or imperative. Also, there is no imperfect subjunctive, optative or imperative. The infinitives and participles correspond to the finite combinations of tense, aspect, and voice.

Augment The indicative of past tenses adds (conceptually, at least) a prefix /e-/, called the augment . This was probably originally a separate word, meaning something like "then", added because tenses in PIE had primarily aspectual meaning. The augment is added to the indicative of the aorist, imperfect, and pluperfect, but not to any of the other forms of the aorist (no other forms of the imperfect and pluperfect exist).

The two kinds of augment in Greek are syllabic and quantitative. The syllabic augment is added to stems beginning with consonants, and simply prefixes e (stems beginning with r , however, add er ). The quantitative augment is added to stems beginning with vowels, and involves lengthening the vowel: a, ā, e, ē → ē i, ī → ī o, ō → ō u, ū → ū ai → ēi ei → ēi or ei oi → ōi au → ēu or au eu → ēu or eu ou → ou Some verbs augment irregularly; the most common variation is e → ei . The irregularity can be explained diachronically by the loss of s between vowels, or that of the letter w , which affected the augment when it was word-initial.
In verbs with a preposition as a prefix, the augment is placed not at the start of the word, but between the preposition and the original verb. For example, προσ(-)βάλλω (I attack) goes to προσ έ βαλoν in the aorist. However compound verbs consisting of a prefix that is not a preposition retain the augment at the start of the word: αὐτο(-)μολῶ goes to ηὐ τομόλησα in the aorist.

Following Homer 's practice, the augment is sometimes not made in poetry , especially epic poetry.

The augment sometimes substitutes for reduplication; see below.

Reduplication Almost all forms of the perfect, pluperfect, and future perfect reduplicate the initial syllable of the verb stem. (A few irregular forms of perfect do not reduplicate, whereas a handful of irregular aorists reduplicate.) The three types of reduplication are: Syllabic reduplication: Most verbs beginning with a single consonant, or a cluster of a stop with a sonorant, add a syllable consisting of the initial consonant followed by e . An aspirated consonant, however, reduplicates in its unaspirated equivalent (see Grassmann's law ).

Augment: Verbs beginning with a vowel, as well as those beginning with a cluster other than those indicated previously (and occasionally for a few other verbs) reduplicate in the same fashion as the augment. This remains in all forms of the perfect, not just the indicative.

Attic reduplication: Some verbs beginning with an a , e or o , followed by a sonorant (or occasionally d or g ), reduplicate by adding a syllable consisting of the initial vowel and following consonant, and lengthening the following vowel. Hence er → erēr , an → anēn , ol → olōl , ed → edēd . This is not specific to Attic Greek , despite its name, but it was generalized in Attic. This originally involved reduplicating a cluster consisting of a laryngeal and sonorant, hence h₃l → h₃leh₃l → olōl with normal Greek development of laryngeals. (Forms with a stop were analogous.) Irregular duplication can be understood diachronically. For example, lambanō (root lab ) has the perfect stem eilēpha (not * lelēpha ) because it was originally slambanō , with perfect seslēpha , becoming eilēpha through compensatory lengthening.

Reduplication is also visible in the present tense stems of certain verbs. These stems add a syllable consisting of the root's initial consonant followed by i . A nasal stop appears after the reduplication in some verbs.

[ 22 ] Writing system Greek alphabet Αα Alpha Νν Nu Ββ Beta Ξξ Xi Γγ Gamma Οο Omicron Δδ Delta Ππ Pi Εε Epsilon Ρρ Rho Ζζ Zeta Σσς Sigma Ηη Eta Ττ Tau Θθ Theta Υυ Upsilon Ιι Iota Φφ Phi Κκ Kappa Χχ Chi Λλ Lambda Ψψ Psi Μμ Mu Ωω Omega History Archaic local variants Ϝϝ Digamma Ͱͱ Heta Ϻϻ San Ϙϙ Koppa Ͷͷ Tsan Digamma Ͳͳ Sampi Ϸϸ Sho Diacritics and other symbols Diacritics ά ὰ ᾶ ἀ ἁ ᾱ ᾰ ϊ ᾳ σ̌ Ligatures ȢȢ Ϗϗ Ϛϛ ⳨ ☧ Numerals ( Attic ) ϛ (6) ϟ (90) ϡ (900) Related topics Use as scientific symbols Orthography Romanization Cyrillization Category v t e Main article: Greek orthography The earliest extant examples of ancient Greek writing ( c.

1450 BC ) are in the syllabic script Linear B . Beginning in the 8th century BC, however, the Greek alphabet became standard, albeit with some variation among dialects. Early texts are written in boustrophedon style, but left-to-right became standard during the classic period. Modern editions of ancient Greek texts are usually written with accents and breathing marks , interword spacing , modern punctuation , and sometimes mixed case , but these were all introduced later.

Sample texts The beginning of Homer 's Iliad exemplifies the Archaic period of ancient Greek (see Homeric Greek for more details): Μῆνιν ἄειδε, θεά, Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος οὐλομένην, ἣ μυρί' Ἀχαιοῖς ἄλγε' ἔθηκε, πολλὰς δ' ἰφθίμους ψυχὰς Ἄϊδι προΐαψεν ἡρώων, αὐτοὺς δὲ ἑλώρια τεῦχε κύνεσσιν οἰωνοῖσί τε πᾶσι· Διὸς δ' ἐτελείετο βουλή· ἐξ οὗ δὴ τὰ πρῶτα διαστήτην ἐρίσαντε Ἀτρεΐδης τε ἄναξ ἀνδρῶν καὶ δῖος Ἀχιλλεύς.

The beginning of Apology by Plato exemplifies Attic Greek from the Classical period of ancient Greek. (The second line is the IPA , the third is transliterated into the Latin alphabet using a modern version of the Erasmian scheme .) Ὅτι [hóti Hóti μὲν men mèn ὑμεῖς, hyːmêːs hūmeîs, | ὦ ɔ̂ː ô ἄνδρες ándres ándres Ἀθηναῖοι, atʰɛːnaî̯i̯oi Athēnaîoi, | πεπόνθατε pepóntʰate pepónthate | ὑπὸ hypo hupò τῶν tɔ̂ːn tôn ἐμῶν emɔ̂ːŋ emôn κατηγόρων, katɛːɡórɔːn katēgórōn, | οὐκ oːk ouk οἶδα· oî̯da oîda: ‖ ἐγὼ eɡɔ́ː egṑ δ' οὖν dûːŋ d' oûn καὶ kai̯ kaì αὐτὸς au̯tos autòs | ὑπ' hyp hup' αὐτῶν au̯tɔ̂ːn autōn ὀλίγου olíɡoː olígou ἐμαυτοῦ emau̯tûː emautoû | ἐπελαθόμην, epelatʰómɛːn epelathómēn, | οὕτω hǔːtɔː hoútō πιθανῶς pitʰanɔ̂ːs pithanôs ἔλεγον.

éleɡon élegon.

‖ Καίτοι kaí̯toi̯ Kaítoi ἀληθές alɛːtʰéz alēthés γε ɡe ge | ὡς hɔːs hōs ἔπος épos épos εἰπεῖν eːpêːn eipeîn | οὐδὲν oːden oudèn εἰρήκασιν.

eːrɛ̌ːkaːsin eirḗkāsin.

‖] Ὅτι μὲν ὑμεῖς, {} ὦ ἄνδρες Ἀθηναῖοι, {} πεπόνθατε {} ὑπὸ τῶν ἐμῶν κατηγόρων, {} οὐκ οἶδα· {} ἐγὼ {δ' οὖν} καὶ αὐτὸς {} ὑπ' αὐτῶν ὀλίγου ἐμαυτοῦ {} ἐπελαθόμην, {} οὕτω πιθανῶς ἔλεγον. {} Καίτοι ἀληθές γε {} ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν {} οὐδὲν εἰρήκασιν. {} [hóti men hyːmêːs | ɔ̂ː ándres atʰɛːnaî̯i̯oi | pepóntʰate | hypo tɔ̂ːn emɔ̂ːŋ katɛːɡórɔːn | oːk oî̯da ‖ eɡɔ́ː dûːŋ kai̯ au̯tos | hyp au̯tɔ̂ːn olíɡoː emau̯tûː | epelatʰómɛːn | hǔːtɔː pitʰanɔ̂ːs éleɡon ‖ kaí̯toi̯ alɛːtʰéz ɡe | hɔːs épos eːpêːn | oːden eːrɛ̌ːkaːsin ‖] Hóti mèn hūmeîs, {} ô ándres Athēnaîoi, {} pepónthate {} hupò tôn emôn katēgórōn, {} ouk oîda: {} egṑ {d' oûn} kaì autòs {} hup' autōn olígou emautoû {} epelathómēn, {} hoútō pithanôs élegon. {} Kaítoi alēthés ge {} hōs épos eipeîn {} oudèn eirḗkāsin. {} How you, men of Athens, are feeling under the power of my accusers, I do not know: actually, even I myself almost forgot who I was because of them, they spoke so persuasively. And yet, loosely speaking, nothing they have said is true.

Modern use See also: Neoclassical compound In education The study of Ancient Greek in European countries in addition to Latin occupied an important place in the syllabus from the Renaissance until the beginning of the 20th century. This was true as well in the United States, where many of the nation's Founders received a classically based education.

[ 23 ] Latin was emphasized in American colleges, but Greek also was required in the Colonial and Early National eras, [ 24 ] and the study of ancient Greece became increasingly popular in the mid-to-late Nineteenth Century, the age of American philhellenism .

[ 25 ] In particular, female intellectuals of the era designated the mastering of ancient Greek as essential in becoming a "woman of letters." [ 26 ] Ancient Greek is still taught as a compulsory or optional subject especially at traditional or elite schools throughout Europe, such as public schools and grammar schools in the United Kingdom . It is compulsory in the liceo classico in Italy , in the gymnasium in the Netherlands , in some classes in Austria , in klasična gimnazija (grammar school – orientation: classical languages) in Croatia , in classical studies in ASO in Belgium and it is optional in the humanities-oriented gymnasium in Germany , usually as a third language after Latin and English, from the age of 14 to 18. In 2006/07, 15,000 pupils studied ancient Greek in Germany according to the Federal Statistical Office of Germany , and 280,000 pupils studied it in Italy.

[ 27 ] It is a compulsory subject alongside Latin in the humanities branch of the Spanish Baccalaureate . Ancient Greek is taught at most major universities worldwide, often combined with Latin as part of the study of classics . In 2010 it was offered in three primary schools in the UK , to boost children's language skills, [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and was one of seven foreign languages which primary schools could teach 2014 as part of a major drive to boost education standards.

[ 30 ] [ needs update ] Ancient Greek is taught as a compulsory subject in all gymnasiums and lyceums in Greece .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Starting in 2001, an annual international competition "Exploring the Ancient Greek Language and Culture" ( Greek : Διαγωνισμός στην Αρχαία Ελληνική Γλώσσα και Γραμματεία ) was run for upper secondary students through the Greek Ministry of National Education and Religious Affairs , with Greek language and cultural organisations as co-organisers.

[ 33 ] It appears to have ceased in 2010, having failed to gain the recognition and acceptance of teachers.

[ 34 ] Modern real-world usage Modern authors rarely write in ancient Greek, though Jan Křesadlo wrote some poetry and prose in the language, and Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone , [ 35 ] some volumes of Asterix , [ 36 ] and The Adventures of Alix have been translated into ancient Greek.

Ὀνόματα Kεχιασμένα ( Onomata Kechiasmena ) is the first magazine of crosswords and puzzles in ancient Greek.

[ 37 ] Its first issue appeared in April 2015 as an annex to Hebdomada Aenigmatum .

Alfred Rahlfs included a preface, a short history of the Septuagint text, and other front matter translated into ancient Greek in his 1935 edition of the Septuagint; Robert Hanhart also included the introductory remarks to the 2006 revised Rahlfs–Hanhart edition in the language as well.

[ 38 ] Akropolis World News reports weekly a summary of the most important news in ancient Greek.

[ 39 ] Ancient Greek is also used by organizations and individuals, mainly Greek, who wish to denote their respect, admiration or preference for the use of this language. This use is sometimes considered graphical, nationalistic or humorous. In any case, the fact that modern Greeks can still wholly or partly understand texts written in non-archaic forms of ancient Greek shows the affinity of the modern Greek language to its ancestral predecessor.

[ 39 ] Ancient Greek is often used in the coinage of modern technical terms in the European languages: see English words of Greek origin .

Latinized forms of ancient Greek roots are used in many of the scientific names of species and in scientific terminology.

See also Ancient Greek dialects – Varieties of Ancient Greek in classical antiquity Ancient Greek grammar – Grammar of the Ancient Greek language Ancient Greek accent Greek alphabet – Script used to write the Greek language Greek diacritics – Marks added to letters in Greek Greek language – Indo-European language Hellenic languages – Branch of Indo-European language family Katharevousa – Former prestige form of the Modern Greek language Koine Greek – Dialect of Greek in the ancient world List of Greek and Latin roots in English List of Greek phrases (mostly ancient Greek) Medieval Greek – Medieval stage of the Greek language Modern Greek – Dialects and varieties of the Greek language spoken in the modern era Mycenaean Greek – Earliest attested form of the Greek language Proto-Greek language – Last common ancestor of all varieties of Greek Varieties of Modern Greek – Dialects and differences between the written standard and spoken speech Notes ^ Mycenaean Greek is imprecisely attested and somewhat reconstructive due to its being written in an ill-fitting syllabary ( Linear B ).

References ^ Dalby, Andrew (28 October 2015).

Dictionary of Languages: The definitive reference to more than 400 languages . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 230.

ISBN 978-1-4081-0214-5 .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 10 June 2024 .

^ Ralli, Angela (2012).

"Greek" .

Revue belge de Philologie et d'Histoire .

90 (3): 964.

doi : 10.3406/rbph.2012.8269 .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2022 . Retrieved 23 January 2021 .

^ Hose, Martin; Schenker, David (2015).

A Companion to Greek Literature . John Wiley & Sons. p. 445.

ISBN 978-1118885956 .

^ Newton, Brian E.; Ruijgh, Cornelis Judd (13 April 2018).

"Greek Language" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2019 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ Gerber, Douglas E. (1997).

A Companion to the Greek Lyric Poets . Brill. p. 255.

ISBN 90-04-09944-1 .

^ Skelton, Christina (2017).

"Greek-Anatolian Language Contact and the Settlement of Pamphylia" (PDF) .

Classical Antiquity .

36 (1): 104– 129.

doi : 10.1525/ca.2017.36.1.104 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 17 April 2021 .

^ Hornblower, Simon (2002). "Macedon, Thessaly and Boiotia".

The Greek World, 479–323 BC (Third ed.). Routledge. p. 90.

ISBN 0-415-16326-9 .

^ a b c Hatzopoulos, Miltiades B. (2018).

"Recent Research in the Ancient Macedonian Dialect: Consolidation and New Perspectives" . In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

299– 324.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 .

^ a b Crespo, Emilio (2018). "The Softening of Obstruent Consonants in the Macedonian Dialect". In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. p. 329.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Dosuna, J. Méndez (2012). "Ancient Macedonian as a Greek dialect: A critical survey on recent work (Greek, English, French, German text)". In Giannakis, Georgios K. (ed.).

Ancient Macedonia: Language, History, Culture . Centre for Greek Language. p. 145.

ISBN 978-960-7779-52-6 .

^ Hammond, N.G.L (1997).

Collected Studies: Further studies on various topics . A.M. Hakkert. p. 79.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ Worthington, Ian (2012).

Alexander the Great: A Reader . Routledge. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1-136-64003-2 .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2024 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ Reynolds, Margaret (2001).

The Sappho Companion . London: Vintage. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-09-973861-9 .

^ Brixhe, Cl. "Le Phrygien". In Fr. Bader (ed.), Langues indo-européennes , pp. 165–178, Paris: CNRS Editions.

^ Brixhe, Claude (2008). "Phrygian". In Woodard, Roger D (ed.).

The Ancient Languages of Asia Minor . Cambridge University Press. pp.

69 –80.

ISBN 978-0-521-68496-5 .

"Unquestionably, however, Phrygian is most closely linked with Greek." (p. 72).

^ Obrador-Cursach, Bartomeu (1 December 2019).

"On the place of Phrygian among the Indo-European languages" .

Journal of Language Relationship (in Russian).

17 ( 3– 4): 243.

doi : 10.31826/jlr-2019-173-407 .

S2CID 215769896 .

With the current state of our knowledge, we can affirm that Phrygian is closely related to Greek.

^ James Clackson.

Indo-European Linguistics: An Introduction . Cambridge University Press, 2007, pp. 11–12.

^ Benjamin W. Fortson.

Indo-European Language and Culture . Blackwell, 2004, p. 181.

^ Henry M. Hoenigswald, "Greek", The Indo-European Languages , ed.

Anna Giacalone Ramat and Paolo Ramat (Routledge, 1998 pp. 228–260), p. 228.

BBC : Languages across Europe: Greek Archived 14 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fortson, Benjamin W. (2004).

Indo-European language and culture: an introduction . Malden, Mass: Blackwell. pp.

226 –231.

ISBN 978-1405103152 .

OCLC 54529041 .

^ Palmer, Leonard (1996).

The Greek Language . Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma Press. p.

262 .

ISBN 978-0-8061-2844-3 .

^ Thirty-six of the eighty-nine men who signed the Declaration of Independence and attended the Constitutional Convention went to a colonial college, all of which offered only the classical curricula. Richard M. Gummere, The American Colonial Mind and the Classical Tradition , p.66 (1963). Admission to Harvard, for example, required that the applicant: "Can readily make and speak or write true Latin prose and has skill in making verse, and is competently grounded in the Greek language so as to be able to construe and grammatically to resolve ordinary Greek, as in the Greek Testament, Isocrates, and the minor poets." Meyer Reinhold, Classica Americana: The Greek and Roman Heritage in the United States , p.27 (1984).

^ Harvard's curriculum was patterned after those of Oxford and Cambridge, and the curricula of other Colonial colleges followed Harvard's. Lawrence A. Cremin, American Education: The Colonial Experience, 1607–1783 , pp. 128–129 (1970), and Frederick Rudolph, Curriculum: A History of the American Undergraduate Course of Study Since 1636 , pp. 31–32 (1978) ^ Caroline Winterer, The Culture of Classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American Cultural Life, 1780–1910 , pp.3–4 (2002).

^ Yopie Prins, Ladies' Greek: Victorian Translations of Tragedy , pp. 5–6 (2017). See also Timothy Kearley, Roman Law, Classical Education, and Limits on Classical Participation in America into the Twentieth-Century , pp. 54–55, 97–98 (2022) ^ "Ministry publication" (PDF) .

www.edscuola.it .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 September 2018 . Retrieved 27 October 2010 .

^ "Ancient Greek 'to be taught in state schools' " .

The Daily Telegraph . 30 July 2010.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "Now look, Latin's fine, but Greek might be even Beta" Archived 3 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine , TES Editorial, 2010 – TSL Education Ltd.

^ More primary schools to offer Latin and ancient Greek Archived 13 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine , The Telegraph, 26 November 2012 ^ "Ωρολόγιο Πρόγραμμα των μαθημάτων των Α, Β, Γ τάξεων του Hμερησίου Γυμνασίου" .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2015 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "ΩΡΟΛΟΓΙΟ ΠΡΟΓΡΑΜΜΑ ΓΕΝΙΚΟΥ ΛΥΚΕΙΟΥ" .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "Annex to 2012 Greek statistics" (PDF) . UNESCO. 2012. p. 26.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2018 .

^ Proceedings of the 2nd Pan-hellenic Congress for the Promotion of Innovation in Education . Vol. II. 2016. p. 548.

^ Areios Potēr kai ē tu philosophu lithos , Bloomsbury 2004, ISBN 1-58234-826-X ^ "Asterix speaks Attic (classical Greek) – Greece (ancient)" .

Asterix around the World – the many Languages of Asterix . 22 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2011 . Retrieved 12 July 2011 .

^ "Enigmistica: nasce prima rivista in greco antico 2015" . 4 May 2015.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 September 2018 .

^ Rahlfs, Alfred, and Hanhart, Robert (eds.), Septuaginta, editio altera ( Deutsche Bibelgesellschaft , 2006).

^ a b "Akropolis World News" .

www.akwn.net . Archived from the original on 22 September 2016.

Further reading Adams, Matthew. "The Introduction of Greek into English Schools." Greece and Rome 61.1: 102–13, 2014.

JSTOR 43297490 .

Allan, Rutger J. "Changing the Topic: Topic Position in Ancient Greek Word Order." Mnemosyne: Bibliotheca Classica Batava 67.2: 181–213, 2014.

Athenaze: An Introduction to Ancient Greek (Oxford University Press). [A series of textbooks on Ancient Greek published for school use.] Bakker, Egbert J., ed.

A Companion to the Ancient Greek Language.

Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.

Beekes, Robert S. P.

Etymological Dictionary of Greek.

Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill, 2010.

Chantraine, Pierre .

Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque , new and updated edn., edited by Jean Taillardat, Olivier Masson , & Jean-Louis Perpillou. 3 vols. Paris: Klincksieck, 2009 (1st edn. 1968–1980).

Christidis, Anastasios-Phoibos, ed.

A History of Ancient Greek: from the Beginnings to Late Antiquity . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

Easterling, P.

and Handley, C.

Greek Scripts: An Illustrated Introduction . London: Society for the Promotion of Hellenic Studies , 2001.

ISBN 0-902984-17-9 Fortson, Benjamin W.

Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction.

2d ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.

Hansen, Hardy and Quinn, Gerald M. (1992) Greek: An Intensive Course , Fordham University Press Horrocks, Geoffrey.

Greek: A History of the Language and its Speakers.

2d ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.

Janko, Richard. "The Origins and Evolution of the Epic Diction." In The Iliad: A Commentary. Vol. 4, Books 13–16.

Edited by Richard Janko, 8–19. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.

Jeffery, Lilian Hamilton.

The Local Scripts of Archaic Greece: Revised Edition with a Supplement by A. W. Johnston.

Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1990.

Morpurgo Davies, Anna, and Yves Duhoux, eds.

A Companion to Linear B: Mycenaean Greek Texts and their World.

Vol. 1. Louvain, Belgium: Peeters, 2008.

Philip S. Peek (2021).

Ancient Greek I: A 21st Century Approach .

Open Book Publishers .

doi : 10.11647/obp.0264 .

ISBN 978-1-80064-655-1 .

Philip S. Peek (2025).

Αncient Greek II: A 21st Century Approach .

Open Book Publishers .

doi : 10.11647/obp.0441 .

ISBN 978-1-80511-476-5 .

External links Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Ancient Greek Ancient Greek test of Wikipedia at Wikimedia Incubator Ancient Greek repository of Wikisource , the free library For a list of words relating to Ancient Greek, see the Ancient Greek language category of words in Wiktionary , the free dictionary.

Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Texts in Ancient Greek Library resources about Ancient Greek Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Classical Greek Online by Winfred P. Lehmann and Jonathan Slocum, free online lessons at the Linguistics Research Center at the University of Texas at Austin Online Greek resources – Dictionaries, grammar, virtual libraries, fonts, etc.

Alpheios – Combines LSJ, Autenrieth, Smyth's grammar and inflection tables in a browser add-on for use on any web site Ancient Greek basic lexicon at the Global Lexicostatistical Database Ancient Greek Swadesh list of basic vocabulary words (from Wiktionary's Swadesh list appendix ) "Greek Language" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Slavonic – online editor for Ancient Greek glottothèque – Ancient Indo-European Grammars online , an online collection of videos on various Ancient Indo-European languages, including Ancient Greek Community courses on Memrise Grammar learning A more extensive grammar of the Ancient Greek language written by J. Rietveld Archived 7 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine Recitation of classics books Perseus Greek dictionaries Greek-Language.com – Information on the history of the Greek language, application of modern Linguistics to the study of Greek, and tools for learning Greek Free Lessons in Ancient Greek, Bilingual Libraries, Forum A critical survey of websites devoted to Ancient Greek Ancient Greek Tutorials – Berkeley Language Center of the University of California A Digital Tutorial For Ancient Greek Based on White's First Greek Book New Testament Greek Acropolis World News – A summary of the latest world news in Ancient Greek, Juan Coderch, University of St Andrews Classical texts Perseus – Greek and Roman Materials Ancient Greek Texts v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Ages of Greek c.

3rd millennium BC c.

1600–1100 BC c.

800–300 BC c.

300 BC – AD 600 c.

600–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐srzzh
Cached time: 20250817223002
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.279 seconds
Real time usage: 1.595 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13578/1000000
Revision size: 50830/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 420092/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10108/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 209494/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.754/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21342384/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1324.753      1 -total
 18.70%  247.716      2 Template:Reflist
 13.17%  174.505      1 Template:Infobox_language
 11.99%  158.879      1 Template:Infobox
 11.04%  146.200     67 Template:Lang
 10.80%  143.042     15 Template:Cite_book
  9.70%  128.453     16 Template:Annotated_link
  8.32%  110.166      1 Template:Greek_Alphabet
  6.98%   92.443      1 Template:Br-separated_entries
  4.73%   62.629      1 Template:Ancient_Greek_dialects Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:148363:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817223002 and revision id 1304058649. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek&oldid=1304058649 " Categories : Ancient Greek Ancient Greece Languages attested from the 9th century BC 9th-century BC establishments in Greece Languages of Sicily Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles needing additional references from January 2019 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2024 Language articles without speaker estimate Languages with ISO 639-2 code Pages with Greek IPA Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Croatian-language text Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing Greek-language text Wikisource templates with missing id Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek 129 languages Add topic

