Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Creation 2 Publication history 3 Fictional character biography Toggle Fictional character biography subsection 3.1 Golden Age 3.2 Silver Age and Bronze Age 3.3 Modern Age 3.4 The New 52 3.5 DC Rebirth 4 Superhero identities Toggle Superhero identities subsection 4.1 Superwoman 4.2 Red Tornado 4.3 Other identities and powers 5 Earth-Two version 6 In other versions Toggle In other versions subsection 6.1 Elseworlds imprint 6.2 Flashpoint 6.3 Injustice: Gods Among Us 6.4 DC Comics Bombshells 6.5 Nightwing: The New Order 6.6 Superman: Secret Identity 6.7 Gotham City Garage 6.8 Tales from the Dark Multiverse 6.9 Marvel Comics cameos 7 Newspaper comic strip 8 Books Toggle Books subsection 8.1 Comic books 8.2 Graphic novels 8.2.1 Lois Lane and the Friendship Challenge 8.2.2 Girl Taking Over: A Lois Lane Story 8.3 Novels 8.3.1 Lois Lane 8.3.2 Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman 8.4 Non-fiction 9 In other media 10 In popular culture 11 See also 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Lois Lane 30 languages العربية Bosanski Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional character in the Superman series This article is about the comic book character. For other uses, see Lois Lane (disambiguation) .

Comics character Lois Lane Art by Gary Frank Publication information Publisher DC Comics First appearance Action Comics #1 (June 1938) Created by Jerry Siegel (writer) Joe Shuster (artist) In-story information Team affiliations Daily Planet Galaxy Communications Partnerships Clark Kent Jimmy Olsen Supporting character of Superman Superboy Notable aliases Superwoman Red Tornado Abilities Superwoman Heat vision, X-ray vision, Freeze breath, Invulnerability, Flight, Superhuman strength, Speed and Hearing Red Tornado Air manipulation and Durability Lois Lane is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics . Created by writer Jerry Siegel and artist Joe Shuster , she first appeared in Action Comics #1 (June 1938). Lois is an award-winning journalist for the Metropolis newspaper the Daily Planet and the primary love interest of the superhero Superman and his alter ego, Clark Kent . In DC continuity, she is also his wife and the mother of their son, Jon Kent , the newest Superboy in the DC Universe .

Lois's physical appearance was originally based on Joanne Carter , a model hired by Joe Shuster.

Jerry Siegel took her name from actress Lola Lane , while her character was inspired by actress Glenda Farrell 's portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of 1930s self-titled films.

[ 1 ] Depictions of the character have varied spanning the comics and other media adaptations. The original Golden Age version of Lois Lane, as well as versions of her from the 1970s onwards, portrays Lois as a dauntless journalist and intellectually equal to Superman. During the Silver Age of Comics , she was the star of Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , a comic book series that had a light and humorous tone.

Since her debut in comic books in 1938, Lois has appeared in various media adaptations and is among the best-known female comic book characters. Actresses who have portrayed Lois in live-action film and television include Noel Neill , Phyllis Coates , Margot Kidder , Teri Hatcher , Erica Durance , Kate Bosworth , Amy Adams , and Elizabeth Tulloch . In animation, the character has been voiced by Joan Alexander , Dana Delany , and Alice Lee .

Rachel Brosnahan most recently played the character in the film Superman (2025).

Creation [ edit ] Writer Jerry Siegel first conceived Lois Lane in 1934, when Siegel and Joe Shuster were still developing Superman.

[ 2 ] A major influence on Lois's characterization was actress Glenda Farrell and her portrayal of the fictional reporter Torchy Blane in a series of Warner Bros.

films. The Torchy Blane movies were popular second features during the later 1930s. On the conception of Lois Lane, Siegel stated in the 1988 Time magazine: My wife Joanne was Joe's original art model for Superman's girlfriend Lois Lane back in the 1930s. Our heroine was, of course, a working girl whose priority was grabbing scoops. What inspired me in the creation was Glenda Farrell, the movie star who portrayed Torchy Blane, a gutsy, beautiful headline-hunting reporter, in a series of exciting motion pictures. Because the name of the actress Lola Lane (who also played Torchy) appealed to me, I called my character Lois Lane. Strangely, the characterization of Lois is amazingly like the real-life personality of my lovely wife.

[ 3 ] An early sketch of Lois Lane by Joe Shuster , modeled on Joanne Carter .

Artist Joe Shuster based Lois's physical appearance on a model named Joanne Carter . Carter had placed an ad in the Cleveland Plain Dealer newspaper in the Situation Wanted column, advertising herself as a model. Shuster corresponded with her and hired her as the model for Lois Lane.

[ 4 ] Shuster's depiction of Lois was modeled on her hairstyle and facial features. "To me she was Lois Lane. She was a great inspiration for me, though. She encouraged me, she was very enthusiastic about the strip; it meant a lot to me." Shuster said about Joanne Carter.

[ 5 ] Joanne Carter married co-creator Jerry Siegel in 1948. On working with Joe Shuster for Lois Lane, Carter said in the 1983 Nemo magazine interview: "Joe was redrawing the strip, and it was going to be more realistic, rather than cartoony. I used to model for him every Saturday until he had enough drawings. He made so many stock drawings that it got to a point where he didn't need any more. We became such good friends by that time we decided we would always stay friends." [ 5 ] Publication history [ edit ] Lois Lane made her debut in Action Comics #1 (June 1938), the first published Superman story.

[ 6 ] Lois is the daughter of Ella and Sam Lane , in earlier comics, her parents were farmers in a town called Pittsdale.

[ 7 ] The modern comics depicts Lois as a former Army brat , born at Ramstein Air Base with Lois having been trained by her father, a US Army General, in areas such as hand-to-hand combat and the use of firearms. She has one sibling, her younger sister Lucy Lane .

[ 8 ] Lois is a journalist for the Daily Planet , one of the best investigative reporters and the best at the newspaper she works at.

[ 9 ] Lois has shown obtaining superpowers and becoming a superhero, some of her superhero identities are Superwoman and Red Tornado of Earth 2.

Aspects of Lois's personality have varied over the years, depending on the comic book writers handling of the character and American social attitudes toward women at the time. In most incarnations, she is shown to be an independent person who is smart, determined and strong-willed. Her physical appearance has varied over the years, depending either on contemporary fashion or media adaptations. In the 1990s, when the television series Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman began airing Lois received a haircut that made her look more like actress Teri Hatcher , and her eyes were typically violet to match her character on Superman: The Animated Series . From the late 1980s through the 1990s she was depicted with auburn hair in the comic books.

In the 1940s, Lois had a newspaper comic strip, Lois Lane, Girl Reporter , a direct spin-off of the Superman comic strip running at the time. A similarly titled comic series began appearing in the Superman comic book in 1944, starting with Superman #28. In 1958, DC Comics gave Lois a comic book series, Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane . The series focuses on her solo adventures and start publication in April 1958. In the 1960s, the series was one of DC's most popular titles and was the top ten best-selling comic books in America.

[ 10 ] She had a series featured in The Superman Family comic book from 1974 to 1982. Released in 2019, Lois Lane , a 12-issue series by writer Greg Rucka and artist Mike Perkins investigates threats and conspiracies in the DC Universe.

Lois is the character most commonly associated with Superman, and throughout their long history , she has always been the most prominent love interest in Clark Kent/Superman's life. In the 1990s, after Clark proposes to Lois and reveals to her that he is Superman, [ 11 ] [ 12 ] she married him in the comic book Superman: The Wedding Album (December 1996).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The couple's biological child in DC Comics canon was born in Convergence: Superman #2 (July 2015) a son named Jonathan Samuel Kent, who eventually becomes Superboy .

Fictional character biography [ edit ] Golden Age [ edit ] The Golden Age Lois Lane and Superman, from the cover of Superman #27 (March–April 1944), art by Wayne Boring .

In the Golden Age comics, Lois was an aggressive, career-minded reporter for the Daily Star (the newspaper's name was changed to the Daily Planet in Action Comics #23 in 1940). After Clark Kent joined the paper and Superman debuted around the same time, Lois found herself attracted to Superman but displeased with her new journalistic competition in the form of Kent.

[ 15 ] Starting early as the 1940s, Lois began to suspect that Clark Kent was Superman, and started to make various attempts at uncovering his secret identity , all of which backfired because of Superman's efforts. The first such story appears in Superman #17 (July–August 1942).

[ 16 ] This theme became particularly pronounced in the 1950s and 1960s Silver Age comic books .

Lois gained her first series of stories (without Superman) starting with Superman #28 (May–June 1944), [ 17 ] Lois Lane, Girl Reporter , running in the Superman comic book for a number of years, had Lois defeating bad guys and getting front-page stories on her own, without any help from Superman.

In the Golden Age comics, Lois had a niece named Susie Tompkins, whose main trait was getting into trouble by telling exaggerated tall tales and fibs to adults.

[ 18 ] Susie's last appearance was in Superman #95 (February 1955).

[ 19 ] Subsequent comics presented Lois' only sibling, Lucy, as single and childless.

Silver Age and Bronze Age [ edit ] When the reading audience of superhero comic books became predominately young boys in the mid to late 1950s, the focus of Superman stories shifted toward science fiction inspired plots involving extraterrestrials , fantasy creatures, and bizarre plots.

Lois's main interests in various late 1950s and 1960s stories became vying with her rival Lana Lang for Superman's affections, attempting to prove Clark Kent and Superman were one and the same or otherwise getting Superman into marriage. Superman's rationale for resisting her matrimonial desires was that marrying her would put her in increased danger from his enemies and that she could not keep his secret identity hidden. Regardless, Lois married several times in the Superman stories of this era, including to a Superman impostor from Kandor, the villainous Zak-Kul, [ 20 ] and a man from the future.

[ 21 ] All these marriages were either annulled or otherwise forgotten.

Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane #1 (April 1958) art by Curt Swan and Stan Kaye.

Lois became more and more popular during the 1950s, and after appearing as the lead character in two issues of DC Comics' Showcase in 1957, DC created an ongoing series for Lois, titled Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The series ran for 137 issues, beginning in April 1958 to October 1974. Most stories were about Lois' romance with Superman, and were drawn by artist Kurt Schaffenberger . Schaffenberger's rendition of Lois became cited by many as the "definitive" version of Lois, and he was often asked by DC editor Mort Weisinger to redraw other artists' depictions of Lois Lane in other DC titles where she appeared.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] So many stories depicted Lois and marriage that the cover of a 1968 80-Page Giant that reprinted several such stories, the "All-Wedding Issue", described the magazine as "featuring Lois' schemes and dreams to marry Superman!".

[ 26 ] The series Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane became one of DC's most popular titles, the third best-selling comic in 1962 and 1965.

[ 10 ] [ 27 ] The title featured the first appearance of the Silver Age Catwoman , after an absence from the comics for over a decade.

[ 28 ] While Lois is suspicious of Superman's secret identity as early as Superman #7 (1940), her suspicions grew during the early Silver Age, with many stories in her series focusing on her attempts to prove Superman and Clark Kent were one and the same. Stories showed Superman using various means to protect his secret identity from Lois, including his Superman robots or Batman disguising himself as Clark/Superman.

[ 29 ] By the end of the 1960s, as attitudes toward women's role in American society changed, Lois' character changed as well. In Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane #80 (Jan. 1968), the character's fashions were updated to a then more contemporary look.

[ 30 ] Stories in the 1970s depicted Lois again as fully capable and less reliant on Superman. She engaged in more adventures without Superman being involved and was much less interested in discovering Superman's secret identity.

Lois had a series featured in The Superman Family (an anthology title started in the mid-1970s after the cancellation of Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane and Superman's Pal, Jimmy Olsen ) from 1974 to 1982. In her series, Lois regularly battled criminals and often defeated them using her quick wits and considerable skill in the Kryptonian martial art of Klurkor, taught to her by Kryptonian survivors in the bottle city of Kandor .

[ 31 ] There were several cameos of the New Gods , including DeSaad and Darkseid . Lois Lane was the backup series in The Daring New Adventures of Supergirl in 1982 to 1983.

[ 32 ] During the Silver and Bronze Age, Lois' backstory became more fully fleshed out, with various stories explaining her life before becoming employed at the Daily Planet . This backstory was attributed to the Lois Lane of Earth-One.

[ 33 ] As summarized in various stories, Lois was born to Sam and Ella Lane and grew up on their farm in the small town of Pittsdale.

[ 7 ] At the age of two, Lois suffered measles , and at the age of three, whooping cough .

[ 34 ] At an unspecified time during Lois' childhood, her younger sister Lucy Lane was born.

[ 34 ] While Lois was a toddler, she encountered a rattlesnake in the woods near the Lane family farm. The snake was scared away by one of Kal-El's baby toys which had landed nearby in one of Jor-El's experimental rockets.

[ 35 ] During Lois' adolescence, she won a youth contest run by the Daily Planet , with the prize being a trip to Metropolis to spend a week working as a cub reporter for the newspaper. There, she first met Clark Kent of Smallville, who was the other winner of the contest. Lois found Clark dull and became more interested in asking him for information about Superboy after learning Clark came from Smallville. During the week in Metropolis, Lois made a bet with Clark to see who would get the most scoops , which turned out to be Lois, as Clark was forced to constantly go into action as Superboy. Lois met Superboy for the first time while uncovering a criminal enterprise for one of her stories. At the end of the week, Clark paid off Lois' bet (an ice cream sundae ), and the two returned to their respective hometowns.

[ 36 ] Lois would meet Superboy (but not Clark Kent) again during her adolescence while attending an all-girls summer camp near Smallville. There, Lois met Lana Lang, a fellow camper, for the first time.

[ 37 ] Lois would make further attempts at landing a job with the Daily Planet during her teenage years [ 38 ] and spent time writing for her hometown's newspaper, the Pittsdale Star .

[ 7 ] Upon finishing high school, Lois left Pittsdale and attended Raleigh College to study journalism. While in college, Lois worked for the student newspaper, the Raleigh Review , as a reporter and eventually its co-editor.

[ 39 ] After graduating from college, Lois became permanently employed at the Daily Planet . Clark Kent and Jimmy Olsen later joined the Planet ' s staff but Lois remained the newspaper's star reporter, [ 40 ] winning the Pulitzer Prize .

[ 41 ] She was very dependent on Superman, however; he told her that having to rescue her so often from problems she caused prevented him from helping others.

[ 42 ] For example, when late for a deadline Lois jumped off a cliff expecting Superman to catch her "as he has done a thousand times", and fly her to her destination.

[ 43 ] When asked on a Sunday morning talk show what she would do if trapped in an underground mine with rescue impossible before the air ran out, Lois admitted that she would impatiently await Superman because "I've got a deadline to meet." [ 44 ] Eventually, Lois realized that she had wasted a good part of her career by staying in Metropolis for Superman's sake and left.

[ 45 ] As both a journalist and as a woman, she had to get on with her life.

[ 46 ] After the 1985–1986 miniseries Crisis on Infinite Earths writer John Byrne revised the Superman legend and eliminated the Silver Age version of Lois from continuity. Before this happened, a final non-canonical imaginary story Whatever Happened to the Man of Tomorrow?

was written by Alan Moore , meant as a send-off for the pre-Crisis versions of the characters, including Lois. Published at the same time but in Earth-One continuity was a two-issue miniseries, Lois Lane , in which she investigates missing children.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Modern Age [ edit ] Lois Lane, as she appears on the cover of The Man of Steel #2 (October 1986), art by John Byrne .

Lois underwent a character alteration beginning with John Byrne's The Man of Steel miniseries, which significantly rewrote Superman's origin and history. In this modern version of events, Lois was portrayed as a tough-as-nails reporter who rarely needed rescuing. She was depicted as strong, opinionated, yet sensitive.

Lois's first real relationship in this version was with Jose Delgado , who she later discovered acted as a vigilante. José's legs are shattered in a battle with a Lexcorp cyborg /human hybrid gone amok. Delgado eventually recovered. He and Lois would have several on and off experiences together before the relationship completely disintegrated, due to Delgado accepting help from a Lexcorp subsidiary ARL.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Another major change made was that Lois did not fall in love with just Superman, although she was attracted to him. One reason was the revised nature of the Superman/Clark Kent relationship. In the original Silver Age stories, Superman had been the man who disguised himself as Clark Kent. In this newly revised concept, it was Clark Kent who lived a life in which his activity as Superman was decidedly secondary. Lois initially resented the rookie Clark Kent getting the story on Superman as his first piece when she had spent ages trying to get an interview. This sometimes ill-tempered rivalry remained the case until The Adventures of Superman #460–463 and Action Comics #650.

Following Clark's brief rampage under the influence of the Eradicator , Lois was hesitant to forgive Clark for "selling out" to Collin Thornton and running Newstime Magazine, but forgave him in a span of mere minutes when he returned to ask for his job back. Clark elected to repay Lois by finally letting go of his self-imposed inhibitions and passionately kissed her. The two became a couple, and eventually, Lois accepted a proposal of marriage.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Clark shortly after revealed to her that he was Superman.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] DC Comics had planned on Lois and Clark being married in 1993's Superman vol. 2 #75. With the then-upcoming television show Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman , DC decided they did not want to have the two married in the comics and not married on TV. Partially as a result of this, Superman was killed in Superman #75 instead, dying in Lois' arms after a battle with the monster Doomsday . After a period of time, Superman returned to life, and both he and Lois resumed their relationship, though not without a few problems (such as a brief reappearance of Clark's former college girlfriend, the mermaid Lori Lemaris ). Lois eventually decided to take an overseas assignment to assert her independence and not be dependent on Clark, who had begun to overprotect her. When Clark became convinced Lois was in danger, he and her father Sam allied to aid her secretly.

When Lois returned to Metropolis, she had been through several life-threatening exploits and was slightly amused when Clark informed her his powers had been depleted, and that he was her editor (due to Perry White 's cancer). Upon discovering Clark still had her wedding ring within a handkerchief, Lois warmly broke down, teasing Clark and finally agreeing to become his wife.

Lois and Clark were finally married in the comic book Superman: The Wedding Album (December 1996), which featured the work of nearly every living artist who had ever worked on Superman.

[ 14 ] The issue was published during the week of October 6, 1996, coinciding with an episode of the television series Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman , which featured the wedding of the two characters.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] The Wedding Album itself spent part of its opening pages accommodating and reconciling the then-current comic storyline of Lois and Clark having broken off their engagement.

Since their marriage, Clark and Lois continue to be one of the strongest relationships in comics. In 2006, the couple took the next step in adopting a newly arrived Kryptonian boy, who they named Chris Kent . The boy is later discovered to be the son of Jor-El 's foe, General Zod . Although initially uneasy about raising a super-powered child, Lois has shown immense aptitude of being 'Mommy Lois.' Following a devastating battle with Zod, Chris sacrificed himself to seal the Phantom Zone rift, trapping himself inside with Zod's forces, leaving Lois without her son.

In the second issue of Final Crisis , Lois and Perry are caught in an explosion triggered by Clayface destroying the Daily Planet and Lois is critically injured. In the third issue, it is revealed that only Clark's heat vision is keeping her heart beating. Clark is visited by a mysterious phantom who insists that he must depart Earth immediately if he is to save his wife's life. The story is continued in the 3D tie-in comic Superman Beyond , where the female Monitor Zillo Valla stops time around Lois, allowing Superman to leave her side for a while, recruiting him and several of his multiversal doppelgangers in a mission to save the entire Multiverse, promising care for Lois. After defeating the dark Monitor Mandrakk, Superman brings back a distilled drop of The Bleed and administers it to Lois through a kiss, restoring her to full health. Lois is later seen in Final Crisis #6, one of the few still free humans.

After the events of Superman: New Krypton Superman must leave Earth for an undetermined amount of time swearing off his Earthly connections in the eyes of his fellow Kryptonians to keep an eye on General Zod the New Kryptonian military commander, but he secretly tells Lois he still considers her his wife and will come back to her. In the issues of Action Comics Lois has reunited with Chris Kent, who has aged to adulthood in the past months and became the new Metropolis hero Nightwing .

[ 55 ] Supergirl and Lana visit Lois' apartment to tell her that her sister Lucy Lane was killed during a battle with Supergirl . Lois does not believe that her sister is dead and refuses to accept the news until she has irrefutable proof. Lois asks Supergirl for a recovered piece of Superwoman's costume.

[ 56 ] Lois hands her exposé in and the government is after her for treason. With agents on her tail, she makes a mad dash for it. When Lois is in custody, her father Sam Lane is there to greet her in an interview room in an unnamed facility. Sam tells Lois the only reason he has been lenient with her is because she is his daughter, while he does love her the planet will always come first over his family and threatens to make her disappear forever if she continues. Lois returns to the Daily Planet under cover of night and explains all to Perry. She points out the whole paper is at risk and everyone connected to it if her exposé runs. Perry understands and though he must protect the paper he is first and foremost a good journalist and nudges Lois in the right direction; he will not run the story but noted it must get out to the people somehow. Enlightened, she quits the Daily Planet , as Lois gets her edge back.

[ 57 ] It was later revealed she never really quit the Daily Planet .

Lois learns her father's forces destroyed New Krypton . She is kidnapped by Lucy and taken to Sam's secret base.

[ 58 ] There, Lois argues with her father, countering his insistence on regarding the Kryptonians as "rabid dogs" by pointing out that they naturally regard him as a genocidal maniac after he destroyed their planet. In the war between New Krypton and Earth, Supergirl finds them and threatens to kill Sam. Lois stops her, saying her father will be judged for his war crimes. Refusing to go to trial, Sam takes a gun and commits suicide.

[ 59 ] Later, Lois visits the imprisoned Lucy.

[ 60 ] She expresses disbelief on what her sister has become. Lois says while she will not miss her father, she will miss her sister.

[ 61 ] In Superman: Grounded , Superman begins a journey through America to reconnect with the American people, and Lois, though confused at first, supports his choice. Lois later travels to Rushmark and finds an old college friend Brian, who invites her to have dinner with him and his wife. When Lois leaves Brian's home she is met by Superman. The two reaffirm their love to each other and go to Chicago.

[ 62 ] There, Lois helps Superman arrest a violent father who has been attacking his wife and son.

[ 63 ] Later, Lois and Superman investigate a factory in Des Moines . Lois wants to publish an article, which would reveal the workers' illegal activities, but Superman forces her not to. Feeling betrayed, Lois returns to Metropolis and does not speak to Superman for a while.

[ 64 ] When Lois is kidnapped by Lisa Jennings, a woman who wants to destroy Superman, he rescues her.

[ 65 ] With the danger over. Superman apologizes to Lois about what happened in Des Moines. Lois replies that she wrote the article anyway, saying that she was a reporter before she was his wife. Knowing that his wife did the right thing, Superman kisses her. The two then return home.

[ 66 ] The New 52 [ edit ] In 2011, DC Comics relaunched its titles and its main continuity was rebooted with the New 52 . Lois now works for Morgan Edge heading up the media division of the Daily Planet . She views Clark as a friend and is unaware that he is Superman.

[ 67 ] Lois investigates the story of twenty people who developed metahuman powers after being kidnapped by Brainiac. Her search leads her to a U.S. senator, who revealed to be one of the Twenty. The senator dies, but not before transferring his powers to Lois, who falls into a coma.

[ 68 ] Lois later awakes from her coma at the hospital, with Jonathan Carroll at her side.

[ 69 ] Lois manifests psychic powers and helps Superman fight the Psychic Pirate. During the fight, Lois learns that Clark is Superman but falls back into a coma. After defeating the Psychic Pirate, Superman brings Lois back to the hospital.

[ 70 ] Later, the Parasite attacks the hospital and attempts to steal Lois' powers.

[ 71 ] Superman tricks the Parasite into absorbing Lois' psionic energy. The power overwhelms the Parasite, causing him to collapse. Lois awakens from her coma but she does not seem to remember Superman's identity.

[ 72 ] Lois is the main character in the Superman: Lois Lane #1 one-shot. In this story, Lois' sister, Lucy, asks for her help in finding her roommate Amanda Suresh, who had been kidnapped by a mysterious group called "the Cartel." According to Lucy, Amanda had been taking a drug that transformed her into a monster. As Lois investigates the Cartel, she gets captured and taken to the Cartel's headquarters. There, Lois finds out the Cartel had been capturing people who had been mutated by the drug. Lois escapes and rescues Amanda when the captured monsters cause a riot. As she returns home, Lois finds out Lucy had been taking the drug. As Lucy apologizes for putting all three in danger, Lois chooses to publish her story about the Cartel.

[ 73 ] Some time after this, an organisation led by the mysterious 'HODOR-ROOT' learn Superman's secret identity, prompting him to share that information with Lois. When HODOR-ROOT try to analyse Clark's new 'Super-Flare' power, Lois reveals his identity to the public in the hope of removing their blackmail card, but this forces Clark to go on the run, hunted by criminals and law enforcement as some apparent side-effect of his Super-Flare has depleted his powers. Superman eventually learns that his depleted powers are due to Vandal Savage infecting him with a form of radiation that inhibits his cells' ability to absorb solar radiation, subjecting himself to kryptonite as a form of chemotherapy. With his powers restored, Clark reconciles with Lois, accepting that she exposed his identity for good reasons.

In the New 52: Futures End , set five years in the possible future of the New 52-verse. Lois is considered the most successful freelance reporter on the planet and her blog "The Fast Lane" is one of the most read and well-respected sources of news in the world.

[ 74 ] The birth of Lois and Clark's son in Convergence: Superman #2 (July 2015), art by Dan Jurgens .

In the miniseries Convergence , which featured many Post- Crisis DC Universe characters, including a married Superman and his pregnant wife Lois Lane, deal with the impending birth of their child, as Superman is called to protect the city.

[ 75 ] Convergence shows the birth of their son, Jon Kent .

[ 76 ] Following Convergence , DC announced the spin-off comic book series Superman: Lois and Clark , debuting in October 2015 by Dan Jurgens and Lee Weeks .

[ 77 ] The eight-issue series is set several years after the Convergence event, where Clark and Lois and their son Jon have been living and working in the New 52 universe. The couple now lives in California and has changed their last name to White (a tribute to Perry White). Lois has become an anonymous author, publishing several critically acclaimed books under the alias name "Author X." While Clark continues his superhero duty, protecting cities and civilians quietly behind the scenes.

[ 78 ] Their son, Jonathan, eventually began to develop superpowers of his own (similar to those of his father Superman) and learned the truth about his parents' true origin.

In The Final Days of Superman , the pre- Flashpoint Superman helps his New 52 counterpart defeat a man who has become convinced that he is the 'true' Superman after exposure to some of Superman's excess energy.

New 52 -Lois is present when 'her' Superman expires as recent energy exposures catch up with him, after he tells her his life story for posterity.

DC Rebirth [ edit ] In June 2016, DC Comics relaunched its entire line of comic book titles with DC Rebirth . The publisher once again re-established the Post- Crisis Superman as the principal Superman in DC comics, along with his wife, Lois Lane, and their son, Jonathan .

[ 79 ] Lois began to investigate the disappearance of her New 52 counterpart, [ 80 ] and after learning the apparent death of her other-self, she returns to the Daily Planet posing as her counterpart.

[ 81 ] Following a confrontation with Mister Mxyzptlk , Lois and Superman's essence is merged with their New 52 counterpart, creating a new DC Universe.

Released in July 2019 to July 2020, Lois stars in a 12-issue limited series Lois Lane written by Greg Rucka and art by Mike Perkins . The series sees Lois as she investigates stories of conspiracy, intrigue and murder in the DC Universe. Writer Greg Rucka intended for the series to focus on Lois' legacy as a hard-boiled journalist and the investigative world which she inhabits, with the series reflecting the state of modern journalism in the world today.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Superhero identities [ edit ] Lois Lane has become a superhero and gained superpowers several times in the comics, animation, and live-action series.

Superwoman [ edit ] Lois Lane, first appearance as Superwoman in Action Comics #60 (May 1943), art by Joe Shuster .

Lois was the first person to assume the Superwoman persona and has become the superheroine on several occasions. Her first appearance as Superwoman (as well as Superwoman's first appearance in DC Comics) was in Action Comics #60 (May 1943).

[ 84 ] The story is set in a dream sequence, where, after Lois is hit by a truck, she dreams a transfusion of Superman's blood gives her superpowers and she becomes Superwoman. In Superman #45, Lois believes Hocus and Pocus—a pair of fraudulent magicians—have given her superpowers, and with Superman's help and intervention, Lois once again becomes Superwoman.

[ 85 ] In Action Comics #156, Lois actually gains superpowers from one of Lex Luthor 's inventions, which launches a short-lived career as "Superwoman." [ 86 ] In The Superman Family #207, the Earth-Two Lois gained superpowers from her husband, after Superman brought an extraterrestrial plant into their home, with Lois losing the powers after the death of the plant.

[ 87 ] Other stories have Lois transformed into Superwoman when Superman transfers some of his powers to Lois, or due to Mr. Mxyzptlk 's interference. On Smallville in the episode "Prophecy," Jor-El gives Lois all of Clark's powers for one day.

In the original Crime Syndicate of America on Earth-Three , Lois Lane and Superwoman were two separate individual characters.

[ 88 ] Superwoman is a supervillain and Lois married Earth-Three's greatest champion, Alexander Luthor. The pre-Crisis version of the characters perished when Earth-Three was destroyed during the events of Crisis on Infinite Earths .

[ 89 ] In the graphic novel JLA: Earth 2 , Superwoman, a member of the Crime Syndicate is the alternate version of Lois Lane.

[ 90 ] She is an Amazon by birth and the chief editor of the Daily Planet . She inhabits the same antimatter universe which contains the planet Qward . The New 52 version of Superwoman of Earth-3 is also named Lois Lane and is part of the Crime Syndicate.

In All-Star Superman , the 12-issue comic book series by Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely , Lois becomes a Kryptonian Superwoman for 24 hours. In the story, Superman (who believed he was dying) revealed his secret identity to her and takes Lois to his Fortress of Solitude to spend her birthday. While at his Arctic sanctuary, he presents Lois with her birthday present, a formula called "Exo-Genes" created by Superman from his own DNA , that allows Lois to have his powers for twenty-four hours. With her new Kryptonian powers and new Superwoman costume (made by Superman), the two spend the whole day together on different adventures and shared a kiss on the moon.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] At the end of the story, Superman proclaims his love for Lois, before he flies off into the sun to repair it. Lois later appeared as Superwoman in the animated All-Star Superman film, voiced by Christina Hendricks .

In DC Rebirth , the New 52 Lois and Lana gained superpowers due to the solar energy explosion caused by the death of the New 52 Superman. This results in both Lois and Lana becoming Superwoman, with Lois possessing all of Superman's traditional powers, while Lana has the ability to absorb solar energy and release it in other forms. Lois later dies at the hands of a female Bizarro , being overloaded with solar energy the same way Superman was killed.

[ 93 ] In 2024, Lois returned as Superwoman in DC Comics in the DC All In initiative. She first appeared as Superwoman in Superman vol 6 #19. During the " Absolute Power " storyline, Amanda Waller 's Amazo robots steal the powers of Earth's metahumans, among others. In Superwoman Special #1, it was revealed that General Zod is among those affected, with Lois gaining his powers and becoming Superwoman again.

[ 94 ] Soon after, Lois loses her powers after using most of them up while battling X-El, a Bizarro clone of Lex Luthor.

[ 95 ] Red Tornado [ edit ] Lois Lane as Red Tornado in Earth 2 #17 (January 2014), art by Nicola Scott .

Following the DC relaunch, the series Earth 2 debuted in 2012, set on the parallel world of that name. It depicts a modern take on the Golden Age world, starring the Justice Society of America and superheroes of that period.

In Earth 2 , Lois Lane is married to Superman . When Clark's cousin Kara arrived on earth, she stayed with Clark's parents, before moving in and living with Clark and Lois. Lois considers Kara as her daughter and Kara calls Lois mom.

[ 96 ] Five years prior to the start of the story, during the first Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois was killed by one of Darkseid 's assassins at the Daily Planet , she died in her husband's arms.

[ 97 ] Superman and many other heroes of Earth 2 are killed in the war.

Five years later, as various heroes begin to rise and various gods from Apokolips begin to wreak havoc again. Lois' consciousness is revealed to have survived and was downloaded into the robot body of Red Tornado by her father Sam Lane and Robert Crane .

[ 98 ] Lois, now as Red Tornado, possessed the power of wind manipulation and cyclone generation abilities. Lois bands together with Green Lantern (Alan Scott), Batman ( Thomas Wayne ), Accountable (Jimmy Olsen) and the other gathered heroes to fight against the forces of Apokolips. After a protracted battle with what was thought to be a surviving brainwashed Superman, Lois realizes he is, in fact, a Bizarro , and takes advantage of his deteriorating form to disintegrate him with a cyclone blast.

[ 99 ] In the story, Lois is referred to by Doctor Fate as the "Resurrection hope".

During Superman's rampage and destruction on Earth 2, Lois is among a group that discovers Val-Zod, a Kryptonian, hidden in a cell beneath Arkham.

[ 100 ] Lois helps Val feel accepted and welcomed on Earth 2, learn to control his superpower, and overcome his agoraphobia (due to his prolonged travel in space to Earth).

[ 101 ] Val-Zod eventually becomes the new Superman of Earth 2.

In the second Apokoliptian invasion of Earth 2, Lois and Kara are reunited, after Kara and Huntress return to Earth 2 from Prime Earth.

[ 102 ] Lois, along with Kara, Val, Huntress, Batman and other heroes, fights against the armies of Apokolips and new villains appearing across Earth 2. While searching for Huntress beneath the fire pits of Earth 2 in DeSaad 's cloning facility, Lois, Val, Kara and Batman found the real Superman who has been held captive for five years. He was revived by DeSaad and was used as the genetic source for the Kryptonian clones. The extraction of his DNA corrupted his body leaving him without any powers.

[ 103 ] Lois and Superman reunite briefly, before he sacrificed himself one last time, destroying the Parademon facilities using his corrupt DNA.

[ 104 ] After Superman's death, Lois gave Kara the symbol from his uniform, which was then worn by Kara in remembrance.

In the final days of Earth 2, Lois' instincts as a journalist lead her to attempt to preserve and record the history and stories of Earth 2 in her large memory bank in the hope that someday, someone will read the data and rebuild this world.

[ 105 ] After the destruction of Earth 2, Lois and the remaining civilians and heroes of Earth 2 relocated to a new world.

[ 106 ] The writer of Earth 2 , Tom Taylor , specifically resurrected Lois Lane on Earth 2 after he was told to kill off the character in the Injustice comic series. Taylor stated "bringing Lois in was quite a personal thing, because having to do such horrible, horrible things to her in Injustice, the first thing I asked when I got on the book was if I could bring back Lois. Then it was just a matter of working out exactly how." [ 107 ] Taylor received " Women in Refrigerators " criticism for his Injustice comic stories. Bringing back Lois as Red Tornado was Taylor's way to "unfridge" Lois. As Taylor noted, in Lois' first appearance as Red Tornado, Lois literally came out of a blue refrigerator. Other reasons for bringing back Lois involve Superman, Taylor commented "While evil bastard Superman is out there killing and maiming and destroying, I wanted Lois to exist as the counterpoint to this. She's the beating heart at the center. She's the good Ying to Superman's evil Yang. Where there's Lois, there's hope." [ 108 ] Nicola Scott , the long-time artist on Earth 2, on drawing Red Tornado Lois, "I wanted Lois to be Lois, despite the fact that she's metal. I wanted to make sure she looked really feminine and really beautiful, so all she'd need is a flesh coating and a wig and she'd be good to go." [ 109 ] Other identities and powers [ edit ] Green Lantern – In Tangent Comics: Tales of the Green Lantern #1, Green Lantern of Earth-9 is introduced with three different origin tales. In one origin story, Lois is an archaeologist, explorer, and adventurer hired by billionaire playboy Booster Gold to explore underwater ruins off the coast of Florida. She discovers a community of mutants known as the Sea Devils and is murdered by Booster Gold when she tries to protect the Sea Devils. Her body is taken to the underwater castle and resurrected as the Green Lantern.

Elastic Lass – Lois becomes Elastic Lass, after borrowing Jimmy Olsen's Elastic Lad serum, given to him by Professor Potter, so she can catch the Wrecker, who has been blowing up statues around Metropolis.

[ 110 ] Isis – On the television series Smallville , Lois is possessed by the spirit of the Egyptian goddess and hero Isis while wearing the Amulet of Isis in the tenth-season episode "Isis." This was based on the character of Isis who first appeared in an eponymous 1975-77 CBS television series , later known as The Secrets of Isis . Isis was then brought into DC comics canon, both as a superhero and as a separate goddess. As Isis, Lois had super strength, speed, telekinesis, telepathy, energy projection, magic, and could fly.

Krypton Girl – In the imaginary story in Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane #47, Lois is from Krypton and takes the superhero name Krypton Girl on Earth; Clark Kent is an ordinary human.

[ 111 ] Leopard Lady – Lois becomes the supervillain Leopard Lady and marries Lex Luthor when a machine that can bring out evil in a person is used on her.

[ 112 ] Power Girl – In Superman #125, Lois dreams she and Clark gain superpowers and become Power-Girl and Power-Man.

[ 113 ] Stiletto – On Smallville , Lois takes on the superhero persona of Stiletto, after saving Chloe from a carjacker in the eighth-season episode "Stiletto." Super-Lois – The comic book Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane featured several stories in which Lois gains superpowers and becomes Super-Lois. In one, Lois gains superpower after Superman gives her a blood transfusion. In another story, Lois is invited to visit Kandor with three other accomplished women of Earth; while there, a scientist gives her superpowers. Lois uses her new superpowers to save Superman from a Kryptonite trap set by Mayhem, Inc.

[ 114 ] Supermaid – In an imaginary story in Superman #158, Lois goes to Krypton as a child and becomes Supermaid. Lois' father sent his infant daughter to Krypton in a starship after discovering the Sun would go nova and destroy the Solar System. Arriving on Krypton within a power beam modifies Lois' molecular biology, giving her superpowers. Lois was adopted and raised by a zookeeper as Kandi Khan and became the Superheroine Supermaid.

[ 115 ] Ultra Woman – On the television series Lois and Clark: The New Adventures of Superman in the episode "Ultra Woman" Superman's powers are transferred to Lois when a red Kryptonite laser beam hit him. Martha Kent makes Lois a new costume and Clark introduces her to Metropolis as Ultra Woman.

Divine empowerment – Lois was briefly granted divine powers as the Goddess of Integrity by the war and death gods but gave the powers up at the urging of Wonder Woman . Her powers include flight, enhanced intellect, teleportation and weather manipulation.

[ 116 ] Psychic powers – In The New 52 , Lois was given various psychic powers by Senator Hume; she has redeveloped and lost these powers numerous times. Some of her powers are telepathy and astral projection .

[ 117 ] Earth-Two version [ edit ] DC Comics instituted its multiverse system in the early 1960s for organizing its continuity and introduced the Earth-Two Superman in Justice League of America #73 (August 1969).

[ 118 ] This retcon declared the Golden Age Superman and Lois Lane stories (i.e. comics published from 1938 through the early 1950s) as having taken place on the parallel world of " Earth-Two " versus the then mainstream ( Silver Age ) universe of "Earth-One".

The Earth-Two Lois Lane and Superman, from the cover of Action Comics #484 (June 1978), art by José Luis García-López and Dick Giordano .

In Action Comics #484 (June 1978), a flashback story reveals Earth-Two's Lois became infatuated with Clark Kent after the latter lost his memory of his superheroic identity (thanks to a spell cast by the old Justice Society of America enemy Wizard working for Colonel Future ), with the result of Clark acting more aggressive and extroverted. Clark and Lois began to date each other and were soon married. During the honeymoon, Lois discovered that Clark was indeed Superman. After recruiting the aid of Wizard, Lois restored Clark's memory and Wizard surrendered to the authorities.

[ 119 ] The now-married Lois and Clark appeared in a series of stories in The Superman Family #195–199 and #201–222 titled Mr and Mrs Superman , which presented their further adventures early in their marriage. Susie Tompkins made a return as a recurring character.

[ 120 ] Years later, Lois and Clark acted as parental figures for Power Girl , Superman's cousin, after she arrived on Earth.

During the Crisis on Infinite Earths miniseries, the Earth-Two Lois Lane was seemingly seen for the final time, as Lois, the Earth-Two Superman, and the Superboy of Earth-Prime are, at the end of the story, taken by Earth-Three 's Alexander Luthor Jr.

into a paradise-like dimension. Following the events of Crisis on Infinite Earths, this version of Lois was retroactively removed from DC's continuity.

In 2005's Infinite Crisis miniseries, it is revealed that the Earth-Two Lois Lane Kent, along with Superboy, Alexander Luthor Jr., and Superman, have been watching the events of the post- Crisis DC Universe from their pocket dimension. Out of the four observers, she is the only one who still believes that the new universe is just going through a rough patch; Superboy-Prime and Alexander are convinced that Earth is corrupt, and Kal-L is slowly becoming swayed to their way of thinking.

[ 121 ] Kal-L is determined to restore Earth-Two and heal Lois, who is dying from an unknown illness. He believes that Lois' health will recover when she returns to her home universe.

[ 122 ] Despite the restoration of Earth-Two, Lois Lane dies in the arms of her husband Superman despite his protests that he cannot let her die.

[ 123 ] After Kal-L is mortally wounded by Superboy-Prime, he comments that he finally understood Lois' final words "It's... not... going..." as meaning that it would never end for them, and one day it would be understood that even the heroes who had been lost in the original Crisis were still out there somewhere. After his demise, Superman and Lois are shown reunited in the stars, while their bodies are buried on Earth alongside Superboy (Conner Kent), who gave his life to stop Superboy-Prime's attempts to restore his Earth.

[ 124 ] Lois later returns as a sinister Black Lantern with her husband in the Blackest Night crossover. Her first task is to kidnap Martha Kent with her spouse and stating that she and Kal-L wish for Kal-El , Conner Kent, and Martha, to be reunited with Jonathan Kent in death. She proved unable to deal with the resourcefulness of Martha Kent, and was set ablaze by the widow, but kept regenerating until Krypto intervened, ripping the black ring out of her hand and preventing regeneration for long enough to allow Superman and Conner Kent to destroy the Black Lantern powerhouses attacking Smallville , and reaching town to aid others unhindered.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] Black Lantern Lois later appears to Power Girl , claiming that she has escaped the ring's corrupting influence, and needs her help. This was just a ploy to get close enough to her husband's body, which was being held in the JSA headquarters after his black ring had been removed. Black Lantern Lois sacrifices herself to resurrect Kal-L by giving her ring to him.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] In other versions [ edit ] During the years 1942–1985 Editora Brasil-América and Editora Abril which published the Brazilian versions of Superman comics, Lois Lane's name was translated to "Miriam Lane" and later to "Miriam Lois Lane." In Spanish speaking countries, her name was translated to "Luisa Lane" in comics, TV series and movies.

Elseworlds imprint [ edit ] Superman: Speeding Bullets , a 1993 Elseworlds story based on the concept of an amalgamation of Superman and Batman . Martha and Thomas Wayne discovered Baby Kal-El, adopt and named him Bruce. Bruce discovers his superpowers when his parents are killed and create the identity Batman to fight criminals in Gotham City . Lois relocates to Gotham City after Lex Luthor buys the Daily Planet , and soon forms a relationship with Bruce Wayne, the owner of her new job at the Gotham Gazette . She later convinces him to abandon the identity of Batman and adopt a more hopeful persona of Superman.

Superman: The Feral Man of Steel , a 1994 Elseworlds special in Superman (vol. 2) Annual #6, based on The Jungle Book stories with elements from Tarzan . Raised by wolves in 19th-century Indian Jungle and is given the name K'L'L. Lois is an American girl who falls for K'L'L.

In Superman: Kal , Lady Loisse is the daughter of the late Lord Lane in the Middle Ages . She is held captive by Baron Luthor, who hopes to make her his bride. Lois falls for Kal, a blacksmith's apprentice after he wins a contest against Luthor's best fighters. She accepts his request for her hand in marriage, as payment for him forging a suit of armour for Luthor from his rocket. After their wedding, Loisse is taken from Kal by Luthor, who subsequently killed her.

[ 130 ] Lois is a teacher from the undercity in the 1996 series, Superman's Metropolis , modelled on Fritz Lang 's classic 1927 science-fiction film Metropolis .

Superman: War of the Worlds , a Superman story adapted into the H. G. Wells novel The War of the Worlds . Set in 1938, after applying for a job at the Daily Star , Clark and Lois witness the arrival of the Martian invasion of Earth. Superman dies saving the Earth, and Lois marries Lex Luthor who becomes the Vice President .

In the 1998 series, JLA: The Nail , the Kents never found Clark, Lois is selected by Green Lantern to provide the Justice League with some positive media presentation after a recent propaganda campaign focuses on the idea that many modern metahumans are alien invaders. Tracking recent kidnapped heroes to a secret base, Lois is introduced to the Kents, who provide a safe house for various heroes after Lana Lang smuggled them out of the facility, and later discovers that the true mastermind behind the conspiracy is Jimmy Olsen , mutated into a Kryptonian through genetic experiments carried out based on DNA samples found in Kal-El's crashed and abandoned ship. Jimmy is finally defeated by Kal-El, who was here raised by an Amish couple until their deaths at Olsen's hands, with Lois writing about how Kal-El's time with the Kents helped him accept his abilities and grow into the Superman he should have been. In the sequel, JLA: Another Nail Lois helps the Kents create Kal-El's 'Clark' disguise- albeit naming him 'Carl' on impulse- to give him a chance at a normal life outside of his role as Superman, reasoning that the simplicity of the glasses will stop people paying too much attention to him, while their original plan to completely cover him with a false beard would make people suspect that Kal-El had something to hide.

John Byrne 's Superman & Batman: Generations follow the life and families of Superman and Lois and their descendants over the course of three separate Elseworlds series.

Published in 1999, The Superman Monster takes elements from Mary Shelley 's novel Frankenstein where Superman is similar to the Frankenstein monster . Set in Gotham City in 1888, Eloise Edge is the daughter of Burgomaster Edge and the fiancé of scientist Vicktor Luthor who creates the creature, Klaus, using Kryptonian technology. Eloise develops an affection for Klaus, and after she is killed by a ricocheting bullet and revived in the same Matrix that created Klaus, she accompanies him to the Arctic to learn more about her new condition.

In the series, Son of Superman , fifteen years after the disappearance of Superman, Lois' teenage son Jon Kent begins to display superpowers and learns his father is Superman. Jon joins the rebel organization to fight against the corrupt U.S. government.

In JLA: Created Equal , all men on Earth except Superman and Lex Luthor are killed by a strange disease. When Lois become pregnant, Superman is forced to leave Earth after Luthor reveals he is still a carrier for the disease. Years later, Lois gives birth to her and Clark's son, Adam, who has various half-siblings conceived with the other females using sperm samples provided by Superman, but Adam accidentally kills his mother when he hugs her too hard.

Lois is a captain in the military in series Superman: Last Son of Earth and Superman: Last Stand on Krypton . A reverse of the Superman origin with Kal-El being sent from Earth to Krypton, discovering the Green Lantern power ring, and journeys to Earth and help its people fight against the dictator Luthor.

In Superman/Tarzan: Sons of the Jungle , Kal-El, the last survivor of Krypton crash-lands in East Africa and is raised by apes to become the Lord of the Jungle; and meet the adventurer John Greystoke, Jane Clayton and her friend Metropolis reporter Lois Lane.

In the 2003 Elseworlds series Superman: Red Son , Superman's escape rocket did not land in Smallville , but in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin . Lois is married to Lex Luthor but still uses the surname Lane for her articles in the Daily Planet . Superman saves her life, and the two have an instant attraction with each other; however, Lois never acts on her feelings and remains married to Luthor. When her husband is elected President, Lois becomes First Lady and serves as an unofficial American emissary to Wonder Woman . After the fall of Superman's Greater Soviet Union and presumed death, he attends his "funeral" wearing a suit and glasses. He and Lois are shown looking at each other before he departs.

Superman: True Brit , the 2004 series re-imagines the origin of Superman, where his spaceship crashed in Weston-super-Mare in England instead of the town of Smallville in America. A humorous look at Superman and the British tabloid press, it features Louisa Layne-Ferret, a hard-edged reporter. Lois herself briefly appears to offer an American perspective on Superman and invites Colin Clark to visit America.

Flashpoint [ edit ] In the alternate timeline of the Flashpoint event, a young Lois Lane sneaks into the facility where her father Sam Lane is stationed to bring him a birthday cake. During a breakout, Lois briefly encounters Kal-El and Neil Sinclair . Sinclair attempts to pursue revenge against her father for the experiments that were performed on him. Sam traps Sinclair and himself in the Phantom Zone .

[ 131 ] Years later, Lois is reporting on a fashion show in Montmartre when the Atlanteans flooded Europe. She is saved by the Amazons who take her to "New Themiscyra" (the United Kingdom). Once there, she learns that Jimmy Olsen, who dies in the flood while trying to save an old man, was an agent of Cyborg . Lois agrees to spy on the Amazons for Cyborg. When the time comes for her to undergo a near-fatal "conversion" into the Amazonian ranks, she escapes, aided by Penny Black, who is wounded by Artemis in the process.

[ 132 ] During this time, Lois walks through the remains of the London Underground and encounters Grifter and the Resistance.

[ 133 ] Lois soon joins the Resistance. After meeting up with the recovering Penny, she uses Cyborg's device to locate her missing armor at Westminster .

[ 134 ] Lois later broadcasts a message to the world that the Amazons have imprisoned people in internment. The Amazons in Westminster attempt to kill her.

[ 135 ] Lois is then rescued by Kal-El (who comes to protect her from Sinclair who has returned). During the fight, Kal-El manages to destroy Sinclair, but Lois is caught in the blast. Before Lois dies in the arms of Kal-El, she tells him to save the people.

[ 136 ] Injustice: Gods Among Us [ edit ] In the digital prequel comic to the video game Injustice: Gods Among Us , Lois is married to Superman and is pregnant with their child. While on a story at the docks with Jimmy Olsen, she is kidnapped by The Joker and Harley Quinn and taken to a submarine where they perform surgery on her. When the Joker is captured by the Justice League , he informs them he has planted a nuclear bomb in Metropolis and wired the detonator to Lois's heart, set to go off when she dies. While under the influence of Scarecrow 's kryptonite-laced fear gas, Superman mistakes Lois for Doomsday and, in an attempt to protect his family, unknowingly flies up into space with her, killing both Lois and their unborn child in the process. When she dies, a nuclear bomb obliterates Metropolis. Superman, devastated by the death of Lois and their unborn child as well as his inadvertent role in destroying Metropolis, kills the Joker and begins his campaign for world domination. Her death serves as the catalyst for Superman's new outlook, as he becomes more willing to kill to protect the world.

In Year Three of the series, Superman was put in a magic comatose sleep, where events played out differently in his dream scenario. In this dream world, Superman imagines he had broken free of the fear gas in time to save Lois and their unborn child. Batman had killed Joker to prevent the possibility of another attack on Superman and his family. Lois eventually gave birth to their daughter Lara Lane-Kent. Superman and Lois live a happy and normal life, raising their daughter Lara, who eventually develops superpowers and with her father's guidance becomes a superhero of her own. Superman is eventually awakened from his slumber by Ares and is left feeling angrier and more bitter after realizing and living the life he could have had with Lois and their child. In Year Five, in an alternate world, Lois and Clark are shown happily visiting Clark's parents, telling them that she is pregnant.

DC Comics Bombshells [ edit ] DC Comics Bombshells , a comic book series set in an alternate history of World War II , Eloisa "Lois" Lane is a mixed-race 17-year-old newspaper hawker from Metropolis' Cuban district. When criminals working for Killer Frost kidnaps her, she is rescued by the Batgirls (a group of female vigilantes) and partners with them to defeat Hugo Strange , the man who crippled her mother.

[ 137 ] Later in the series, she gets a job working at the Gotham Gazette for Vicki Vale and eventually begins dating Supergirl.

Nightwing: The New Order [ edit ] In an alternate reality, Nightwing activates a device ending an ongoing war between the super-powered beings and depowers ninety percent of the superhero population and leads to a future where superpower is outlawed. Lois is a Blue Lantern and a member of the Titans , who form a resistance against the anti-metahuman government.

Superman: Secret Identity [ edit ] Published in 2004, Superman: Secret Identity is a four-issue miniseries written by Kurt Busiek and art by Stuart Immonen . Set in the real world where superheroes only exist in comic books. Clark Kent, living in a small town in Kansas, discovers that he has the same powers as Superman, the fictional superhero he was named after. Years later, Clark moves to New York , working as a writer and secretly saving people with his abilities. He meets Lois Chaudhari, an Indian American designer on a blind date (set up by friends because their names resemble the fictional couple Clark Kent and Lois Lane). The two quickly fall in love, got married and had twin daughters Jane and Carol Kent, who also inherit their father's powers.

Gotham City Garage [ edit ] Gotham City Garage , a digital-first comic book series written by Collin Kelly and Jackson Lanzing, reimagines DC superheroes and villains as bikers in a post-apocalyptic world. Governor Lex Luthor controls the modern utopia Gotham City and the rest of the continent is a wasteland. Lois Lane runs a rebel news radio station "The Frequency". When Barda ask for help, Lois and Jimmy Olsen join her in the resistance.

Tales from the Dark Multiverse [ edit ] Tales from the Dark Multiverse: Death of Superman , an anthology series that explores alternate takes on classic DC stories set in a different world in the Dark Multiverse. After Superman is killed by Doomsday, filled with anger and grief, Lois merges with the Eradicator and gains Kryptonian powers so she can take revenge on the corrupt world and those who let Superman die.

Marvel Comics cameos [ edit ] Lois Lane has had several (mostly cameo) appearances alongside Clark Kent in past works of Marvel Comics , namely in X-Men #98, Superman vs. The Amazing Spider-Man (1976), The Mighty Thor #341 (1984), Excalibur #8, [ 138 ] Ghost Rider (vol. 3) #66 (1995), and Marvels Epilogue (September 2019).

Newspaper comic strip [ edit ] Lois Lane, Girl Reporter is a newspaper comic strip featuring Lois Lane, a spin-off from the Superman comic strip and topper to the Superman Sunday strip in the Cleveland Plain Dealer . Twelve comic strips were produced and originally ran between October 24, 1943, to February 27, 1944.

[ 139 ] Lois also appears in the Superman daily newspaper comic strip, distributed by McClure Syndicate which ran continuously from January 1939 to May 1966 with a separate Sunday strip added on November 5, 1939.

Books [ edit ] Comic books [ edit ] Lois has appeared in several self-titled miniseries, one-shots and collected editions: Lois Lane – a two issue limited series published in August and September 1986.

[ 140 ] Superman: Lois Lane – a one-shot published in June 1998 as part of the "Girlfrenzy!" Fifth-week event .

[ 141 ] Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance – a three-issue limited series published August 2011-October 2011 as part of the Flashpoint crossover.

[ 142 ] DC Archive Editions: Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane Archives Vol. 1 – a collection of Silver Age Lois Lane stories. Showcase #9-10 and Superman's Girlfriend, Lois Lane #1-8. Published in January 2012.

[ 143 ] Lois Lane: A Celebration of 75 Years – special anniversary anthology celebrating Lois Lane's 75 years in comics. Collects material from Action Comics #1-2, 6, 484, 600, 662, Adventures of Superman #631, All Star Superman #2-3, Man of Steel #2, Showcase #9, Superman #29, 33–34, 58, 168, Superman 80-page giant #1, Superman's Girlfriend, Lois Lane #1, 5, 16, 23, 42, 106, and Wonder Woman #170. Published in November 2013, the collection compiles stories from Golden Age to Silver Age and modern adventures.

[ 144 ] Superman: Lois Lane #1 – a one-shot published in April 2014.

[ 145 ] Superman: Lois and Clark – an eight-issue limited series, collects #1-8 published in August 2016.

Lois Lane – a 12-issue limited series by writer Greg Rucka and artist Mike Perkins released in July 2019 to July 2020.

Graphic novels [ edit ] Lois Lane and the Friendship Challenge [ edit ] A graphic novel by writer Grace Ellis and artist Brittney Williams , and focus on a 13-year-old Lois Lane as she navigates the confusing worlds of social media and friendship during summer break in the sleepy town of Liberty View. Released in August 2020, it is part of DC's original graphic novels for young readers .

[ 146 ] Girl Taking Over: A Lois Lane Story [ edit ] DC graphic novels for young adults , Girl Taking Over: A Lois Lane Story , written by Sarah Kuhn and art by Arielle Jovellanos was released in April 2023.

[ 147 ] Novels [ edit ] Lois Lane [ edit ] Lois is the protagonist in the young adult novel series, Lois Lane , written by Gwenda Bond and published by Switch Press . The series follows the adventures of Lois Lane as a savvy, whip-smart, and unafraid contemporary teenage high school girl. The first book in the series, Fallout , was revealed by the author in 2014 and was released on May 1, 2015. Bond revealed the second book, Double Down , in July 2015, [ 148 ] and the book was released on May 1, 2016.

[ 149 ] On the series, Bond said: "Lois is an icon, of course, a superhero without any superpowers ... except her unmatched bravery and smarts. Not to mention her sense of humor and her commitment to truth and justice. She's also one of my all-time favorite characters—which is why I jumped at the chance to write a novel featuring a teen Lois, moving to Metropolis and becoming a reporter for the first time. And, most of all, to get to put Lois front and center in the starring role, obviously." [ 150 ] Fallout – first novel in the Lois Lane series by Gwenda Bond.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] The novel features a teenage Lois Lane, an Army brat, who has lived all over the world. Lois is starting a new life in Metropolis with her family. While attending a new high school, she tries to solve a mystery as a group known as the Warheads begins to tamper with people's minds via a high-tech immersive video game. Two prequel short stories: Lois Lane: A Real Work of Art and Lois Lane: Cloudy With a Chance of Destruction was also published by Switch Press.

Fallout received positive reviews and was named by Kirkus Reviews one of the "Best Teen Books of 2015" in the science fiction and fantasy category.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Double Down – second Lois Lane novel by Gwenda Bond and published by Switch Press in May 2016.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] The book also received positive reviews.

[ 158 ] Double Down continues to follow teenage Lois Lane as she settled into her new life in Metropolis, and has a job that challenges her. Lois finds herself embroiled in a dangerous mystery that brings her closer to the dirty underbelly of Metropolis.

Triple Threat – Switch Press announced a third Lois Lane novel, Triple Threat , in August 2016.

[ 159 ] The book was released in May 2017.

Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman [ edit ] Based on the ABC television series Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman four original novels were published in 1996: Heat Wave – written by author Michael Jan Friedman and published by HarperCollins .

[ 160 ] Exile – by Michael Jan Friedman [ 161 ] Deadly Games – by Michael Jan Friedman [ 162 ] Lois & Clark: A Superman Novel – a full-length Lois and Clark novel by author C. J. Cherryh and published by Prima Lifestyles .

[ 163 ] Non-fiction [ edit ] Examining Lois Lane: The Scoop on Superman's Sweetheart – an anthology exploring Lois Lane's many incarnations and multiple adaptations from comic book to various films and television series. Analyzing the character in various media through the perspectives of feminism, gender studies, and cultural studies.

[ 164 ] Investigating Lois Lane: The Turbulent History of the Daily Planet's Ace Reporter – an in-depth look at the character and her history in different media by comic book historian Tim Hanley.

[ 165 ] In other media [ edit ] Main article: Lois Lane in other media Lois Lane has appeared in various other media adaptations including radio, animations, films, television, video games and Broadway musical.

In popular culture [ edit ] The American sitcom Seinfeld made numerous references to Lois Lane over its nine-year run: In the episode " The Outing ", Jerry tells a female reporter for a college newspaper "I was attracted to you, too. You remind me of Lois Lane".

In the episode " The Marine Biologist ", when Elaine accuses Jerry of helping a strange woman just so he can take her out on a date, Jerry replies that Superman is never suspected of such intentions when saving a woman's life, prompting Elaine to comment "Well, you're no Superman", to which Jerry responds, "Well, you're no Lois Lane".

The episode " The Mom & Pop Store " has Elaine tell Jerry she's been doing some snooping for him. "Ah! What'd you find out, Lois?" he replies.

In the episode " The Race ," Jerry dates a woman named "Lois" and enjoys frequently using her first name and slyly making Superman-related references in her presence.

In the episode " The Face Painter ". George discovers that a woman he is dating is deaf in one ear and therefore might not have heard him tell her he loves her. "Don't you see what this means?" he says. "It's like the whole thing never happened. It's like when Superman reversed the rotation of the Earth to save Lois Lane!".

The episode " The Cartoon " has Jerry make fun of Elaine's drawings, leading her to reply: "It's better than your drawings of naked Lois Lane".

The Spin Doctors ' 1991 album, Pocket Full of Kryptonite , takes its title as a reference to the album's first song, "Jimmy Olsen's Blues". The song is sung from the point of view of Daily Planet photojournalist Jimmy Olsen , who's in love with Lois Lane and jealous of Superman because of it.

In the movie, A Time to Kill (1996) Jake Brigance consults with Ellen Roark about the case and the judge is clearly annoyed and says "If Lois Lane will let us continue".

In the movie, One Fine Day (1996) the editor of the newspaper reporter Jack Taylor ( George Clooney ) has a cat named after Lois Lane.

In the song "Superman" by the band Peggy Sue , Lois Lane is mentioned in the line: "I'm in love with Lois Lane, but she doesn't even know my real name".

In the song " Rapper's Delight " by The Sugarhill Gang , she is mentioned in the line: "I said, "By the way, baby, what's your name?" She said, "I go by the name of Lois Lane". According to the song, the rapper Big Bank Hank tells Lois Lane why he would make a better boyfriend than Superman.

The 1964-67 show Underdog is a parody of Superman and its star reporter Sweet Polly Purebred is based on Lois Lane.

Keone Madrid directed and choreography a dance video titled "Lois Lane" and features a poem by Rudy Francisco "I'm a Superman, thanks to Lois Lane" which includes the line, "Superman... The Man of steel, big Blue, the last son of Krypton, he is faster than a speeding bullet, stronger than a locomotive, he has Lasers for eyes, X-ray vision and can fly without even flapping his arms, but his most notable power... was Lois Lane, the love of an amazing woman is a phone booth, that can turn a man from a spineless news reporter into a symbol of justice, into the reason why it's safe to walk outside while the sun is sleeping." [ 166 ] The That's Entertainment comic shop successfully petitioned the Worcester, Massachusetts City Council to change the name of the private street running alongside the store to "Lois Lane".

[ 167 ] On December 28, 2012, the new sign was installed. A celebration at the store followed on December 30, 2012, featuring an unveiling, free sketches of Lois by Paul Ryan , and a Lois Lane lookalike contest.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] "To Lois" a poem by Shane Koyczan is a love letter from Superman to Lois Lane, written from Clark's perspective.

[ 170 ] In the movie, Mermaids (1990) Kate Flax ( Christina Ricci ) asks her sister Charlotte ( Winona Ryder ) if her boyfriend has ever kissed her like Superman kisses Lois Lane.

"From the Backbeat" by Lucy Hale includes the line "And my dad was a Superman stick shift driver, stay at home Lois Lane beside him." "Superhero" by 5 Seconds of Summer includes the line "She met him on the staircase, like Kent and Lois Lane." In the Mexican comedy TV series El Chapulín Colorado , a parody of superhero shows, Captain Hopper says his mother is Lois Lane.

" Waiting for Superman " by Daughtry includes the line "She's just watching the clouds roll by and they spell her name like Lois Lane." "Lois Lane" a song by pop artist Noelle Bean, includes the line "I'm so happy, and now we're flying, like Superman and Lois Lane." "Lois Lane" a song by British indie rock band Farrah from the album Moustache includes the line "If you'll be my Lois Lane, I'll be your superman." Mandy Moore portrayed Lois Lane in the 2012 YouTube parody short film The Death and Return of Superman , directed and narrated by Max Landis .

In the movie It (2017), Mr. Keenes compares Beverly Marsh to Lois Lane when she tries his glasses after she tells him he looks like Clark Kent.

Lois Lane is also the name of an important character in the musical Kiss Me, Kate . She is not connected with the Superman character.

See also [ edit ] Comics portal The Dutch girl group Loïs Lane Biblical/Greek origin of name Lois Superman and Lois Lane References [ edit ] ^ Letters to the Editor, Time magazine (May 30, 1988), pp. 6–7.

^ The Jerry Siegel & Joe Shuster Interview . Nemo: the Classic Comics Library No. 2. August 1983. p. 11.

^ Siegel, Joanne.

"The True Inspiration for Lois Lane" . Superman Home Page.

Archived from the original on July 21, 2015 . Retrieved July 19, 2015 .

^ The Jerry Siegel & Joe Shuster Interview . Nemo: the Classic Comics Library No. 2. August 1983. p. 12.

^ a b The Jerry Siegel & Joe Shuster Interview . Nemo: the Classic Comics Library #2. August 1983. p. 14.

^ "1930s".

DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle . London, United Kingdom: Dorling Kindersley . 2010. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-7566-6742-9 .

^ a b c Bernstein, Robert ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( i ). "Introducing ... Lois Lane's Parents!" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 13 (November 1, 1959).

^ Byrne, John ( w ), Byrne, John ( p ), Beatty, John ( i ). "The Power That Failed!" Superman , vol. 2, no. 19, p. 2/6 (July 1, 1988). DC Comics.

^ "DC Comics: Lois Lane" . DC Comics. March 25, 2015 . Retrieved October 20, 2016 .

^ a b Miller, John Jackson (n.d.).

"1962 Comic Book Sales Figures" . Comichron: The Comics Chronicles.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2014.

^ a b Ordway, Jerry ( w ), Jurgens, Dan ; Breeding, Brett ; Gammill, Kerry ; Swan, Curt ; Ordway, Jerry; Byrne, John ( p ), Breeding, Brett; Janke, Dennis ; Byrne, John; Ordway, Jerry ( i ). "Krisis of the Krimson Kryptonite, Part 4: The Human Factor" Superman , vol. 2, no. 50 (December 1, 1990).

^ a b Manning, Matthew K. "1990s" in Dolan, p. 247: "When [Clark Kent] proposed to his longtime love Lois Lane, he did so in a modest fashion...Lois accepted and comic book history was made, served up by writer/artist Jerry Ordway." ^ Jurgens, Dan; Kesel, Karl ; Michelinie, David ; Simonson, Louise ; Stern, Roger ( w ), Byrne, John; Gammill, Kerry; Kane, Gil ; Immonen, Stuart ; Ryan, Paul ; Bogdanove, Jon ; Dwyer, Kieron ; Grummett, Tom ; Giordano, Dick ; Mooney, Jim ; Swan, Curt; Cardy, Nick ; Plastino, Al ; Kitson, Barry ; Frenz, Ron ; Jurgens, Dan ( p ), Austin, Terry ; Anderson, Murphy ; McLeod, Bob ; Marzan Jr., Jose ; Breeding, Brett; Janke, Dennis; Hazelwood, Doug ; Rodier, Denis ; Thibert, Art ; Pérez, George ; Guice, Jackson ; Cardy, Nick; Plastino, Al; McCarthy, Ray; Rubinstein, Joe ; Ordway, Jerry ( i ). "The Wedding Album" Superman: The Wedding Album , no. 1 (December 1, 1996).

^ a b Manning "1990s" in Dolan, p. 275: " The behind-the-scenes talent on the monumental issue appropriately spanned several generations of the Man of Tomorrow's career. Written by Dan Jurgens, Karl Kesel, David Michelinie, Louise Simonson, and Roger Stern, the one-shot featured the pencils of John Byrne, Gil Kane, Stuart Immonen, Paul Ryan, Jon Bogdanove, Kieron Dwyer, Tom Grummett, Dick Giordano, Jim Mooney, Curt Swan, Nick Cardy, Al Plastino, Barry Kitson, Ron Frenz, and Dan Jurgens." ^ Fleisher, Michael L. (2007).

The Original Encyclopedia of Comic Book Heroes, Volume Three: Superman . DC Comics. pp.

145– 162, 409– 420.

ISBN 978-1-4012-1389-3 .

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Shuster, Joe ( p ), Sikela, John ( i ). "Man Or Superman?" Superman , no. 17 (July–August 1942).

^ Cameron, Don ( w ), Dobrotka, Ed ( p ). "Lois Lane, Girl Reporter story–The Suicidal Swain" Superman , no. 28 (June 1, 1944).

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Sikela, John ( p ), Dobrotka, Ed ( i ). "Cinderella – a la Superman" Action Comics , no. 59 (April 1, 1943).

^ Woolfolk, Bill ( w ), Boring, Wayne ( p ), Kaye, Stan ( i ). "Susie's Enchanted Isle" Superman , no. 95 (February 1, 1955).

^ Binder, Otto ( w ), Boring, Wayne ( p ), Kaye, Stan ( i ). "The Shrinking Superman!" Action Comics , no. 245 (October 1, 1958).

^ Bernstein, Robert ( w ), Boring, Wayne ( p ), Kaye, Stan ( i ). "The Man Who Married Lois Lane" Superman , no. 136 (April 1, 1960).

^ Irvine, Alex "1950s" in Dolan, p. 85: "The future title Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane got a tryout in issues #9 and #10 of Showcase , when Lois Lane stepped in as the lead feature." ^ Irvine "1950s" in Dolan, p. 89: "Following her successful test run in the pages of Showcase #9 and #10, Lois Lane got her own title Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane in which Superman was ever the prankster." ^ Voger, Mark; Voglesong, Kathy (2003).

"Front Page Romance" .

Hero Gets Girl!: The Life & Art of Kurt Schaffenberger . Raleigh, North Carolina: TwoMorrows Publishing . pp.

43– 45.

ISBN 1-893905-29-2 .

^ Eury, Michael (2006).

The Krypton Companion . Raleigh, North Carolina: TwoMorrows Publishing. p. 67.

ISBN 1-893905-61-6 .

^ Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , vol. 1, no. 86 (September–October 1968).

National Periodical Publications, Inc.

.

^ Miller, John Jackson (n.d.).

"1965 Comic Book Sales Figures" . Comichron: The Comics Chronicles.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2015.

^ Dorfman, Leo ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( i ). "The Catwoman's Black Magic!" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 70 (November 1, 1966).

^ Schwartz, Alvin ( w ), Swan, Curt ( p ), Kaye, Stan ( i ). "Batman – Double for Superman!" World's Finest Comics , no. 71 (July–August 1954).

^ McAvennie, Michael "1960s" in Dolan, p. 128: "She started trading in her generic blouse and pencil skirt combinations for a "mod" wardrobe filled with printed dresses, go-go boots, mini skirts, and hot pants." ^ Dorfman, Leo ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Costanza, Pete ( i ). "Courtship, Kryptonian Style!" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 78 (October 1, 1967).

^ The Daring New Adventures of Supergirl at the Grand Comics Database ^ Greenberger, Robert; Pasko, Martin (2010).

The Essential Superman Encyclopedia . Del Rey. pp.

182– 188.

ISBN 978-0-345-50108-0 .

^ a b Wolfman, Marv ( w ), Oksner, Bob ( p ), Colletta, Vince ( i ). "Have You Ever Told Me the Story of My Life?" Superman Family , no. 206 (March–April 1981).

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( i ). "Lois Lane's Childhood" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 26 (July 1, 1961).

^ Finger, Bill ( w ), Wenzel, Al ( p ), Roussos, George ( i ). "How Clark Kent Met Lois Lane" Adventure Comics , no. 128 (May 1, 1948).

^ Binder, Otto ( w ), Papp, George ( p ), Papp, George ( i ). "Superboy Meets Lois Lane" Adventure Comics , no. 261 (June 1, 1959).

^ Binder, Otto ( w ), Sikela, John ( p ), Sikela, John ( i ). "Clark Kent, Cub Reporter" Superboy , no. 63 (March 1, 1958).

^ Dorfman, Leo ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( i ). "Lois Lane's College Scoops" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 55 (February 1, 1965).

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Plastino, Al ( p ), Plastino, Al ( i ). "How Perry White Hired Clark Kent!" Superman , no. 133 (November 1, 1959).

^ Dorfman, Leo ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( i ). "Get Out of My Life, Superman!" Superman's Girl Friend , no. 80 (January 1, 1968).

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( a ), Vivian Berg ( let ), Weisinger, Mort ( ed ).

"Lois Lane's Super-Perfect Crime" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 59 (August 1, 1965).

National Periodical Publications, Inc.

.

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( a ), Weisinger, Mort ( ed ).

"The Wife of Superman's Foe! Part 1: The Bride of Luthor!" Superman's Girl Friend, Lois Lane , no. 34 (July 1, 1962).

National Periodical Publications, Inc.

.

^ Maggin, Elliot S. (1978).

"Chapter 18: The Sociologist" .

Superman: Last Son of Krypton . Arrow Books.

^ "Savage Awakening" by Marv Wolfman, Action Comics , Volume 1, #542. April 1983) ^ Superman Vol. 1 #385, 386 (July, August 1983) ^ Newell, Mindy ( w ), Morrow, Gray ( p ), Morrow, Gray ( i ). "Chapter I: Ignorance Was Bliss/Chapter II: Dark Realities" Lois Lane , no. 1 (August 1, 1986).

^ Newell, Mindy ( w ), Morrow, Gray ( p ), Morrow, Gray ( i ). "Chapter Three: Quicksand/Chapter Four: Quicksand!" Lois Lane , no. 2 (September 1, 1986).

^ Ordway, Jerry ( w ), Ordway, Jerry ( p ), Janke, Dennis ( i ). "The Ledge" The Adventures of Superman , no. 448 (December 1, 1988).

^ Ordway, Jerry ( w ), Ordway, Jerry ( p ), Janke, Dennis ( i ). "Triple Threat" The Adventures of Superman , no. 450 (January 1, 1989).

^ Stern, Roger ( w ), McLeod, Bob ( p ), McLeod, Bob ( i ). "Secrets in the Night" Action Comics , no. 662 (February 1, 1991). DC Comics.

^ Manning "1990s" in Dolan, p. 249: "With their nuptials looming, Clark thought it was time to reveal his dual identity to the love of his life, in this landmark issue by writer Roger Stern and artist Bob McLeod." ^ Dimino, Russ (n.d.).

"The Many Faces Of... Super-Weddings!" . KryptonSite.com.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2012.

^ McNamara, John (writer); Lange, Michael (director) (October 6, 1996). "Swear to God, This Time We're Not Kidding".

Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman . Season 4. Episode 3.

ABC .

^ Rucka, Greg ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ( p ), Jose, Ruy; Ferreira, Julio ( i ). "The Sleepers Part I" Action Comics , no. 875 (May 1, 2009).

^ Gates, Sterling ( w ), Igle, Jamal ( p ), Sibal, Jon ( i ).

Supergirl , vol. 5, no. 42 (August 1, 2009).

^ Rucka, Greg; Trautmann, Eric ( w ), Pérez, Pere ( p ), Bergantiño, Javier ( i ). "Divine Spark Part 2" Action Comics , no. 884 (February 1, 2010).

^ Robinson, James; Gates, Sterling ( w ), Igle, Jamal ( p ), Sibal, Jon ( i ). "Superman: War of the Supermen Part 1: The Battle for New Krypton" Superman: War of the Supermen , no. 1 (July 1, 2010).

^ Robinson, James; Gates, Sterling ( w ), Barrows, Eddy; Urbano, Fernandez; Alberto, Carlos ( p ), Mayer, J. P.; Bergantiño, Javier ( i ). "Superman: War of the Supermen Part 4: The Battle for Survival" Superman: War of the Supermen , no. 4 (July 1, 2010).

^ Gates, Sterling ( w ), Igle, Jamal ( p ), Sibal, Jon ( i ). "Day of the Dollmaker, Part One: Toying With Emotions" Supergirl , vol. 5, no. 58 (January 1, 2011).

^ Gates, Sterling ( w ), Igle, Jamal ( p ), Sibal, Jon; Riggs, Robin ( i ). "Day of the Dollmaker, Part Two: End of the Line" Supergirl , vol. 5, no. 59 (February 1, 2011).

^ Wilson, G. Willow ( w ), Oliveira, Leandro ( p ), Wong, Walden ( i ). "The Road Least Traveled – A Grounded Interlude" Superman , no. 704 (December 1, 2010).

^ Straczynski, J. Michael ( w ), Dias, Wellington; Barrows, Eddy ( p ), Mayer, J. P. ( i ). "Grounded Part Four: Visitation Rights" Superman , no. 705 (January 1, 2011).

^ Straczynski, J. Michael; Roberson, Chris ( w ), Goldman, Alan ( p ), Ferreira, Eber ( i ). "Grounded Part Five" Superman , no. 707 (March 1, 2011).

^ Straczynski, J. Michael; Roberson, Chris ( w ), Neves, Diogenes; Barrows, Eddy; Igle, Jamal ( p ), Albert, Oclair; Mayer, J. P.; Sibal, Jon ( i ). "Grounded Part Eleven" Superman , no. 713 (September 1, 2011).

^ Straczynski, J. Michael; Roberson, Chris ( w ), Igle, Jamal ( p ), Sibal, Jon; Riggs, Robin ( i ). "Grounded Finale" Superman , no. 714 (October 1, 2011).

^ Pérez, George ( w ), Pérez, George ( p ), Merino, Jesus ( i ). "What Price Tomorrow?" Superman , vol. 3, no. 1 (November 1, 2011).

^ Lobdell, Scott ( w ), Jurgens, Dan ( p ), Rapmund, Norm ( i ). "The Last Byline" Superman Annual , vol. 3, no. 2 (September 1, 2013).

^ Lobdell, Scott ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ; Merino, Jesus ( p ), Merino, Jesus ( i ). "Psi-War, Part One" Superman , vol. 3, no. 23 (October 1, 2013).

^ Johnson, Mike ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ( p ), Ferreira, Eber ( i ). "Psi-War, Part Three" Superman , vol. 3, no. 24 (December 1, 2013).

^ Lobdell, Scott ( w ), Lashley, Ken ( p ), Lashley, Ken ( i ). "Brain Drain" Superman , vol. 3, no. 26 (February 1, 2014).

^ Lobdell, Scott ( w ), Benes, Ed ( p ), Benes, Ed ( i ). "Feeding Frenzy" Superman , vol. 3, no. 27 (March 1, 2014).

^ Bennett, Marguerite ( w ), Lupacchino, Emanuela; Hetrick, Meghan; Guara, Ig; Neves, Diogenes ( p ), Ortego, Guillermo; Hetrick, Meghan; Jose, Ruy; Deering, Marc ( i ). "Nostalgia" Superman: Lois Lane , no. 1 (April 1, 2014).

^ Azzarello, Brian ; Lemire, Jeff ; Jurgens, Dan; Giffen, Keith ( w ), Merino, Jesus ( p ), Green, Dan ( i ). "You haven't said a word since we left New York" The New 52: Futures End , no. 2 (July 1, 2014).

^ Siegel, Lucas (November 11, 2014).

"DC's Convergence Week One: Donna Troy, Oracle, Married Superman, Montoya Question, More" .

Newsarama . Archived from the original on November 12, 2014.

^ Jurgens, Dan ( w ), Jurgens, Dan ( p ), Rapmund, Norm ( i ).

Convergence: Superman , no. 2 (July 1, 2015).

^ Yehl, Joshua (July 10, 2015).

"Comic-Con: Lois and Clark Return For New Superman comic - With Their Son!" .

IGN .

Archived from the original on November 3, 2015 . Retrieved July 20, 2015 .

^ Jurgens, Dan ( w ), Weeks, Lee ( p ). "Arrival" Superman: Lois and Clark , no. 1 (December 1, 2015).

^ Schedeen, Jess (April 13, 2016).

"11 Cool Things We Learned From DC's Rebirth Catalog" .

IGN .

Archived from the original on April 24, 2016 . Retrieved May 7, 2016 .

^ Jurgens, Dan ( w ), Segovia, Stephen ( p ), Thibert, Art ( i ). "Lois Lane, Back at the Planet Part 1" Action Comics , no. 965 (December 1, 2016).

^ Jurgens, Dan ( w ), Segovia, Stephen ( p ), Thibert, Art ( i ). "Lois Lane, Back at the Planet Part 2" Action Comics , no. 966 (December 1, 2016).

^ BROWN, TRACY (April 12, 2019).

"DC's new Lois Lane and Jimmy Olsen comic-book series will debut in July" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Betancourt, David (September 13, 2019).

"Lois Lane is now a White House reporter — and an 'enemy of the people' " .

The Washington Post .

^ Siegel, Jerry ( w ), Shuster, Joe ( p ), Shuster, Joe ( i ). "Lois Lane -- Superwoman" Action Comics , no. 60 (May 1, 1943).

^ Schwartz, Alvin ( w ), Sikela, John ( p ), Roussos, George ( i ). "Lois Lane, Superwoman!" Superman , no. 45 (March–April 1947).

^ Issue #156 — released May 1951 ^ Bridwell, E. Nelson ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Giella, Joe ( i ). "The Turnabout Powers" Superman Family , no. 207 (May–June 1981).

^ Conway, Gerry ( w ), Vosburg, Mike ( p ), Smith, Bob ( i ). "Crisis on Earth-3 (Reprise)!" The Secret Society of Super-Villains , no. 14 (April–May 1978).

^ Wolfman, Marv ( w ), Pérez, George ( p ), Giordano, Dick ( i ). "The Summoning" Crisis on Infinite Earths , no. 1 (April 1, 1985).

^ Morrison, Grant ( w ), Quitely, Frank ( p ), Quitely, Frank ( i ).

JLA: Earth 2 (August 18, 2000).

^ Morrison, Grant ( w ), Quitely, Frank ( p ), Grant, Jamie ( i ). "Superman's Forbidden Room" All-Star Superman , no. 2 (February 1, 2006).

^ Morrison, Grant ( w ), Quitely, Frank ( p ), Grant, Jamie ( i ). "Sweet Dreams, Superwoman" All-Star Superman , no. 3 (May 1, 2006).

^ Dyce, Andrew (August 11, 2016).

"DC's New Superwoman Unlocks Secret of Superman's Death" .

Screen Rant .

Archived from the original on October 6, 2016.

^ Younis, Steve (December 11, 2024).

"Mild Mannered Reviews – Superwoman Special #1 (One Shot)" .

Superman Homepage . Retrieved December 12, 2024 .

^ Aguilar, Matthew (April 26, 2025).

"One of DC's Most Powerful Heroes Just Lost Their Powers" .

ComicBook.com . Retrieved June 4, 2025 .

^ Bennett, Marguerite; Taylor, Tom ( w ), Smith, Andy; To, Marcus; ( p ), Hanna, Scott ( i ). "Collision" Earth 2 , no. 27 (December 1, 2014).

^ Levitz, Paul ( w ), Dougherty, Jed ( p ), Dougherty, Jed ( i ).

Worlds' Finest , no. 32 (May 1, 2015).

^ Taylor, Tom ( w ), Scott, Nicola ( p ), Scott, Trevor ( i ). "The Dark Age Begins!" Earth 2 , no. 17 (January 1, 2014).

^ Taylor, Tom ( w ), Scott, Nicola ( p ), Scott, Trevor ( i ). "The Kryptonian, Part Six" Earth 2 , no. 26 (October 1, 2014).

^ Taylor, Tom ( w ), Scott, Nicola ( p ), Scott, Trevor; Alvert, Oclair ( i ). "The Dark Age, Part 3" Earth 2 , no. 19 (March 1, 2014).

^ Taylor, Tom ( w ), Scott, Nicola ( p ), Scott, Trevor ( i ). "The Kryptonian, Part Two" Earth 2 , no. 22 (June 1, 2014).

^ Bennett, Marguerite; Johnson, Mike; Wilson, Daniel ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ; Jimenez, Jorge; Siqueira, Paulo; Syaf, Ardian ( p ), Ferreira, Eber; Hope, Sandra; Jimenez, Jorge; Miki, Danny; Smith, Cam ( i ). "Apokolips Now" Earth 2: World's End , no. 1 (December 1, 2014).

^ Wilson, Daniel H.; Bennett, Marguerite; Johnston, Mike ( w ), Kirkham, Tyler; Sivesay, John; Segovia, Stephen; Paz, Jason; Rocha, Robson; Ortego, Guillermo; Pansica, Eduardo; Wong, Walden ( p ). "All Good Deeds..." Earth 2: Worlds End , no. 9 (February 1, 2015).

^ Wilson, Daniel H.; Bennett, Marguerite; Johnston, Mike ( w ), Kirkham, Tyler; Silva, R. B.; Pansica, Eduardo; Jimenez, Jorge; Rocha, Robson; Barrows, Eddy ( p ). "Sacrifice" Earth 2: Worlds End , no. 15 (March 1, 2015).

^ Levitz, Paul ( w ), Dougherty, Jed ( p ), Hanna, Scott ( i ). "The Secret History of Superman & Batman Part One" Worlds' Finest , no. 27 (December 1, 2014).

^ Wilson, Daniel H.

( w ), Jimenez, Jorge ( p ), Jimenez, Jorge ( i ).

Earth 2: Society , no. 1 (August 1, 2015).

^ Santori-Griffith, Matt (February 5, 2014).

"Tom Taylor Talks Batman and the Cast of Earth 2 " .

Comicosity | Comic Book News, Reviews, Previews, and Interviews . Comicosity.

Archived from the original on August 18, 2015 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 .

^ Roger, Vaneta (November 22, 2013).

" 'Unfridging Lois' Just One of the Surprises Tom Taylor Plans For DC's Earth 2 " .

Newsarama . Archived from the original on July 22, 2015 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 .

^ Santori-Griffith, Matt (May 6, 2014).

"C2E2 Interview: Nicola Scott on Earth 2 " .

Comicosity | Comic Book News, Reviews, Previews, and Interviews . Comicosity.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2015 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 .

^ Binder, Otto ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ). "The 10 Feats of Elastic Lass!" Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane , no. 23 (February 1, 1961).

^ Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ). "The Super-Life of Lois Lane!" Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane , no. 11 (February 1, 1964).

^ Finger, Bill ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ). "Lois Lane's X-Ray Vision!" Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane , no. 28 (October 1, 1961).

^ Coleman, Jerry ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ). "Lois Lane's Super-Dream" Superman , no. 125 (November 1, 1958).

^ Dorfman, Leo ( w ), Novick, Irv ( p ). "When Lois was More Super than Superman!" Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane , no. 85 (August 1, 1968).

^ Hamilton, Edmond ( w ), Swan, Curt ( p ). "Lois Lane, the Super-Maid of Krypton!" Superman , no. 158 (February 1, 1963).

^ Schultz, Mark ( w ), Guichet, Yvel ( p ). "The Pantheon" Superman: The Man of Steel , no. 126-127 (July 2002, August 2002).

^ Lobdell, Scott ( w ), Jurgens, Dan ( p ). "The Last Byline" Superman Annual , no. 2 (September 1, 2013).

^ O'Neil, Dennis ( w ), Dillin, Dick ( p ), Greene, Sid ( i ). "Star Light, Star Bright—Death Star I See Tonight!" Justice League of America , no. 73 (August 1, 1969).

^ Bates, Cary ( w ), Swan, Curt ( p ), Giella, Joe ( i ). "Superman Takes a Wife" Action Comics , no. 484 (June 1, 1978).

^ Bridwell, E. Nelson ( w ), Schaffenberger, Kurt ( p ), Giella, Joe ( i ). "Susie's Flying Saucer" Superman Family , no. 199 (January–February 1980).

^ Infinite Crisis Secret Files #1. DC Comics.

^ Infinite Crisis #1. DC Comics.

^ Infinite Crisis #5. DC Comics.

^ Infinite Crisis #7. DC Comics.

^ Robinson, James ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ( p ), Jose, Ruy; Ferreira, Julio ( i ). "A Sleepy Little Town" Blackest Night: Superman , no. 1 (October 1, 2009).

^ Robinson, James ( w ), Barrows, Eddy ( p ), Jose, Ruy; Ferreira, Julio ( i ). "Psycho Piracy!" Blackest Night: Superman , no. 2 (November 1, 2009).

^ Robinson, James ( w ), Barrows, Eddy; Goldman, Allan ( p ), Jose, Ruy; Ferreira, Eber ( i ). "The Long Dark Knight" Blackest Night: Superman , no. 3 (December 1, 2009).

^ Robinson, James ( w ), Barrows, Eddy; Marz, Marcos ( p ), Ferreira, Julio; Del Negro, Luciana; Jose, Ruy ( i ). "Lost Souls" Blackest Night: JSA , no. 1 (February 1, 2010).

^ Robinson, James; Bedard, Tony ( w ), Barrows, Eddy; Marz, Marcos ( p ), Ferreira, Julio; Ferreira, Eber; Del Negro, Luciana ( i ). "Troubled Souls" Blackest Night: JSA , no. 2 (March 1, 2010).

^ Gibbons, Dave ( w ), García-López, José Luis ( p ), García-López, José Luis ( i ). "Superman: Kal" Superman: Kal , no. 1 (August 18, 1995).

^ Snyder, Scott ; Francis, Lowell ( w ), Ha, Gene ( p ), Ha, Gene ( i ). "In These Small Hands" Flashpoint: Project Superman , no. 2 (September 1, 2011).

^ Abnett, Dan ; Lanning, Andy ( w ), Nunez, Eddie ( p ), Ho, Don ( i ). "Breaking News" Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance , no. 1 (August 1, 2011).

^ John, Geoff ( w ), Kubert, Andy ( p ), Hope, Sandra ( i ). "Flashpoint Chapter Three of Five" Flashpoint , no. 3 (September 1, 2011).

^ Abnett, Dan; Lanning, Andy ( w ), Gugliotta, Gianluca ( p ), Gugliotta, Gianluca ( i ). "Live and Exclusive" Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance , no. 2 (September 1, 2011).

^ Abnett, Dan; Lanning, Andy ( w ), Duce, Christian ( p ), Wong, Walden ( i ). "Kill the Story" Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance , no. 3 (October 1, 2011).

^ Snyder, Scott; Francis, Lowell ( w ), Ha, Gene ( p ), Ha, Gene ( i ). "Battle's Eve" Flashpoint: Project Superman , no. 3 (October 1, 2011).

^ Bennett, Marguerite ( w ), Andolfo, Mirka; Qualano, Pasquale ( p ), Andolfo, Mirka; Qualano, Pasquale ( i ). "Batgirls Swing Again!" DC Comics Bombshells , no. 13 (July 1, 2016).

^ Lamar, Cyriaque: "10 Weird Times Marvel and DC Unofficially Crossed Over". Gizmodo, January 1, 2012.

^ Kleefeld, Sean (January 14, 2014).

"On History: Lois Lane, Girl Reporter" .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2015.

^ Lois Lane at the Grand Comics Database ^ Superman: Lois Lane at the Grand Comics Database ^ Flashpoint: Lois Lane and the Resistance at the Grand Comics Database ^ DC Archive Editions: Superman's Girlfriend Lois Lane Archives Vol. 1 .

DC Comics . January 2012.

ISBN 978-1401233150 .

^ Lois Lane: A Celebration of 75 Years , DC Comics , November 2013, ISBN 978-1401247034 ^ Superman: Lois Lane at the Grand Comics Database ^ "DC Comics: LOIS LANE AND THE FRIENDSHIP CHALLENGE" .

DC Comics . November 25, 2019 . Retrieved May 30, 2020 .

^ "DC Announces New Original Young Adult Graphic Novels for Spring 2023" .

DC Comics . May 27, 2022 . Retrieved May 29, 2022 .

^ Bond, Gwenda (July 22, 2015).

"That Little Sequel Question Answered (Newsy!) + Twitter Chat" . Gwenda Bond.

Archived from the original on September 8, 2015 . Retrieved July 24, 2015 .

^ Double Down (Lois Lane, #2) . Goodreads.

ISBN 978-1-63079-038-7 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ Bond, Gwenda (August 26, 2014).

"The Secret Is Out ... (!!!)" . Gwenda Bond.

Archived from the original on July 24, 2015 . Retrieved December 6, 2014 .

^ McMillan, Graeme (August 26, 2014).

"Lois Lane Is Your New YA Fiction Hero" .

The Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2014 . Retrieved December 6, 2014 .

^ Bond, Gwenda (May 2015).

Lois Lane: Fallout . Switch Press.

ISBN 978-1630790059 .

^ "Fallout" .

Kirkus Reviews .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2015 . Retrieved September 15, 2015 .

^ "Best Teen Books of 2015" .

Kirkus Reviews . Retrieved December 18, 2015 .

^ Bond, Gwenda (May 2016).

Lois Lane: Double Down . Switch Press.

ISBN 978-1630790387 .

^ Price, Matthew (August 24, 2015).

"New Lois Lane novel announced" .

The Oklahoman . Oklahoma City, Oklahoma . Retrieved August 29, 2015 .

^ Cox, Carolyn (August 24, 2015).

"Lois Lane to Return in New YA Novel from Gwenda Bond" . The Mary Sue.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved August 29, 2015 .

^ "Kirkus Reviews: DOUBLE DOWN" .

Kirkus Reviews . Retrieved May 3, 2016 .

^ McMillan, Graeme (August 3, 2016).

"Lois Lane Becomes a 'Triple Threat' in 2017 With New YA Novel" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 5, 2016 .

^ Friedman, Michael Jan (April 1996).

Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman: Heat Wave . New York, New York: HarperCollins .

ISBN 0061010618 .

^ Friedman, Michael Jan (May 1996).

Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman: Exile . New York, New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 0061010626 .

^ Friedman, Michael Jan (June 1996).

Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman: Deadly Games . New York, New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 0061010634 .

^ Cherryh, C. J (August 1996).

Lois & Clark: A Superman Novel . New York, New York: Prima Lifestyles .

ISBN 0761504826 .

^ Farghaly, Nadine (September 2013).

Examining Lois Lane: The Scoop on Superman's Sweetheart . Lanham, Maryland: Scarecrow Press, Inc.

ISBN 978-0810892378 .

^ Hanley, Tim (March 2016).

Investigating Lois Lane: The Turbulent History of the Daily Planet's Ace Reporter .

Chicago Review Press .

ISBN 978-1613733325 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Madrid, Keone (November 15, 2012).

"Lois Lane" .

YouTube .

^ "That's entertaining! Park Ave. store lands 'Lois Lane' " .

Telegram & Gazette . Worcester, Massachusetts. September 5, 2012.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved September 3, 2012 .

^ Semon, Craig S. (December 26, 2012).

"City street becomes 'Lois Lane' Will small byway take on super powers?" .

Telegram & Gazette . Worcester, Massachusetts.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved January 1, 2013 .

^ Semon, Craig S. (December 31, 2012).

"Lois Lane takes the spotlight" .

Telegram & Gazette . Worcester, Massachusetts.

Archived from the original on April 2, 2015 . Retrieved January 1, 2013 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Koyczan, Shane (May 15, 2015).

"To Lois" . YouTube.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lois Lane .

Official website Lois Lane at DC Database Lois Lane at Smallville Wiki v t e Justice League characters Founding members Pre-New 52/ Rebirth Aquaman Batman Flash / Barry Allen Green Lantern / Hal Jordan Martian Manhunter Superman Wonder Woman Post-New 52/ Rebirth Aquaman Batman Cyborg Flash / Barry Allen Green Lantern / Hal Jordan Superman Wonder Woman Recurring members Adam Strange Agent Liberty Amazing-Man / Will Everett III Ambush Bug Animal Man Aqualad Atom Ray Palmer Ryan Choi Atom Smasher Aztek Batgirl/Oracle Batwing Batwoman Big Barda Black Adam Black Canary Black Condor Black Lightning Black Orchid Bloodwynd Booster Gold Blue Beetle Ted Kord Jaime Reyes Blue Devil Blue Jay Bulleteer Captain Atom Captain Marvel / Shazam Catwoman Commander Steel / Hank Heywood III Congorilla Crimson Fox Detective Chimp Doctor Fate Doctor Light Donna Troy Element Girl Elongated Man Etrigan the Demon Fire Firestorm The Flash Jay Garrick Wally West General Glory Geo-Force Godiva Green Arrow Green Lantern Guy Gardner Jade John Stewart Kyle Rayner Simon Baz Jessica Cruz Sojourner Mullein Guardian Gypsy Harley Quinn Hawkman Carter Hall Katar Hol Hawkgirl and Hawkwoman Shiera Sanders Hall Shayera Hol Kendra Saunders Hourman Rick Tyler Matthew Tyler (android) Huntress Ice Glacier Jesse Quick John Constantine Kasumi Katana Lightray Lobo Madame Xanadu Manitou Dawn Manitou Raven Maxima Maya Mera Metamorpho Mister Miracle Mr Terrific Moon Maiden Mystek Naomi McDuffie Obsidian Orion Pandora Phantom Stranger Plastic Man Power Girl Question Raven Ray Red Arrow Red Tornado Robin/Nightwing Rocket Red Shade, the Changing Man Silver Sorceress Snapper Carr Starfire Stargirl Starman Mikaal Tomas Prince Gavyn Will Payton Jack Knight Steel Super-Chief Superboy Supergirl Swamp Thing Tasmanian Devil Tomorrow Woman Triumph Vibe Vixen Wonder Girl Zatanna Zauriel Other characters Supporting characters Alfred Pennyworth Arella A.R.G.U.S.

Carol Ferris Highfather Hippolyta Iris West James Gordon Jimmy Olsen Lois Lane Lucius Fox Pariah Perry White Steve Trevor Sue Dibny Vicki Vale Allies Amazonians Atlanteans Birds of Prey Doom Patrol Gotham City Police Department Justice League Dark John Constantine Deadman Detective Chimp Etrigan the Demon Swamp Thing Zatanna Justice Society of America Lantern Corps Guardians of the Universe Zamarons Blue Lantern Corps Green Lantern Corps Indigo Tribe White Lantern Corps Legion of Super-Heroes Marvel/Shazam Family New Gods Outsiders S.T.A.R. Labs Teen Titans Robin Starfire Beast Boy Cyborg Raven Young Justice Neutral characters Amanda Waller Black Adam Captain Cold Frankenstein Jonah Hex Killer Frost Larfleeze Lobo Harley Quinn Poison Ivy Star Sapphire Suicide Squad Enemies Central rogues Amazo Anti-Monitor Black Adam Black Manta Brainiac Captain Cold Cheetah Darkseid Deathstroke Despero Doctor Destiny Doctor Light Doomsday Eclipso Felix Faust Gorilla Grodd Joker Kanjar Ro Lex Luthor Libra Mongul Nekron Neron Ocean Master Professor Ivo Prometheus Queen Bee Queen of Fables Sinestro Starro Steppenwolf T. O. Morrow Trigon Ultra-Humanite Vandal Savage Other supervillains Amos Fortune Black Hand Blockbuster Brain Storm Circe David Graves Deadshot Doctor Polaris Doctor Sivana Epoch Funky Flashman Gamemnae General Wade Eiling Gentleman Ghost Gog Hyathis Imperiex Key King Kull Ma'alefa'ak Magog Manchester Black Manga Khan Manhunter Matter Master Maxwell Lord Merlyn Morgaine le Fey Nebula Man OMAC Paragon Per Degaton Ra's al Ghul Rama Khan Red King Reverse-Flash Shaggy Man Siren Solaris Solomon Grundy Sonar Starbreaker Weapons Master Weather Wizard Wizard Organizations Aryan Brigade Axis Amerika Brotherhood of Evil Cadre Crime Syndicate of America Darkseid's Elite Fearsome Five Female Furies Injustice League Kobra Lantern Corps Black Lantern Corps Orange Lantern Corps Red Lantern Corps Sinestro Corps League of Assassins Legion of Doom Manhunters Parademons Phantom Zone Villains Rogues Royal Flush Gang Secret Six Secret Society of Super Villains White Martians Alternative versions Alternate versions of the Justice League Extreme Justice Just'a Lotta Animals Justice Guild of America Justice League 3000 Justice League Dark Justice League Elite Justice League Europe Justice League International Justice League Queer Justice League Task Force Justice League United Justice Legion Alpha Justice Lords Super Buddies Super Jrs.

Young Justice Others Superman Wonder Woman In other media DC Extended Universe Superman Batman Wonder Woman Flash Aquaman Category v t e Superman Jerry Siegel Joe Shuster Other writers and artists Characters Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor Jimmy Olsen Perry White Supergirl Jonathan and Martha Kent Jon Kent Supporting characters Enemies Locations Fortress of Solitude Krypton Kandor Metropolis Daily Planet Phantom Zone Smallville History and themes Character and cast Dynasty Supermen of America Kryptonian Origin Publication history Action Comics #1 Action Comics #775 Action Comics #1000 Superman and Lois Lane Symbol Superboy (Kal-El) Ongoing publications Action Comics Power Girl Batman/Superman: World's Finest Superman In other media In film Related Alternative versions of Superman Metropolis, Illinois Superman (gene) Joanne Siegel Category v t e Superman characters Superman family By codename Superman Superboy Supergirl Superwoman Nightwing Flamebird Steel Power Girl By public identity Clark Kent Conner Kent Jon Kent Sodam Yat Mon-El Kara Zor-El Matrix Linda Danvers Laurel Gand Lois Lane Lucy Lane Lana Lang Luma Lynai Donna Troy Kristin Wells Chris Kent/Lor-Zod Thara Ak-Var David Connor John Henry Irons Natasha Irons Kong Kenan Kara Zor-L Pets Krypto Streaky the Supercat Beppo Comet Supporting characters Lois Lane Jimmy Olsen Jor-El Lara Jonathan and Martha Kent Perry White Lana Lang Batman Lucy Lane Lori Lemaris Gangbuster Zor-El Alura Dubbilex Sam Lane Lyla Lerrol Pete Ross Professor Potter Lena Luthor Maxima Morgan Edge Dan Turpin Steve Lombard Cat Grant Professor Hamilton Maggie Sawyer Bibbo Bibbowski Ron Troupe Strange Visitor Rampage Vartox Associated characters The Authority Apollo Enchantress Lightray Manchester Black Midnighter OMAC Steel Guardian Justice League Atom Aquaman Batman Black Canary Blue Beetle Cyborg Flash Green Arrow Green Lantern John Stewart Martian Manhunter Robin/Nightwing Orion Captain Marvel Wonder Woman Justice Society of America Legion of Substitute Heroes Legion of Super-Heroes Cosmic Boy Saturn Girl Lightning Lad Chameleon Boy Colossal Boy Invisible Kid Star Boy Phantom Girl Triplicate Girl Shrinking Violet Bouncing Boy Sun Boy Brainiac 5 Ultra Boy Element Lad Matter-Eater Lad Lightning Lass Dream Girl Timber Wolf Princess Projectra Ferro Lad Karate Kid White Witch Shadow Lass Chemical King Wildfire Tyroc Dawnstar Laurel Gand Legion of Super-Pets Legion of Super-Villains Lobo Maxima Newsboy Legion Project Cadmus Silent Knight Super-Chief Supermen of America World's Finest Team Enemies Central rogues Atomic Skull Bizarro Bloodsport Brainiac Bruno Mannheim Cyborg Superman Hank Henshaw Darkseid Doomsday General Zod Lex Luthor Livewire Mercy Graves Metallo Mister Mxyzptlk Mongul Parasite Silver Banshee Toyman Ultra-Humanite Recurring adversaries Anti-Monitor Atlas Blaze and Satanus Brainiac 2 Chemo Composite Superman Conduit Dev-Em Equus Faora Funky Flashman Gog Hellgramite Imperiex Jax-Ur Joker Kobra Lord Satanis Magpie Mala Mammoth Manchester Black Morgan Edge Neutron Nick O'Teen Non Ol-Vir Prankster Quarmer Quex-Ul Rampage Riot Ruin Scorch Solaris Solomon Grundy Terra-Man Titano Ultraman Ursa Volcana Organizations Black Zero Fearsome Five Intergang Masters of Disaster Royal Flush Gang Secret Society of Super Villains Suicide Squad Superman Revenge Squad Alternative versions Superman Earth-One Earth-Two Ultraman Superboy-Prime Kingdom Come Supergirl Power Girl In other media 1978–1987 film series Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor Eve Teschmacher General Zod DC Extended Universe Clark Kent / Superman Lois Lane Lex Luthor Zod Smallville Clark Kent Lois Lane Lana Lang Justice League Lex Luthor Lionel Luthor Chloe Sullivan Arrowverse Kara Danvers Alex Danvers Lex Luthor Nia Nal Superman & Lois Clark Kent Lois Lane Related Superman and Lois Lane Daily Planet Alien races Kryptonians Category v t e Golden Age of Comic Books Ace Comics Captain Courageous Doctor Nemesis The Flag Lash Lightning The Raven Unknown Soldier Vulcan All-American Publications The Atom Al Pratt Black Canary Doctor Mid-Nite Charles McNider Doiby Dickles The Flash Jay Garrick Gay Ghost Green Lantern Alan Scott Hawkgirl Shiera Sanders Hall Hawkman Carter Hall Hop Harrigan Johnny Thunder Justice Society of America The King Mister Terrific Terry Sloane Neptune Perkins Red Tornado Sargon the Sorcerer Terrific Whatzit Thunderbolt Ultra-Man The Whip Wildcat Ted Grant Wonder Woman Centaur Comics Airman Amazing-Man The Arrow The Clock The Eye Fantom of the Fair Magician from Mars The Masked Marvel Minimidget Charlton Comics Atomic Mouse Captain Atom Nightshade Mr. Muscles Nature Boy Space Adventures Yellowjacket Dell Comics Doctor Hormone Flash Gordon The Owl Phantasmo Supermind's Son Zorro Fawcett Comics Bulletgirl Bulletman Captain Marvel Captain Marvel Jr.

Captain Midnight Dan Dare Golden Arrow Hoppy the Marvel Bunny Ibis the Invincible Lieutenant Marvels Marvel Family Mary Marvel Master Man Minute-Man Mr. Scarlet Nyoka the Jungle Girl Phantom Eagle Pinky the Whiz Kid Scoop Smith Spy Smasher Squadron of Justice Uncle Marvel Fox Comics Black Fury Blue Beetle Dan Garret The Bouncer Bronze Man Dynamo The Flame Green Mask The Moth Samson Stardust the Super Wizard U.S. Jones Wonder Man Harvey Comics Black Cat Captain 3-D Captain Freedom Green Hornet Invisible Scarlet O'Neil Kato Shock Gibson Spirit of '76 Lev Gleason Publications Captain Battle Claw Crimebuster Daredevil Little Wise Guys Silver Streak MLJ Comics The Black Hood Bob Phantom Captain Flag The Comet The Firefly The Fox The Hangman Rang-a-Tang the Wonder Dog The Shield Super Duck The Web The Wizard National Allied Publications Ace the Bat-Hound Air Wave Aquaman Batman Batwoman Black Pirate Boy Commandos Captain Comet Chris KL-99 Congo Bill Crimson Avenger Lee Travis Dan the Dyna-Mite Dark Ranger Detective Chimp Doctor Fate Kent Nelson Doctor Occult Genius Jones Gimmick Girl Green Arrow Guardian Hourman Rex Tyler Johnny Chambers King Faraday The Knight Krypto Liberty Belle Manhunter Paul Kirk Martian Manhunter Miss X Mr. America Newsboy Legion Phantom Stranger Rex the Wonder Dog Robin Dick Grayson Robotman Rose Psychic Sandman Wesley Dodds Sandy the Golden Boy Seven Soldiers of Victory Shining Knight Sir Justin Slam Bradley The Spectre Jim Corrigan Speedy Roy Harper Squire Star-Spangled Kid Sylvester Pemberton Starman Ted Knight Stripesy Stuff the Chinatown Kid Superboy Kal-El Superman Superwoman Lois Lane Tarantula TNT Tommy Tomorrow Vigilante Greg Saunders Wonder Woman Zatara Nedor Comics American Crusader American Eagle Black Terror Captain Future Doc Strange Fighting Yank The Ghost Grim Reaper Judy of the Jungle Kara the Jungle Princess Lance Lewis, Space Detective Liberator The Magnet Miss Masque Princess Pantha Pyroman The Scarab The Woman in Red Novelty Press Blue Bolt Dick Cole The Target The Targeteers The Twister Prize Publications Atomic-Man Black Owl Fighting American Green Lama Yank & Doodle Quality Comics Archie O'Toole #711 Black Condor Blackhawk Blue Tracer Bozo the Iron Man Captain Triumph Doll Girl Doll Man Firebrand Human Bomb Invisible Hood The Jester Kid Eternity Lady Luck Madame Fatal Magno Manhunter Merlin the Magician Midnight Miss America Miss Fear Mouthpiece Neon the Unknown Phantom Lady Plastic Man Quicksilver The Ray Red Bee Red Torpedo The Spider Spider Widow Uncle Sam Wildfire Wonder Boy Woozy Winks Timely Comics All-Winners Squad American Ace The Angel Black Marvel Black Widow Claire Voyant Blazing Skull Blonde Phantom Blue Blade Blue Diamond Breeze Barton Bucky Bucky Barnes Captain America Captain Wonder The Challenger Citizen V The Destroyer Dynamic Man Father Time Ferret Fiery Mask The Fin Golden Girl Human Torch Jack Frost Laughing Mask Marvel Boy Mercury Miss America Miss Fury Mister E Namor Namora The Patriot Phantom Reporter Red Raven Rockman Silver Scorpion Sun Girl Super Rabbit Thin Man Thunderer Tim Mulrooney Toro Venus Vision Whizzer Robert Frank Witness Young Allies Misc.

American Comics Group Superkatt Anglo-American Publishing Commander Steel Atlas Publications Captain Atom Bell Features The Brain Johnny Canuck Nelvana of the Northern Lights Cardal Publishing Streamline Columbia Comics The Face Skyman David McKay Publications Mandrake the Magician The Phantom DC Thomson The Amazing Mr X Jack Flash Dynamic Publications Dynamic Man Yankee Girl Eastern Color Printing Buck Rogers Hydroman Phantom Magician EC Comics Moon Girl Superduperman Elliot Publishing Company Kismet, Man of Fate Fiction House Fantomah Hillman Periodicals Airboy The Heap Holyoke Publishing Cat-Man Kitten Miss Victory L. Miller & Son, Ltd.

Kid Marvelman Marvelman Young Marvelman Magazine Enterprises Funnyman Maple Leaf Publishing Brok Windsor Iron Man Rural Home Publications Green Turtle Street & Smith The Avenger Doc Savage The Shadow Supersnipe Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐4fs86
Cached time: 20250818131839
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.614 seconds
Real time usage: 1.804 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 33860/1000000
Revision size: 120559/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 358963/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 48596/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 292341/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.772/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6810199/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1397.923      1 -total
 67.00%  936.664      1 Template:Reflist
 32.58%  455.448     96 Template:Cite_comic
 13.09%  182.975     19 Template:Cite_book
 10.32%  144.241     23 Template:Cite_web
  9.78%  136.776     13 Template:Navbox
  6.83%   95.500      1 Template:Justice_League_characters
  6.04%   84.469      2 Template:Short_description
  3.92%   54.854      4 Template:Pagetype
  3.68%   51.444    107 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18564:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818131839 and revision id 1306567137. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lois_Lane&oldid=1306567137 " Categories : Lois Lane American female characters in television Characters created by Jerry Siegel Characters created by Joe Shuster Comics characters introduced in 1938 DC Comics female characters DC Comics female superheroes DC Comics film characters DC Comics metahumans DC Comics superheroes DC Comics titles Female characters in film Fictional Pulitzer Prize winners Fictional reporters and correspondents Superman characters Superhero television characters Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2013 Converting comics character infoboxes Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lois Lane 30 languages Add topic

