Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Two dimensions 2 Three dimensions 3 Four dimensions 4 Spherical symmetry 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Circular symmetry 7 languages Català Español فارسی Français Português Română 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Spherical symmetry ) Property of a planar object which maps onto itself after rotation by any angle This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In 2-dimensions an archery target has circular symmetry.

A surface of revolution has circular symmetry around an axis in 3-dimensions.

In geometry , circular symmetry is a type of continuous symmetry for a planar object that can be rotated by any arbitrary angle and map onto itself.

Rotational circular symmetry is isomorphic with the circle group in the complex plane , or the special orthogonal group SO(2), and unitary group U(1). Reflective circular symmetry is isomorphic with the orthogonal group O(2).

Two dimensions [ edit ] A 2-dimensional object with circular symmetry would consist of concentric circles and annular domains.

Rotational circular symmetry has all cyclic symmetry , Z n as subgroup symmetries. Reflective circular symmetry has all dihedral symmetry , Dih n as subgroup symmetries.

Three dimensions [ edit ] A double-cone is a surface of revolution , generated by a line.

In 3-dimensions, a surface or solid of revolution has circular symmetry around an axis, also called cylindrical symmetry or axial symmetry . An example is a right circular cone .  Circular symmetry in 3 dimensions has all pyramidal symmetry , C n v as subgroups.

A double-cone , bicone , cylinder , toroid and spheroid have circular symmetry, and in addition have a bilateral symmetry perpendicular to the axis of system (or half cylindrical symmetry ). These reflective circular symmetries have all discrete prismatic symmetries , D n h as subgroups.

Four dimensions [ edit ] Clifford torus stereographic projections (simple) 1:5 5:1 Cylindrical Duocylindrical In four dimensions, an object can have circular symmetry, on two orthogonal axis planes, or duocylindrical symmetry . For example, the duocylinder and Clifford torus have circular symmetry in two orthogonal axes. A spherinder has spherical symmetry in one 3-space, and circular symmetry in the orthogonal direction.

Spherical symmetry [ edit ] See also: Rotational symmetry § Rotational symmetry with respect to any angle An unmarked sphere has reflectional spherical symmetry .

An analogous 3-dimensional equivalent term is spherical symmetry .

Rotational spherical symmetry is isomorphic with the rotation group SO(3) , and can be parametrized by the Davenport chained rotations pitch, yaw, and roll. Rotational spherical symmetry has all the discrete chiral 3D point groups as subgroups. Reflectional spherical symmetry is isomorphic with the orthogonal group O(3) and has the 3-dimensional discrete point groups as subgroups.

A scalar field has spherical symmetry if it depends on the distance to the origin only, such as the potential of a central force . A vector field has spherical symmetry if it is in radially inward or outward direction with a magnitude and orientation (inward/outward) [ citation needed ] depending on the distance to the origin only, such as a central force.

See also [ edit ] Isotropy Rotational symmetry Particle in a spherically symmetric potential Gauss's theorem References [ edit ] Weisstein, Eric W.

"Solid of Revolution" .

MathWorld .

Weisstein, Eric W.

"Surface of Revolution" .

MathWorld .

"Orthogonal group" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press , 2001 [1994] Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Circular_symmetry&oldid=1214289480#Spherical_symmetry " Categories : Symmetry Rotation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2011 This page was last edited on 18 March 2024, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Circular symmetry 7 languages Add topic

