Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Vertiginous question 3 languages 한국어 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical argument by Benj Hellie This article may document a neologism or protologism in such a manner as to promote it .

Please add more reliable sources to establish its current use and the impact the term has had on its field. Otherwise consider renaming or deleting the article.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Benj Hellie's vertiginous question asks why, of all the subjects of experience out there, this one—the one corresponding to the human being referred to as Benj Hellie—is the one whose experiences are lived ? (The reader is supposed to substitute their own case for Hellie's.) [ 1 ] In other words: Why am I me and not someone else?

A simple response is that this question reduces to "Why are Hellie's experiences lived from Hellie's perspective," which is trivial to answer. However, Hellie argues, through a parable , that this response leaves something out. His parable describes two situations, one reflecting a broad global constellation view of the world and everyone's phenomenal features, and one describing an embedded view from the perspective of a single subject.

[ further explanation needed ] The former seems to align better with the simple response above, [ why?

] but the latter seems to be a better description of consciousness .

Overview [ edit ] Philosophers have used various different terminology to describe the phenomenon of individuals existing as themselves and not as someone else. Tim S. Roberts refers to the question of why a particular organism out of all the organisms that happen to exist happens to be you as the "Even Harder Problem of Consciousness".

[ 2 ] Herbert Spiegelberg has referred to it as the "I-am-me experience", and it has been called the "Ich-Erlebnis" by German psychologists.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The vertiginous question may have a number of philosophical implications.

Christian List argues that the vertiginous question and the existence of first-personal facts is evidence against physicalism , and evidence against other third-personal metaphysical pictures, including standard versions of dualism .

[ 5 ] List also argues that the vertiginous question implies a "quadrilemma" for theories of consciousness. He claims that at most three of the following metaphysical claims can be true: 'first-person realism ', 'non- solipsism ', 'non-fragmentation', and 'one world' – and thus one of these four must be rejected.

[ 6 ] List has proposed a model he calls the "many-worlds theory of consciousness" in order to reconcile the subjective nature of consciousness without lapsing into solipsism.

[ 7 ] Some philosophers have argued that there exists a connection between the nature of the self and the nature of time . Vincent Conitzer argues that the vertiginous question is related to A series and B series theories of time, and that arguments in favor of the A-theory of time are more effective as arguments for the combined position of both A-theory being true and the "I" being metaphysically privileged from other perspectives.

[ 8 ] Caspar Hare has made similar arguments with the theories of egocentric presentism and perspectival realism , of which several other philosophers have written reviews.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Thomas Nagel has extensively discussed the question of personal identity in The View from Nowhere . It contrasts passive and active points of view in how humanity interacts with the world, relying either on a subjective perspective that reflects a point of view or an objective perspective that takes a more detached perspective.

[ 11 ] Nagel describes the objective perspective as the "view from nowhere", one where the only valuable ideas are ones derived independently.

[ 12 ] The question of why we exist as humans has implications within the field of anthropics . Toby Pereira has proposed a principle in anthropics called the super-strong self sampling assumption (SSSSA), which is a variant of the strong self-sampling assumption proposed by Nick Bostrom in the book Anthropic Bias . The SSSSA asserts that the probability of a conscious observer existing as a particular being is weighted toward the "size" of that being in cognitive terms. Since non-human animals vastly outnumber humans, this begs the question of why we happen to find ourselves as humans, since it is statistically far more likely to exist as a non-human animal if animals are conscious . The answer according to the SSSSA is that humans take up a disproportionate amount of consciousness-space. However, following this logic, this begs the question of why we don't find ourselves as superintelligent beings, since they would have an even larger cognitive size and share of consciousness-space if they existed. This may be evidence against the existence of future artificial consciousness and conscious superintelligent AI.

[ 13 ] Other philosophers have discussed various other related ideas. Similar questions are also asked by J. J. Valberg in justifying his horizonal view of the self.

[ 14 ] Japanese philosopher Hitoshi Nagai has used the concept of first person perspectives as a way of defining the self, defining the self as the "one who directly experiences the consciousness of oneself".

[ 15 ] It has also been argued that the self is an "idiomodific" concept.

[ 16 ] Other related but opposing concepts include the anatta concept in Buddhist philosophy and open individualism which assert that the self does not exist.

See also [ edit ] Centered world Further facts Indexicality Problem of mental causation Subjective idealism Metaphysical subjectivism Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy) Type–token distinction References [ edit ] ^ Hellie, Benj (2013).

"Against Egalitarianism" .

Analysis .

73 (2): 304– 320.

doi : 10.1093/analys/ans101 .

^ Roberts, Tim S. (September 2007).

" The Even Harder Problem of Consciousness by Roberts. Tim S." NeuroQuantology .

5 (2): 214– 221.

doi : 10.14704/nq.2007.5.2.129 .

^ Watanabe, Tsuneo (1 June 2009), "From Spiegelberg's "I-am-me" experience to the solipsistic experience", IHSRC 2009 (The 28th International Human Science Research Conference) , Molde, Norway , retrieved 2 February 2025 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Watanabe, Tsuneo, "Enigma of the private self and studies of the "I-am-me experience": Towards a phenomenological approach to the development of the subjective self", ISTP (International Society for Theoretical Psychology) 2017 Conference (Tokyo, Japan) ^ List, Christian (2023).

"The first-personal argument against physicalism" . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ List, Christian (2023).

"A quadrilemma for theories of consciousness" . The Philosophical Quarterly . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ List, Christian (2023).

"The many-worlds theory of consciousness" . The Philosophical Quarterly . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ Conitzer, Vincent (30 Aug 2020). "The Personalized A-Theory of Time and Perspective".

arXiv : 2008.13207v1 [ physics.hist-ph ].

^ McDaniel, Kris (January 2012).

" On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects by Hare, Caspar - Review" (PDF) .

Ethics .

122 (2): 403– 410.

doi : 10.1086/663578 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ Markosian, Ned.

"Are You Special? A Review of Caspar Hare's On Myself, and Other, Less Important Subjects " (PDF) .

The Philosophical Review . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-26 . Retrieved 2015-03-13 .

^ McGinn, Colin (1997).

Minds and Bodies: Philosophers and Their Ideas . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-511355-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Thomas, Alan (2015).

Thomas Nagel . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-49418-8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Pereira, Toby (2017).

"An Anthropic Argument against the Future Existence of Superintelligent Artificial Intelligence" .

doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1705.03078 .

^ Valberg, J. J. (2007).

Dream, Death, and the Self . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691128597 .

^ * Why Isn’t Consciousness Real? (1) Philosophia Osaka No. 6, 2011:41-61 PDF ^ Watanabe, Tsuneo (2009).

"Eastern Epistemology and the Psychology of the Subjective Self" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 February 2020 . Retrieved 22 February 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Hellie, Benj. Against egalitarianism. Preprint of article in Analysis (2013).

Benj Hellie's page at the University of Toronto.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vertiginous_question&oldid=1304120358 " Categories : Anthropic principle Conceptions of self Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in the philosophy of mind Consciousness Identity (philosophy) Metaphysics of mind Mind–body problem Ontology Open problems Phenomenology Philosophical problems Subjective experience Theory of mind Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2022 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles about possible neologisms from May 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2023 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 03:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vertiginous question 3 languages Add topic

