Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Intelligence explosion 3 Emergence of superintelligence 4 Variations Toggle Variations subsection 4.1 Non-AI singularity 5 Predictions 6 Plausibility 7 Speed improvements Toggle Speed improvements subsection 7.1 Exponential growth 7.2 Accelerating change 8 Algorithm improvements 9 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 9.1 Skepticism of exponential growth 9.2 Technological limiting factors 9.3 Anthropics 10 Potential impacts Toggle Potential impacts subsection 10.1 Uncertainty and risk 10.2 Next step of sociobiological evolution 10.3 Implications for human society 11 Hard or soft takeoff 12 Relation to immortality and aging 13 History of the concept 14 In politics 15 Notes 16 See also 17 References Toggle References subsection 17.1 Citations 17.2 Sources 18 Further reading 19 External links Toggle the table of contents Technological singularity 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Boarisch Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technological growth scenario "The Singularity" redirects here. For other uses, see Singularity (disambiguation) .

Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e The technological singularity —or simply the singularity [ 1 ] —is a hypothetical point in time at which technological growth becomes completely alien to humans, uncontrollable and irreversible, resulting in unforeseeable consequences for human civilization .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to the most popular version of the singularity hypothesis, I. J. Good 's intelligence explosion model of 1965, an upgradable intelligent agent could eventually enter a positive feedback loop of successive self-improvement cycles; more intelligent generations would appear more and more rapidly, causing a rapid increase ("explosion") in intelligence that culminates in a powerful superintelligence , far surpassing all human intelligence .

[ 4 ] Some scientists, including Stephen Hawking , have expressed concern that artificial superintelligence (ASI) could result in human extinction.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The consequences of a technological singularity and its potential benefit or harm to the human race have been intensely debated.

Prominent technologists and academics dispute the plausibility of a technological singularity and associated artificial intelligence explosion, including Paul Allen , [ 7 ] Jeff Hawkins , [ 8 ] John Holland , Jaron Lanier , Steven Pinker , [ 8 ] Theodore Modis , [ 9 ] Gordon Moore , [ 8 ] and Roger Penrose .

[ 10 ] One claim is that artificial intelligence growth is likely to run into decreasing returns instead of accelerating ones.

Stuart J. Russell and Peter Norvig observe that in the history of technology, improvement in a particular area tends to follow an S curve: it begins with accelerating improvement, then levels off (without continuing upward into a hyperbolic singularity).

[ 11 ] Consider, for example, the history of transportation, which experienced exponential improvement from 1820 to 1970, then abruptly leveled off. Predictions based on continued exponential improvement (e.g., interplanetary travel by 2000) proved false.

History [ edit ] Alan Turing , often regarded as the father of modern computer science, laid a crucial foundation for contemporary discourse on the technological singularity. His pivotal 1950 paper " Computing Machinery and Intelligence " argued that a machine could, in theory, exhibit intelligent behavior equivalent to or indistinguishable from that of a human.

[ 12 ] The Hungarian-American mathematician John von Neumann (1903–1957) is the first known person to discuss a coming "singularity" in technological progress.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Stanislaw Ulam reported in 1958 that an earlier discussion with von Neumann "centered on the accelerating progress of technology and changes in human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue".

[ 15 ] Subsequent authors have echoed this viewpoint.

[ 3 ] [ 16 ] In 1965, I. J. Good speculated that superhuman intelligence might bring about an intelligence explosion: [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Let an ultraintelligent machine be defined as a machine that can far surpass all the intellectual activities of any man however clever. Since the design of machines is one of these intellectual activities, an ultraintelligent machine could design even better machines; there would then unquestionably be an 'intelligence explosion', and the intelligence of man would be left far behind. Thus the first ultraintelligent machine is the last invention that man need ever make, provided that the machine is docile enough to tell us how to keep it under control.

— Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine (1965) The concept and the term "singularity" were popularized by Vernor Vinge : first in 1983, in an article that claimed that, once humans create intelligences greater than their own, there will be a technological and social transition similar in some sense to "the knotted space-time at the center of a black hole"; [ 19 ] and then in his 1993 essay "The Coming Technological Singularity", [ 4 ] [ 16 ] in which he wrote that it would signal the end of the human era, as the new superintelligence would continue to upgrade itself and advance technologically at an incomprehensible rate, and he would be surprised if it occurred before 2005 or after 2030.

[ 4 ] Another significant contribution to wider circulation of the notion was Ray Kurzweil 's 2005 book The Singularity Is Near , predicting singularity by 2045.

[ 16 ] Intelligence explosion [ edit ] Further information: Recursive self-improvement Although technological progress has been accelerating in most areas, it has been limited by the basic intelligence of the human brain, which has not, according to Paul R. Ehrlich , changed significantly for millennia.

[ 20 ] But with the increasing power of computers and other technologies, it might eventually be possible to build a machine significantly more intelligent than humans.

[ 21 ] If superhuman intelligence is invented—through either the amplification of human intelligence or artificial intelligence—it will, in theory, vastly surpass human problem-solving and inventive skill. Such an AI is called seed AI [ 22 ] [ 23 ] because if an AI is created with engineering capabilities that match or surpass those of its creators, it could autonomously improve its own software and hardware to design an even more capable machine, which could repeat the process in turn. This recursive self-improvement could accelerate, potentially allowing enormous qualitative change before reaching any limits imposed by the laws of physics or theoretical computation. It is speculated that over many iterations, such an AI would far surpass human cognitive abilities .

One version of intelligence explosion is where computing power approaches infinity in a finite amount of time. In this version, once AIs are performing the research to improve themselves, speed doubles e.g. after 2 years, then 1 year, then 6 months, then 3 months, then 1.5 months, etc., where the infinite sum of the doubling periods is 4 years. Unless prevented by physical limits of computation and time quantization, this process would achieve infinite computing power in 4 years, properly earning the name "singularity" for the final state. This form of intelligence explosion is described in Yudkowsky (1996).

[ 24 ] Emergence of superintelligence [ edit ] Further information: Superintelligence A superintelligence, hyperintelligence, or superhuman intelligence is a hypothetical agent that possesses intelligence far surpassing that of the brightest and most gifted humans.

[ 25 ] "Superintelligence" may also refer to the form or degree of intelligence possessed by such an agent.

I. J. Good , Vernor Vinge , and Ray Kurzweil define the concept in terms of the technological creation of super intelligence, arguing that it is difficult or impossible for present-day humans to predict what human beings' lives would be like in a post-singularity world.

[ 4 ] [ 26 ] The related concept "speed superintelligence" describes an AI that can function like a human mind but much faster.

[ 27 ] For example, with a millionfold increase in the speed of information processing relative to that of humans, a subjective year would pass in 30 physical seconds.

[ 28 ] Such a difference in information processing speed could drive the singularity.

[ 29 ] Technology forecasters and researchers disagree about when, or whether, human intelligence will likely be surpassed. Some argue that advances in artificial intelligence (AI) will probably result in general reasoning systems that bypass human cognitive limitations. Others believe that humans will evolve or directly modify their biology so as to achieve radically greater intelligence.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] A number of futures studies focus on scenarios that combine these possibilities, suggesting that humans are likely to interface with computers , or upload their minds to computers , in a way that enables substantial intelligence amplification.

Robin Hanson 's 2016 book The Age of Em describes a future in which human brains are scanned and digitized, creating "uploads" or digital versions of human consciousness. In this future, the development of these uploads may precede or coincide with the emergence of superintelligent artificial intelligence.

[ 32 ] Variations [ edit ] Non-AI singularity [ edit ] Some writers use "the singularity" in a broader way, to refer to any radical changes in society brought about by new technology (such as molecular nanotechnology ), [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] although Vinge and other writers say that without superintelligence, such changes would not be a true singularity.

[ 4 ] Predictions [ edit ] Progress of AI performance on various benchmarks compared to human-level performance [ 36 ] Numerous dates have been predicted for the attainment of singularity.

In 1965, Good wrote that it was more probable than not that an ultra-intelligent machine would be built in the 20th century.

[ 17 ] That computing capabilities for human-level AI would be available in supercomputers before 2010 was predicted in 1988 by Moravec , assuming that the current rate of improvement continued.

[ 37 ] The attainment of greater-than-human intelligence between 2005 and 2030 was predicted by Vinge in 1993.

[ 4 ] A singularity in 2021 was predicted by Yudkowsky in 1996.

[ 24 ] Human-level AI around 2029 and the singularity in 2045 was predicted by Kurzweil in 2005.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] He reaffirmed these predictions in 2024 in The Singularity is Nearer .

[ 40 ] Human-level AI by 2040, and intelligence far beyond human by 2050 was predicted in 1998 by Moravec, revising his earlier prediction.

[ 41 ] A median confidence of 50% that human-level AI would be developed by 2040–2050 was the outcome of four informal polls of AI researchers, conducted in 2012 and 2013 by Bostrom and Müller .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Plausibility [ edit ] Prominent technologists and academics who dispute the plausibility of a technological singularity include Paul Allen , [ 7 ] Jeff Hawkins , [ 8 ] John Holland , Jaron Lanier , Steven Pinker , [ 8 ] Theodore Modis , [ 9 ] and Gordon Moore , [ 8 ] whose law is often cited in support of the concept.

[ 44 ] Most proposed methods for creating superhuman or transhuman minds fall into two categories: intelligence amplification of human brains and artificial intelligence. The many speculated ways to augment human intelligence include bioengineering , genetic engineering , nootropic drugs, AI assistants, direct brain–computer interfaces , and mind uploading . These possible paths to an intelligence explosion, all of which will presumably be pursued, make a singularity more likely.

[ 28 ] Robin Hanson has expressed skepticism of human intelligence augmentation, writing that once the "low-hanging fruit" of easy methods for increasing human intelligence have been exhausted, further improvements will become increasingly difficult.

[ 45 ] Despite all the speculated ways to amplify human intelligence, nonhuman artificial intelligence (specifically seed AI) is the most popular option among the hypotheses that would advance the singularity.

[ citation needed ] The possibility of an intelligence explosion depends on three factors.

[ 46 ] The first accelerating factor is the new intelligence enhancements made possible by each previous improvement. But as the intelligences become more advanced, further advances will become more and more complicated, possibly outweighing the advantage of increased intelligence. Each improvement should generate at least one more improvement, on average, for movement toward singularity to continue. Finally, the laws of physics may eventually prevent further improvement.

[ citation needed ] There are two logically independent, but mutually reinforcing, causes of intelligence improvements: increases in the speed of computation and improvements to the algorithms used.

[ 16 ] The former is predicted by Moore's Law and the forecasted improvements in hardware, [ 47 ] and is comparatively similar to previous technological advances. But Schulman and Sandberg [ 48 ] argue that software will present more complex challenges than simply operating on hardware capable of running at human intelligence levels or beyond.

A 2017 email survey of authors with publications at the 2015 NeurIPS and ICML machine learning conferences asked about the chance that "the intelligence explosion argument is broadly correct". Of the respondents, 12% said it was "quite likely", 17% said it was "likely", 21% said it was "about even", 24% said it was "unlikely", and 26% said it was "quite unlikely".

[ 49 ] Speed improvements [ edit ] Both for human and artificial intelligence, hardware improvements increase the rate of future hardware improvements. An analogy to Moore's Law suggests that if the first doubling of speed took 18 months, the next would take 18 subjective months—nine external months—and the next four months, two months, and so on toward a speed singularity.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 50 ] [ 24 ] Some upper limit on speed may eventually be reached. Jeff Hawkins has said that a self-improving computer system will inevitably run into limits on computing power: "in the end there are limits to how big and fast computers can run. We would end up in the same place; we'd just get there a bit faster. There would be no singularity." [ 8 ] It is difficult to directly compare silicon -based hardware with neurons . But Berglas (2008) notes that computer speech recognition is approaching human capabilities, and that this capability seems to require 0.01% of the volume of the brain. This analogy suggests that modern computer hardware is within a few orders of magnitude of being as powerful as the human brain , as well as taking up a lot less space. But the costs of training systems with deep learning may be larger.

[ citation needed ] [ a ] Exponential growth [ edit ] Ray Kurzweil writes that, due to paradigm shifts , a trend of exponential growth extends Moore's law from integrated circuits to earlier transistors , vacuum tubes , relays , and electromechanical computers. He predicts that the exponential growth will continue, and that in a few decades the computing power of all computers will exceed that of ("unenhanced") human brains, with superhuman artificial intelligence appearing around the same time.

An updated version of Moore's law over 120 Years (based on Kurzweil's graph ). The 7 most recent data points are all Nvidia GPUs .

The exponential growth in computing technology suggested by Moore's law is commonly cited as a reason to expect a singularity in the relatively near future, and a number of authors have proposed generalizations of Moore's law. Computer scientist and futurist Hans Moravec proposed in a 1998 book [ 53 ] that the exponential growth curve could be extended back to earlier computing technologies before the integrated circuit .

Ray Kurzweil postulates a law of accelerating returns whereby the speed of technological change (and more generally, all evolutionary processes) [ 54 ] increases exponentially, generalizing Moore's law in the same manner as Moravec's proposal, and also including material technology (especially as applied to nanotechnology ) and medical technology .

[ 55 ] Between 1986 and 2007, machines' application-specific capacity to compute information per capita roughly doubled every 14 months; the per capita capacity of the world's general-purpose computers has doubled every 18 months; the global telecommunication capacity per capita doubled every 34 months; and the world's storage capacity per capita doubled every 40 months.

[ 56 ] On the other hand, it has been argued that the global acceleration pattern having a 21st-century singularity as its parameter should be characterized as hyperbolic rather than exponential.

[ 57 ] Kurzweil reserves the term "singularity" for a rapid increase in artificial intelligence (as opposed to other technologies), writing: "The Singularity will allow us to transcend these limitations of our biological bodies and brains ... There will be no distinction, post-Singularity, between human and machine".

[ 58 ] He also defines the singularity as when computer-based intelligences significantly exceed the sum total of human brainpower, writing that advances in computing before that "will not represent the Singularity" because they do "not yet correspond to a profound expansion of our intelligence." [ 59 ] Accelerating change [ edit ] Main article: Accelerating change According to Kurzweil, his logarithmic graph of 15 lists of paradigm shifts for key historic events shows an exponential trend.

Some singularity proponents argue its inevitability through extrapolation of past trends, especially those pertaining to shortening gaps between improvements to technology. In one of the first uses of the term "singularity" in the context of technological progress, Stanislaw Ulam tells of a conversation with John von Neumann about accelerating change: One conversation centered on the ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue.

[ 15 ] Kurzweil claims that technological progress follows a pattern of exponential growth , following what he calls the " law of accelerating returns ". Whenever technology approaches a barrier, Kurzweil writes, new technologies surmount it. He predicts paradigm shifts will become increasingly common, leading to "technological change so rapid and profound it represents a rupture in the fabric of human history".

[ 60 ] Kurzweil believes that the singularity will occur by 2045.

[ 55 ] His predictions differ from Vinge's in that he predicts a gradual ascent to the singularity, rather than Vinge's rapidly self-improving superhuman intelligence.

Oft-cited dangers include those commonly associated with molecular nanotechnology and genetic engineering . These threats are major issues for both singularity advocates and critics, and were the subject of Bill Joy 's 2000 Wired magazine article " Why The Future Doesn't Need Us ".

[ 16 ] [ 61 ] Algorithm improvements [ edit ] Some intelligence technologies, like "seed AI", [ 22 ] [ 23 ] may also be able to make themselves not just faster but also more efficient, by modifying their source code . These improvements would make further improvements possible, which would make further improvements possible, and so on.

The mechanism for a recursively self-improving set of algorithms differs from an increase in raw computation speed in two ways. First, it does not require external influence: machines designing faster hardware would still require humans to create the improved hardware, or to program factories appropriately.

[ citation needed ] An AI rewriting its own source code could do so while contained in an AI box .

Second, as with Vernor Vinge 's conception of the singularity, it is much harder to predict the outcome. While speed increases seem to be only a quantitative difference from human intelligence, actual algorithm improvements would be qualitatively different.

Eliezer Yudkowsky compares it to the changes that human intelligence brought: humans changed the world thousands of times more quickly than evolution did, and in totally different ways. Similarly, the evolution of life was a massive departure and acceleration from geological rates of change, and improved intelligence could cause change to be as different again.

[ 62 ] Substantial dangers are associated with an intelligence explosion singularity originating from a recursively self-improving set of algorithms. First, the goal structure of the AI might self-modify, potentially causing the AI to optimise for something other than what was originally intended.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Second, AIs could compete for the resources humankind uses to survive.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] While not actively malicious, AIs would promote the goals of their programming, not necessarily broader human goals, and thus might crowd humans out.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Carl Shulman and Anders Sandberg suggest that algorithm improvements may be the limiting factor for a singularity; while hardware efficiency tends to improve at a steady pace, software innovations are more unpredictable and may be bottlenecked by serial, cumulative research. They suggest that in the case of a software-limited singularity, intelligence explosion would actually become more likely than with a hardware-limited singularity, because in the software-limited case, once human-level AI is developed, it could run serially on very fast hardware, and the abundance of cheap hardware would make AI research less constrained.

[ 70 ] An abundance of accumulated hardware that can be unleashed once the software figures out how to use it has been called "computing overhang".

[ 71 ] Criticism [ edit ] Linguist and cognitive scientist Steven Pinker wrote in 2008: "There is not the slightest reason to believe in a coming singularity. The fact that you can visualize a future in your imagination is not evidence that it is likely or even possible. Look at domed cities, jet-pack commuting, underwater cities, mile-high buildings, and nuclear-powered automobiles—all staples of futuristic fantasies when I was a child that have never arrived. Sheer processing power is not a pixie dust that magically solves all your problems." [ 8 ] Jaron Lanier denies that the singularity is inevitable: "I do not think the technology is creating itself. It's not an autonomous process." [ 72 ] Furthermore: "The reason to believe in human agency over technological determinism is that you can then have an economy where people earn their own way and invent their own lives. If you structure a society on not emphasizing individual human agency, it's the same thing operationally as denying people clout, dignity, and self-determination ... to embrace [the idea of the Singularity] would be a celebration of bad data and bad politics." [ 72 ] Philosopher and cognitive scientist Daniel Dennett said in 2017: "The whole singularity stuff, that's preposterous. It distracts us from much more pressing problems", adding: "AI tools that we become hyper-dependent on—that is going to happen. And one of the dangers is that we will give them more authority than they warrant." [ 73 ] Some critics suggest religious motivations or implications of singularity, especially Kurzweil's version. The buildup to the singularity is compared with Christian end-of-time scenarios. Beam calls it "a Buck Rogers vision of the hypothetical Christian Rapture".

[ 74 ] John Gray says "the Singularity echoes apocalyptic myths in which history is about to be interrupted by a world-transforming event".

[ 75 ] David Streitfeld in The New York Times questioned whether "it might manifest first and foremost—thanks, in part, to the bottom-line obsession of today’s Silicon Valley —as a tool to slash corporate America’s head count." [ 76 ] Astrophysicist and scientific philosopher Adam Becker criticizes Kurzweil's concept of human mind uploads to computers on the grounds that they are too fundamentally different and incompatible.

[ 77 ] Skepticism of exponential growth [ edit ] Theodore Modis holds the singularity cannot happen.

[ 78 ] [ 9 ] [ 79 ] He claims the "technological singularity" and especially Kurzweil lack scientific rigor; Kurzweil is alleged to mistake the logistic function (S-function) for an exponential function, and to see a "knee" in an exponential function where there can in fact be no such thing.

[ 80 ] In a 2021 article, Modis wrote that no milestones—breaks in historical perspective comparable in importance to the Internet, DNA, the transistor, or nuclear energy—had been observed in the previous 20 years, while five of them would have been expected according to the exponential trend advocated by proponents of the technological singularity.

[ 81 ] AI researcher Jürgen Schmidhuber has said that the frequency of subjectively "notable events" appears to be approaching a 21st-century singularity, but cautioned readers to take such plots of subjective events with a grain of salt: perhaps differences in memory of recent and distant events create an illusion of accelerating change where none exists.

[ 82 ] Hofstadter (2006) raises concern that Kurzweil is insufficiently rigorous, that an exponential tendency of technology is not a scientific law like one of physics, and that exponential curves have no "knees".

[ 83 ] Nonetheless, he did not rule out the singularity in principle in the distant future [ 8 ] and in light of ChatGPT and other recent advancements has revised his opinion significantly toward dramatic technological change in the near future.

[ 84 ] Economist Robert J. Gordon points out that measured economic growth slowed around 1970 and slowed even further since the 2008 financial crisis , and argues that the economic data show no trace of a coming Singularity as imagined by I. J. Good .

[ 85 ] In addition to general criticisms of the singularity concept, several critics have raised issues with Kurzweil's iconic chart. One line of criticism is that a log-log chart of this nature is inherently biased toward a straight-line result. Others identify selection bias in the points Kurzweil uses. For example, biologist PZ Myers points out that many of the early evolutionary "events" were picked arbitrarily.

[ 86 ] Kurzweil has rebutted this by charting evolutionary events from 15 neutral sources and showing that they fit a straight line on a log-log chart .

Kelly (2006) argues that the way the Kurzweil chart is constructed, with the x-axis having time before the present, it always points to the singularity being "now", for any date on which one would construct such a chart, and shows this visually on Kurzweil's chart.

[ 87 ] Technological limiting factors [ edit ] Martin Ford [ 88 ] postulates a "technology paradox": before the singularity could occur, most routine jobs would be automated, since this would require a level of technology inferior to that of the singularity. This would cause massive unemployment and plummeting consumer demand, which in turn would destroy the incentive to invest in the technology required to bring about the singularity. Job displacement is increasingly no longer limited to the types of work traditionally considered "routine".

[ 89 ] Theodore Modis [ 90 ] and Jonathan Huebner [ 91 ] argue that the rate of technological innovation has not only ceased to rise, but is actually now declining. Evidence for this decline is that the rise in computer clock rates is slowing, even while Moore's prediction of exponentially increasing circuit density continues to hold. This is due to excessive heat buildup from the chip, which cannot be dissipated quickly enough to prevent it from melting when operating at higher speeds. Advances in speed may be possible in the future by virtue of more power-efficient CPU designs and multi-cell processors.

[ 92 ] Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen argued the opposite of accelerating returns, the complexity brake: [ 7 ] the more progress science makes toward understanding intelligence, the more difficult it becomes to make additional progress. A study of the number of patents shows that human creativity does not show accelerating returns, but in fact, as suggested by Joseph Tainter in his The Collapse of Complex Societies , [ 93 ] a law of diminishing returns . The number of patents per thousand peaked in the period from 1850 to 1900, and has been declining since.

[ 91 ] The growth of complexity eventually becomes self-limiting, and leads to a widespread "general systems collapse".

Anthropics [ edit ] If a technological singularity inevitably leads to artificial consciousness , Toby Pereira argues that based on anthropic reasoning, the fact that we find ourselves as humans is evidence against the future existence of superintelligent AI. He proposes a new principle in anthropic reasoning called the super-strong self sampling assumption (SSSSA), this is a variant of the strong self-sampling assumption proposed by Nick Bostrom in the book Anthropic Bias . The SSSSA asserts that the probability of a conscious observer existing as a particular being is weighted toward the "size" of that being in cognitive terms. This can also be used to explain why we find ourselves existing as humans rather than animals . However, the SSSSA argues that since future artificial superintelligence would have a vastly larger cognitive size, we would statistically almost certainly expect to find ourselves as artificial superintelligent beings if such beings existed and were conscious. The fact that we do not find ourselves as such beings is therefore evidence against their future existence.

[ 94 ] Potential impacts [ edit ] Dramatic changes in the rate of economic growth have occurred in the past because of technological advancement. Based on population growth, the economy doubled every 250,000 years from the Paleolithic era until the Neolithic Revolution . The new agricultural economy doubled every 900 years, a remarkable increase. Since the Industrial Revolution , the world's economic output has doubled every 15 years, 60 times faster than during the agricultural era. If the rise of superhuman intelligence causes a similar revolution, argues Robin Hanson, one would expect the economy to double at least quarterly and possibly weekly.

[ 95 ] Uncertainty and risk [ edit ] Further information: Existential risk from artificial general intelligence The term "technological singularity" reflects the idea that such change may happen suddenly and that it is difficult to predict how the resulting new world would operate.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] It is unclear whether an intelligence explosion resulting in a singularity would be beneficial or harmful, or even an existential threat .

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Because AI is a major factor in singularity risk, several organizations pursue a technical theory of aligning AI goal-systems with human values, including the Future of Humanity Institute (until 2024), the Machine Intelligence Research Institute , [ 96 ] the Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence , and the Future of Life Institute .

Physicist Stephen Hawking said in 2014: "Success in creating AI would be the biggest event in human history. Unfortunately, it might also be the last, unless we learn how to avoid the risks." [ 100 ] Hawking believed that in the coming decades, AI could offer "incalculable benefits and risks" such as "technology outsmarting financial markets, out-inventing human researchers, out-manipulating human leaders, and developing weapons we cannot even understand." [ 100 ] He suggested that artificial intelligence should be taken more seriously and that more should be done to prepare for the singularity: [ 100 ] So, facing possible futures of incalculable benefits and risks, the experts are surely doing everything possible to ensure the best outcome, right? Wrong. If a superior alien civilisation sent us a message saying, "We'll arrive in a few decades," would we just reply, "OK, call us when you get here – we'll leave the lights on"? Probably not – but this is more or less what is happening with AI.

Berglas (2008) claims that there is no direct evolutionary motivation for AI to be friendly to humans. Evolution has no inherent tendency to produce outcomes valued by humans, and there is little reason to expect an arbitrary optimisation process to promote an outcome desired by humankind, rather than inadvertently leading to an AI behaving in a way not intended by its creators.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Anders Sandberg has elaborated on this, addressing various common counter-arguments.

[ 104 ] AI researcher Hugo de Garis suggests that artificial intelligences may simply eliminate the human race for access to scarce resources , [ 65 ] [ 63 ] and humans would be powerless to stop them.

[ 105 ] Alternatively, AIs developed under evolutionary pressure to promote their own survival could outcompete humanity.

[ 69 ] Bostrom (2002) discusses human extinction scenarios, and lists superintelligence as a possible cause: When we create the first superintelligent entity, we might make a mistake and give it goals that lead it to annihilate humankind, assuming its enormous intellectual advantage gives it the power to do so. For example, we could mistakenly elevate a subgoal to the status of a supergoal. We tell it to solve a mathematical problem, and it complies by turning all the matter in the solar system into a giant calculating device, in the process killing the person who asked the question.

According to Eliezer Yudkowsky , a significant problem in AI safety is that unfriendly AI is likely to be much easier to create than friendly AI. Both require large advances in recursive optimisation process design, but friendly AI also requires the ability to make goal structures invariant under self-improvement (or the AI could transform itself into something unfriendly) and a goal structure that aligns with human values and does not automatically destroy the human race. An unfriendly AI, on the other hand, can optimize for an arbitrary goal structure, which does not need to be invariant under self-modification.

[ 106 ] Bill Hibbard (2014) harvtxt error: no target: CITEREFBill_Hibbard2014 ( help ) proposes an AI design that avoids several dangers, including self-delusion, [ 107 ] unintended instrumental actions, [ 63 ] [ 108 ] and corruption of the reward generator.

[ 108 ] He also discusses social impacts of AI [ 109 ] and testing AI.

[ 110 ] His 2001 book Super-Intelligent Machines advocates public education about AI and public control over AI. It also proposes a simple design that is vulnerable to corruption of the reward generator.

Next step of sociobiological evolution [ edit ] Further information: Sociocultural evolution This section may contain material unrelated to the topic of the article .

Please help improve this section or discuss this issue on the talk page .

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Schematic Timeline of Information and Replicators in the Biosphere: Gillings et al.'s " major evolutionary transitions " in information processing.

[ 111 ] Amount of digital information worldwide (5 × 10 21 bytes) versus human genome information worldwide (10 19 bytes) in 2014 [ 111 ] While the technological singularity is usually seen as a sudden event, some scholars argue the current speed of change already fits this description.

[ citation needed ] In addition, some argue that we are already in the midst of a major evolutionary transition that merges technology, biology, and society. Digital technology has infiltrated the fabric of human society to a degree of indisputable and often life-sustaining dependence.

A 2016 article in Trends in Ecology & Evolution argues that "humans already embrace fusions of biology and technology. We spend most of our waking time communicating through digitally mediated channels... we trust artificial intelligence with our lives through antilock braking in cars and autopilots in planes... With one in three courtships leading to marriages in America beginning online, digital algorithms are also taking a role in human pair bonding and reproduction".

The article further argues that from the perspective of evolution , several previous Major Transitions in Evolution have transformed life through innovations in information storage and replication ( RNA , DNA , multicellularity , and culture and language ). In the current stage of life's evolution, the carbon-based biosphere has generated a system (humans) capable of creating technology that will result in a comparable evolutionary transition .

The digital information created by humans has reached a similar magnitude to biological information in the biosphere. Since the 1980s, the quantity of digital information stored has doubled about every 2.5 years, reaching about 5 zettabytes in 2014 (5 × 10 21 bytes).

[ 112 ] In biological terms, there are 7.2 billion humans on the planet, each with a genome of 6.2 billion nucleotides. Since one byte can encode four nucleotide pairs, the individual genomes of every human could be encoded by approximately 1 × 10 19 bytes. The digital realm stored 500 times more information than this in 2014 (see figure). The total amount of DNA contained in all of the cells on Earth is estimated to be about 5.3 × 10 37 base pairs, equivalent to 1.325 × 10 37 bytes of information.

If growth in digital storage continues at its current rate of 30–38% compound annual growth per year, [ 56 ] it will rival the total information content contained in all of the DNA in all of the cells on Earth in about 110 years. This would represent a doubling of the amount of information stored in the biosphere in just 150 years.

[ 111 ] Implications for human society [ edit ] Further information: Artificial intelligence in fiction In 2009, under the auspices of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), Eric Horvitz chaired a meeting of leading computer scientists, artificial intelligence researchers, and roboticists at the Asilomar conference center in Pacific Grove, California. The goal was to discuss the impact of the possibility that robots could become self-sufficient and able to make their own decisions. They discussed the extent to which computers and robots might acquire autonomy , and to what degree they could use such abilities to pose threats or hazards.

[ 113 ] Some machines are programmed with various forms of semi-autonomy, including the ability to locate their own power sources and choose targets to attack with weapons. Also, some computer viruses can evade elimination and, according to scientists in attendance, could therefore be said to have reached a "cockroach" stage of machine intelligence. The conference attendees noted that self-awareness as depicted in science fiction is probably unlikely, but that other potential hazards and pitfalls exist.

[ 113 ] Frank S. Robinson predicts that once humans achieve a machine with the intelligence of a human, scientific and technological problems will be tackled and solved with brainpower far superior to that of humans. He notes that artificial systems are able to share data more directly than humans, and predicts that this will result in a global network of super-intelligence that dwarfs human capability.

[ 114 ] Robinson also discusses how vastly different the future would look after such an intelligence explosion.

Hard or soft takeoff [ edit ] In this sample recursive self-improvement scenario, humans modifying an AI's architecture would be able to double its performance every three years through, for example, 30 generations before exhausting all feasible improvements (left). If instead the AI is smart enough to modify its own architecture as well as human researchers can, its time required to complete a redesign halves with each generation, and it progresses all 30 feasible generations in six years (right).

[ 115 ] In a hard takeoff scenario, an artificial superintelligence rapidly self-improves, "taking control" of the world (perhaps in a matter of hours), too quickly for significant human-initiated error correction or for a gradual tuning of the agent's goals. In a soft takeoff, the AI still becomes far more powerful than humanity, but at a human-like pace (perhaps on the order of decades), on a timescale where ongoing human interaction and correction can effectively steer its development.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Ramez Naam argues against a hard takeoff. He has pointed out that we already see recursive self-improvement by superintelligences, such as corporations.

Intel , for example, has "the collective brainpower of tens of thousands of humans and probably millions of CPU cores to... design better CPUs!" But this has not led to a hard takeoff; rather, it has led to a soft takeoff in the form of Moore's law .

[ 118 ] Naam further points out that the computational complexity of higher intelligence may be much greater than linear, such that "creating a mind of intelligence 2 is probably more than twice as hard as creating a mind of intelligence 1." [ 119 ] J. Storrs Hall believes that "many of the more commonly seen scenarios for overnight hard takeoff are circular – they seem to assume hyperhuman capabilities at the starting point of the self-improvement process" in order for an AI to be able to make the dramatic, domain-general improvements required for takeoff. Hall suggests that rather than recursively self-improving its hardware, software, and infrastructure all on its own, a fledgling AI would be better off specializing in one area where it was most effective and then buying the remaining components on the marketplace, because the quality of products on the marketplace continually improves, and the AI would have a hard time keeping up with the cutting-edge technology used by the rest of the world.

[ 120 ] Ben Goertzel agrees with Hall's suggestion that a new human-level AI would do well to use its intelligence to accumulate wealth. The AI's talents might inspire companies and governments to disperse its software throughout society. Goertzel is skeptical of a hard five-minute takeoff but speculates that a takeoff from human to superhuman level on the order of five years is reasonable. He calls this a "semihard takeoff".

[ 121 ] Max More disagrees, arguing that if there were only a few superfast human-level AIs, that they would not radically change the world, as they would still depend on other people to get things done and would still have human cognitive constraints. Even if all superfast AIs worked on intelligence augmentation, it is unclear why they would do better in a discontinuous way than existing human cognitive scientists at producing superhuman intelligence, although the rate of progress would increase. More further argues that superintelligence would not transform the world overnight: it would need to engage with existing, slow human systems to have physical impact on the world. "The need for collaboration, for organization, and for putting ideas into physical changes will ensure that all the old rules are not thrown out overnight or even within years." [ 122 ] Relation to immortality and aging [ edit ] Main article: Biological machine Feynman's vision of a medical use for nanotechnology by swallowing the doctor may be partially achieved by the ribosome , which functions as a biological machine . Such protein domain dynamics can only now be seen by neutron spin echo spectroscopy.

Eric Drexler , one of the founders of nanotechnology , theorized in 1986 the possibility of cell repair devices, including ones operating within cells and using as yet hypothetical biological machines , allowing immortality via nanotechnology .

[ 123 ] According to Richard Feynman , his former graduate student and collaborator Albert Hibbs originally suggested to him (circa 1959) the idea of a medical use for Feynman's theoretical micromachines. Hibbs suggested that certain repair machines might one day be shrunk to the point that it would, in theory, be possible to (as Feynman put it) " swallow the doctor ". The idea was incorporated into Feynman's 1959 essay There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom .

[ 124 ] In 1988, Moravec predicted the possibility of "uploading" a human mind into a human-like robot, achieving quasi-immortality by extreme longevity via transfer of the human mind between successive new robots as the old ones wear out; beyond that, he predicts later exponential acceleration of subjective experience of time leading to a subjective sense of immortality.

[ 37 ] In 2005, Kurzweil suggested that medical advances would allow people to protect their bodies from the effects of aging, making life expectancy limitless . He argues that technological advances in medicine would allow us to continuously repair and replace defective components in our bodies, prolonging life to an undetermined age.

[ 125 ] Kurzweil buttresses his argument by discussing current bio-engineering advances. He suggests somatic gene therapy ; after synthetic viruses with specific genetic information, the next step is to apply this technology to gene therapy, replacing human DNA with synthesized genes.

[ 126 ] Beyond merely extending the operational life of the physical body, Jaron Lanier argues for a form of immortality called "Digital Ascension" that involves "people dying in the flesh and being uploaded into a computer and remaining conscious." [ 127 ] History of the concept [ edit ] A paper by Mahendra Prasad, published in AI Magazine , asserts that the 18th-century mathematician Marquis de Condorcet first hypothesized and mathematically modeled an intelligence explosion and its effects on humanity.

[ 128 ] An early description of the idea was made in John W. Campbell 's 1932 short story "The Last Evolution".

[ 129 ] In his 1958 obituary for John von Neumann , Ulam recalled a conversation with him about the "ever accelerating progress of technology and changes in the mode of human life, which gives the appearance of approaching some essential singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, could not continue." [ 15 ] In 1965, Good wrote his essay postulating an "intelligence explosion" of recursive self-improvement of a machine intelligence.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 1977, Hans Moravec wrote an article with unclear publishing status where he envisioned a development of self-improving thinking machines, a creation of "super-consciousness, the synthesis of terrestrial life, and perhaps jovian and martian life as well, constantly improving and extending itself, spreading outwards from the solar system, converting non-life into mind." [ 130 ] [ 131 ] The article describes the human mind uploading later covered in Moravec (1988). The machines are expected to reach human level and then improve themselves beyond that ("Most significantly of all, they [the machines] can be put to work as programmers and engineers, with the task of optimizing the software and hardware which make them what they are. The successive generations of machines produced this way will be increasingly smarter and more cost effective.") Humans will no longer be needed, and their abilities will be overtaken by the machines: "In the long run the sheer physical inability of humans to keep up with these rapidly evolving progeny of our minds will ensure that the ratio of people to machines approaches zero, and that a direct descendant of our culture, but not our genes, inherits the universe." While the word "singularity" is not used, the notion of human-level thinking machines thereafter improving themselves beyond human level is there. In this view, there is no intelligence explosion in the sense of a very rapid intelligence increase once human equivalence is reached. An updated version of the article was published in 1979 in Analog Science Fiction and Fact .

[ 132 ] [ 131 ] In 1981, Stanisław Lem published his science fiction novel Golem XIV . It describes a military AI computer (Golem XIV) that obtains consciousness and starts to increase its intelligence, moving toward personal technological singularity. Golem XIV was originally created to aid its builders in fighting wars, but as its intelligence advances to a much higher level than that of humans, it stops being interested in the military requirements because it finds them lacking internal logical consistency.

Vernor Vinge addressed Good's intelligence explosion in the January 1983 issue of Omni magazine. Vinge seems to have been the first to use the term "singularity" (although not "technological singularity") in a way specifically tied to the creation of intelligent machines: [ 19 ] [ 131 ] We will soon create intelligences greater than our own. When this happens, human history will have reached a kind of singularity, an intellectual transition as impenetrable as the knotted space-time at the center of a black hole, and the world will pass far beyond our understanding. This singularity, I believe, already haunts a number of science-fiction writers. It makes realistic extrapolation to an interstellar future impossible. To write a story set more than a century hence, one needs a nuclear war in between ... so that the world remains intelligible.

In 1985, in "The Time Scale of Artificial Intelligence", AI researcher Ray Solomonoff articulated mathematically the related notion of what he called an "infinity point": if a research community of human-level self-improving AIs take four years to double their own speed, then two years, then one year and so on, their capabilities increase infinitely in finite time.

[ 16 ] [ 133 ] In 1986, Vinge published Marooned in Realtime , a science-fiction novel where a few remaining humans traveling forward in the future have survived an unknown extinction event that might well be a singularity. In a short afterword, Vinge writes that an actual technological singularity would not be the end of the human species: "of course it seems very unlikely that the Singularity would be a clean vanishing of the human race. (On the other hand, such a vanishing is the timelike analog of the silence we find all across the sky.)".

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] In 1988, Vinge used the phrase "technological singularity" in the short-story collection Threats and Other Promises , writing in the introduction to his story "The Whirligig of Time": Barring a worldwide catastrophe, I believe that technology will achieve our wildest dreams, and soon.

When we raise our own intelligence and that of our creations, we are no longer in a world of human-sized characters. At that point we have fallen into a technological "black hole", a technological singularity.

[ 136 ] In 1988, Hans Moravec published Mind Children , [ 37 ] in which he predicted human-level intelligence in supercomputers by 2010, self-improving intelligent machines far surpassing human intelligence later, human mind uploading into human-like robots later, intelligent machines leaving humans behind, and space colonization. He did not mention "singularity", though, and he did not speak of a rapid explosion of intelligence immediately after the human level is achieved. Nonetheless, the overall singularity tenor is there in predicting both human-level artificial intelligence and further artificial intelligence far surpassing humans later.

Vinge's 1993 article "The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era", [ 4 ] spread widely on the internet and helped popularize the idea.

[ 137 ] This article contains the statement, "Within thirty years, we will have the technological means to create superhuman intelligence. Shortly after, the human era will be ended." Vinge argues that science-fiction authors cannot write realistic post-singularity characters who surpass the human intellect, as the thoughts of such an intellect is beyond humans' ability to express.

[ 4 ] Minsky 's 1994 article says robots will "inherit the Earth", possibly with the use of nanotechnology, and proposes to think of robots as human "mind children", drawing the analogy from Moravec. The rhetorical effect of the analogy is that if humans are fine to pass the world to their biological children, they should be equally fine to pass it to robots, their "mind children". Per Minsky, "we could design our 'mind-children' to think a million times faster than we do. To such a being, half a minute might seem as long as one of our years, and each hour as long as an entire human lifetime." The feature of the singularity present in Minsky is the development of superhuman artificial intelligence ("million times faster"), but there is no talk of sudden intelligence explosion, self-improving thinking machines, or unpredictability beyond any specific event, and the word "singularity" is not used.

[ 138 ] Tipler 's 1994 book The Physics of Immortality predicts a future where super–intelligent machines build enormously powerful computers, people are "emulated" in computers, life reaches every galaxy, and people achieve immortality when they reach Omega Point .

[ 139 ] There is no talk of Vingean "singularity" or sudden intelligence explosion, but intelligence much greater than human is there, as well as immortality.

In 1996, Yudkowsky predicted a singularity by 2021.

[ 24 ] His version of singularity involves intelligence explosion: once AIs are doing the research to improve themselves, speed doubles after 2 years, then 1 one year, then after 6 months, then after 3 months, then after 1.5 months, and after more iterations, the "singularity" is reached.

[ 24 ] This construction implies that the speed reaches infinity in finite time.

In 2000, Bill Joy , a prominent technologist and a co-founder of Sun Microsystems , voiced concern over the potential dangers of robotics, genetic engineering, and nanotechnology.

[ 61 ] In 2005, Kurzweil published The Singularity Is Near . Kurzweil's publicity campaign included an appearance on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart .

[ 140 ] From 2006 to 2012, an annual Singularity Summit conference was organized by Machine Intelligence Research Institute , founded by Eliezer Yudkowsky .

In 2007, Yudkowsky suggested that many of the varied definitions that have been assigned to "singularity" are mutually incompatible rather than mutually supporting.

[ 34 ] [ 141 ] For example, Kurzweil extrapolates current technological trajectories past the arrival of self-improving AI or superhuman intelligence, which Yudkowsky argues represents a tension with both I. J. Good's proposed discontinuous upswing in intelligence and Vinge's thesis on unpredictability.

[ 34 ] In 2009, Kurzweil and X-Prize founder Peter Diamandis announced the establishment of Singularity University , a nonaccredited private institute whose mission is "to educate, inspire and empower leaders to apply exponential technologies to address humanity's grand challenges." [ 142 ] Funded by Google , Autodesk , ePlanet Ventures , and a group of technology industry leaders, Singularity University is based at NASA 's Ames Research Center in Mountain View , California . The not-for-profit organization runs an annual ten-week graduate program that covers ten different technology and allied tracks, and a series of executive programs throughout the year.

[ citation needed ] In politics [ edit ] In 2007, the Joint Economic Committee of the United States Congress released a report about the future of nanotechnology. It predicts significant technological and political changes in the midterm future, including possible technological singularity.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] [ 145 ] Former President of the United States Barack Obama spoke about singularity in his interview to Wired in 2016: [ 146 ] One thing that we haven't talked about too much, and I just want to go back to, is we really have to think through the economic implications. Because most people aren't spending a lot of time right now worrying about singularity—they are worrying about "Well, is my job going to be replaced by a machine?" Notes [ edit ] ^ Large language models such as ChatGPT and Llama require millions of hours of graphics processing unit ( GPU ) time. Training Meta's Llama in 2023 took 21 days on 2048 NVIDIA A100 GPUs, thus requiring hardware substantially larger than a brain. Training took around a million GPU hours, with an estimated cost of over $2 million.  Even so, it is far smaller, and thus easier to train, than a LLM such as ChatGPT, which as of 2023 had 175 billion parameters to adjust, compared to 65 million for Llama.

[ 51 ] Training Google's Gemini LLM is estimated to have cost between $30 million and $191 million, similar to that of ChatGPT 4.

[ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Technology portal Artificial consciousness – Field in cognitive science Ephemeralization – Technological advancement theory Global brain – Futuristic concept of a global interconnected network Technological revolution – Period of rapid technological change Technophobia – Fear or discomfort with advanced technology Neo-Luddism – Philosophy opposing modern technology References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Cadwalladr, Carole (22 February 2014).

"Are the robots about to rise? Google's new director of engineering thinks so…" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 May 2022 .

^ "Collection of sources defining "singularity" " .

singularitysymposium.com . Archived from the original on 17 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 April 2019 .

^ a b Eden, Amnon H.; Moor, James H.; Søraker, Johnny H.; Steinhart, Eric, eds. (2012).

Singularity Hypotheses: A Scientific and Philosophical Assessment . The Frontiers Collection. Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

1– 2.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-32560-1 .

ISBN 9783642325601 .

^ a b c d e f g h Vinge, Vernor.

"The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era" Archived 2018-04-10 at the Wayback Machine , in Vision-21: Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering in the Era of Cyberspace , G. A. Landis, ed., NASA Publication CP-10129, pp. 11–22, 1993. - "There may be developed computers that are "awake" and superhumanly intelligent. (To date, there has been much controversy as to whether we can create human equivalence in a machine. But if the answer is 'yes, we can', then there is little doubt that beings more intelligent can be constructed shortly thereafter.)" ^ Sparkes, Matthew (13 January 2015).

"Top scientists call for caution over artificial intelligence" .

The Telegraph (UK) .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2015 . Retrieved 24 April 2015 .

^ "Hawking: AI could end human race" . BBC. 2 December 2014.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2015 . Retrieved 11 November 2017 .

^ a b c Allen, Paul G.; Greaves, Mark (12 October 2011), "Paul Allen: The Singularity Isn't Near" , MIT Technology Review , retrieved 12 April 2015 ^ a b c d e f g h i "Tech Luminaries Address Singularity" .

IEEE Spectrum . 1 June 2008.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ a b c Modis, Theodore (2012). “Why the Singularity Cannot Happen”. Published in Eden, Amnon H. et al (Eds.) (2012).

Singularity Hypothesis (PDF) . New York: Springer. p. 311.

ISBN 978-3-642-32560-1 .

pp. 311–339.

^ Penrose, Roger (1999).

The emperor's new mind: concerning computers, minds and the laws of physics . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-286198-6 .

^ Russell, Stuart J.

; Norvig, Peter (2021).

Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (4th ed.). Hoboken: Pearson. p. 1005.

ISBN 978-0-1346-1099-3 .

LCCN 20190474 .

^ "What is the Techological Singularity? | IBM" .

www.ibm.com . 13 August 2024 . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ Vinge, Vernor (1993).

"The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era" (PDF) .

Proceedings of a symposium cosponsored by the NASA Lewis Research Center and the Ohio Aerospace Institute and held in Westlake, Ohio March 30-31, 1993 . NASA Conference Publication. Vol. 10129. p. 11.

Bibcode : 1993vise.nasa...11V .

^ Shanahan, Murray (7 August 2015).

The Technological Singularity . MIT Press. p. 233.

ISBN 978-0-262-52780-4 .

^ a b c Ulam, Stanislaw (May 1958).

"Tribute to John von Neumann" (PDF) .

Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society . 64, #3, part 2: 5.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 November 2018 .

^ a b c d e f Chalmers , David J. (2010).

"The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis" (PDF) .

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

17 ( 9– 10): 7– 65.

^ a b c Good, I. J. (1965), Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine , archived from the original on 27 May 2001 ^ a b Good, I. J. (1965), Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2012 ^ a b Dooling, Richard.

Rapture for the Geeks: When AI Outsmarts IQ (2008), p. 88 ^ Ehrlich, Paul.

"Paul Ehrlich: The Dominant Animal: Human Evolution and the Environment – The Long Now" .

longnow.org . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ "Businessweek – Bloomberg" .

Bloomberg.com . 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ a b Yampolskiy, Roman V. "Analysis of types of self-improving software." Artificial General Intelligence. Springer International Publishing, 2015. pp. 384–393.

^ a b Eliezer Yudkowsky .

General Intelligence and Seed AI-Creating Complete Minds Capable of Open-Ended Self-Improvement , 2001.

^ a b c d e Yudkowsky, Eliezer (1996).

"Staring into the Singularity" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2008.

^ Chalmers, David J. (2016). "The Singularity: A Philosophical Analysis".

Science Fiction and Philosophy: From Time Travel to Superintelligence (2nd ed.). Wiley. pp.

171– 224.

doi : 10.1002/9781118922590.ch16 .

ISBN 978-1-118-92261-3 .

^ Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near, pp. 135–136. Penguin Group, 2005.

^ Sotala, Kaj; Yampolskiy, Roman (2017). "Risks of the Journey to the Singularity".

The Technological Singularity . The Frontiers Collection. Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. pp.

11– 23.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-54033-6_2 .

ISBN 978-3-662-54031-2 .

^ a b "What is the Singularity? | Singularity Institute for Artificial Intelligence" . Singinst.org. Archived from the original on 8 September 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ Chalmers, David J. (2016). "The Singularity".

Science Fiction and Philosophy . John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.

171– 224.

doi : 10.1002/9781118922590.ch16 .

ISBN 9781118922590 .

^ Pearce, David (2012), Eden, Amnon H.; Moor, James H.; Søraker, Johnny H.; Steinhart, Eric (eds.), "The Biointelligence Explosion" , Singularity Hypotheses , The Frontiers Collection, Berlin and Heidelberg, Germany: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.

199– 238, doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-32560-1_11 , ISBN 978-3-642-32559-5 , retrieved 16 January 2022 ^ Gouveia, Steven S., ed. (2020).

"ch. 4, "Humans and Intelligent Machines: Co-evolution, Fusion or Replacement?", David Pearce" .

The Age of Artificial Intelligence: An Exploration . Vernon Press.

ISBN 978-1-62273-872-4 .

^ Hanson, Robin (2016).

The Age of Em . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 528.

ISBN 9780198754626 .

^ Hall, Josh (2010).

"Singularity: Nanotech or AI?" . Hplusmagazine.com. Archived from the original on 23 December 2010 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ a b c Yudkowsky, Eliezer (2007), The Singularity: Three Major Schools , archived from the original on 1 October 2018 ^ Sandberg, Anders .

An overview of models of technological singularity Archived 2011-07-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ "International scientific report on the safety of advanced AI: interim report" .

GOV.UK . 17 May 2024. p. 26.

^ a b c Hans Moravec, Mind Children , 1988 ^ "List of Analyses of Time to Human-Level AI" .

AI Impacts . 22 January 2015 . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Kurzweil, Ray (2005).

The Singularity Is Near . Penguin Group. p. 120.

^ Kurzweil, Ray (2024).

The singularity is nearer: when we merge with Al . New York: Viking.

ISBN 978-0-399-56276-1 .

OCLC 1438926317 .

^ Moravec, Hans P. (1998).

Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind . Oxford University Press USA.

^ Khatchadourian, Raffi (16 November 2015).

"The Doomsday Invention" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2019 . Retrieved 31 January 2018 .

^ Müller, V. C., & Bostrom, N. (2016). "Future progress in artificial intelligence: A survey of expert opinion". In V. C. Müller (ed): Fundamental issues of artificial intelligence (pp. 555–572). Berlin, Germany: Springer Berlin.

http://philpapers.org/rec/MLLFPI Archived 2019-03-02 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Wallich, Paul (1 June 2008).

"Who's Who In The Singularity" .

IEEE Spectrum . Archived from the original on 12 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ Hanson, Robin (1998).

"Some Skepticism" .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 8 April 2020 .

^ David Chalmers John Locke Lecture, 10 May 2009, Exam Schools, Oxford, Presenting a philosophical analysis of the possibility of a technological singularity or "intelligence explosion" resulting from recursively self-improving AI Archived 2013-01-15 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "ITRS" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 September 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ Shulman, Carl; Anders, Sandberg (2010).

"Implications of a Software-Limited Singularity" (PDF) .

Machine Intelligence Research Institute .

^ Grace, Katja; Salvatier, John; Dafoe, Allan; Zhang, Baobao; Evans, Owain (24 May 2017). "When Will AI Exceed Human Performance? Evidence from AI Experts".

arXiv : 1705.08807 [ cs.AI ].

^ Siracusa, John (31 August 2009).

"Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard: the Ars Technica review" .

Ars Technica .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ Leswing, Jonathan Vanian,Kif (13 March 2023).

"ChatGPT and generative AI are booming, but the costs can be extraordinary" .

CNBC . Retrieved 8 February 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Buchholz, Katharina.

"The Extreme Cost Of Training AI Models" .

Forbes . Retrieved 8 February 2025 .

^ Moravec, Hans (1999).

Robot: Mere Machine to Transcendent Mind . Oxford University Press. p. 61.

ISBN 978-0-19-513630-2 .

^ Ray Kurzweil, The Age of Spiritual Machines , Viking; 1999, ISBN 978-0-14-028202-3 . pp.

30, 32 Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near , Penguin Group, 2005 ^ a b "The World's Technological Capacity to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information" Archived 2013-07-27 at the Wayback Machine , Martin Hilbert and Priscila López (2011), Science , 332 (6025), pp. 60–65; free access to the article through: martinhilbert.net/WorldInfoCapacity.html.

^ Korotayev, Andrey V.; LePoire, David J., eds. (2020).

"The 21st Century Singularity and Global Futures" .

World-Systems Evolution and Global Futures .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-33730-8 .

ISBN 978-3-030-33729-2 .

ISSN 2522-0985 .

S2CID 241407141 .

^ Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near, p. 9. Penguin Group, 2005 ^ Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near , pp. 135–136. Penguin Group, 2005.
"So we will be producing about 10 26 to 10 29 cps of nonbiological computation per year in the early 2030s. This is roughly equal to our estimate for the capacity of all living biological human intelligence ... This state of computation in the early 2030s will not represent the Singularity, however, because it does not yet correspond to a profound expansion of our intelligence. By the mid-2040s, however, that one thousand dollars' worth of computation will be equal to 10 26 cps, so the intelligence created per year (at a total cost of about $10 12 ) will be about one billion times more powerful than all human intelligence today. That will indeed represent a profound change, and it is for that reason that I set the date for the Singularity—representing a profound and disruptive transformation in human capability—as 2045." ^ Kurzweil, Raymond (2001), "The Law of Accelerating Returns" , Nature Physics , 4 (7), Lifeboat Foundation: 507, Bibcode : 2008NatPh...4..507B , doi : 10.1038/nphys1010 , archived from the original on 27 August 2018 , retrieved 7 August 2007 .

^ a b Joy, Bill (April 2000), "Why The Future Doesn't Need Us" , Wired Magazine , vol. 8, no. 4, Viking Adult, ISBN 978-0-670-03249-5 , archived from the original on 5 February 2009 , retrieved 7 August 2007 , Our most powerful 21st-century technologies – robotics, genetic engineering, and nanotech – are threatening to make humans an endangered species.

^ Yudkowsky, Eliezer S.

"Power of Intelligence" . Yudkowsky.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ a b c Omohundro, Stephen M. (30 November 2007). Wang, Pei; Goertzel, Ben; Franklin, Stan (eds.).

" "The Basic AI Drives." Artificial General Intelligence, 2008 proceedings of the First AGI Conference, Vol. 171" . Amsterdam, Netherlands: IOS.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2010 .

^ "Artificial General Intelligence: Now Is the Time" . KurzweilAI.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ a b "Omohundro, Stephen M., "The Nature of Self-Improving Artificial Intelligence." Self-Aware Systems. 21 Jan. 2008. Web. 07 Jan. 2010" . 6 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2010 .

^ Barrat, James (2013). "6, "Four Basic Drives" ".

Our Final Invention (First ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. pp.

78– 98.

ISBN 978-0312622374 .

^ "Max More and Ray Kurzweil on the Singularity" . KurzweilAI.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2018 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ "Concise Summary | Singularity Institute for Artificial Intelligence" . Singinst.org. Archived from the original on 21 June 2011 . Retrieved 9 September 2011 .

^ a b Bostrom, Nick (2004).

"The Future of Human Evolution" .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2010 .

^ Shulman, Carl; Sandberg, Anders (2010). Mainzer, Klaus (ed.).

"Implications of a Software-Limited Singularity" (PDF) .

ECAP10: VIII European Conference on Computing and Philosophy .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 May 2014 .

^ Muehlhauser, Luke; Salamon, Anna (2012).

"Intelligence Explosion: Evidence and Import" (PDF) . In Eden, Amnon; Søraker, Johnny; Moor, James H.; Steinhart, Eric (eds.).

Singularity Hypotheses: A Scientific and Philosophical Assessment . Springer.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 October 2014 . Retrieved 28 August 2018 .

^ a b Lanier, Jaron (2013).

"Who Owns the Future?" .

New York: Simon & Schuster . Archived from the original on 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 March 2016 .

^ Cadwalladr, Carole (12 February 2017), "Daniel Dennett: 'I begrudge every hour I have to spend worrying about politics' " , The Guardian .

^ Beam, Alex (24 February 2005).

"That Singularity Sensation" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved 15 February 2013 .

^ Gray, John (24 November 2011).

"On the Road to Immortality" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 19 March 2013 .

^ Streitfeld, David (11 June 2023).

"Silicon Valley Confronts the Idea That the 'Singularity' Is Here" .

New York Times . Retrieved 11 June 2023 .

^ Wood, Andrew Paul (17 May 2025). "Mission Critical".

New Zealand Listener : 38– 39.

^ Modis, Theodore (2020). “Forecasting the Growth of Complexity and Change—An Update”. Published in Korotayev, Andrey; LePoire, David (Eds.) (3 January 2020).

The 21st Century Singularity and Global Futures (1 ed.). Springer. p. 620.

ISBN 978-3-030-33730-8 .

pp/ 101–104.

^ Modis, Theodore (May–June 2003). “ The Limits of Complexity and Change ”. The Futurist. 37 (3): 26–32.

^ Modis, Theodore (2006) "The Singularity Myth" Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine , Technological Forecasting & Social Change , February 2006, pp. 104 - 112 ^ Modis, Theodore (1 March 2022).

"Links between entropy, complexity, and the technological singularity" .

Technological Forecasting and Social Change .

176 121457.

arXiv : 2410.10844 .

doi : 10.1016/j.techfore.2021.121457 .

ISSN 0040-1625 .

S2CID 245663426 .

^ Schmidhuber, Jürgen (2006), New millennium AI and the convergence of history , arXiv : cs/0606081 , Bibcode : 2006cs........6081S .

^ Trying to Muse Rationally About the Singularity Scenario by Douglas Hofstadter, 2006, unauthorized transcript .

^ Brooks, David (13 July 2023).

"Opinion | 'Human Beings Are Soon Going to Be Eclipsed' " .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2 August 2023 .

^ William D. Nordhaus , "Why Growth Will Fall" (a review of Robert J. Gordon , The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living Since the Civil War , Princeton University Press, 2016, ISBN 978-0691147727 , 762 pp., $39.95), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXIII, no. 13 (August 18, 2016), p. 68.

^ Myers, PZ, Singularly Silly Singularity , archived from the original on 28 February 2009 , retrieved 13 April 2009 ^ Kelly, Kevin (2006).

"The Singularity Is Always Near" .

The Technium . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Ford, Martin, The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating Technology and the Economy of the Future Archived 2010-09-06 at the Wayback Machine , Acculant Publishing, 2009, ISBN 978-1-4486-5981-4 ^ Markoff, John (4 March 2011).

"Armies of Expensive Lawyers, Replaced by Cheaper Software" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 25 February 2017 .

^ Modis, Theodore (2002) "Forecasting the Growth of Complexity and Change" Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine , Technological Forecasting & Social Change , 69, No 4, 2002, pp. 377 – 404 ^ a b Huebner, Jonathan (2005) "A Possible Declining Trend for Worldwide Innovation" Archived 2015-03-22 at the Wayback Machine , Technological Forecasting & Social Change , October 2005, pp. 980–6 ^ Krazit, Tom (26 September 2006).

"Intel pledges 80 cores in five years" .

CNET News . Archived from the original on 15 February 2021.

^ Tainter, Joseph (1988) " The Collapse of Complex Societies Archived 2015-06-07 at the Wayback Machine " (Cambridge University Press) ^ Pereira, Toby (2017).

"An Anthropic Argument against the Future Existence of Superintelligent Artificial Intelligence" .

doi : 10.48550/arXiv.1705.03078 .

^ Hanson, Robin (1 June 2008), "Economics Of The Singularity" , IEEE Spectrum Special Report: The Singularity , archived from the original on 11 August 2011 , retrieved 25 July 2009 & Long-Term Growth As A Sequence of Exponential Modes Archived 2019-05-27 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Yudkowsky, Eliezer (2008), Bostrom, Nick; Cirkovic, Milan (eds.), "Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk" (PDF) , Global Catastrophic Risks , Oxford University Press: 303, Bibcode : 2008gcr..book..303Y , ISBN 978-0-19-857050-9 , archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2008 .

^ "The Uncertain Future" .

theuncertainfuture.com; a future technology and world-modeling project .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2010 .

^ Anders Sandberg and NickBostrom (2008).

"Global Catastrophic Risks Survey (2008) Technical Report 2008/1" (PDF) . Future of Humanity Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 May 2011.

^ "Existential Risks: Analyzing Human Extinction Scenarios and Related Hazards" .

nickbostrom.com . 2002.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2011 . Retrieved 25 January 2006 .

^ a b c Hawking, Stephen (1 May 2014).

"Stephen Hawking: 'Transcendence looks at the implications of artificial intelligence – but are we taking AI seriously enough?' " .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 5 May 2014 .

^ Nick Bostrom, "Ethical Issues in Advanced Artificial Intelligence" Archived 2018-10-08 at the Wayback Machine , in Cognitive, Emotive and Ethical Aspects of Decision Making in Humans and in Artificial Intelligence , Vol. 2, ed. I. Smit et al., Int. Institute of Advanced Studies in Systems Research and Cybernetics, 2003, pp. 12–17.

^ Eliezer Yudkowsky : Artificial Intelligence as a Positive and Negative Factor in Global Risk Archived 2012-06-11 at the Wayback Machine . Draft for a publication in Global Catastrophic Risk from August 31, 2006, retrieved July 18, 2011 (PDF file).

^ Hay, Nick (11 June 2007).

"The Stamp Collecting Device" .

SIAI Blog . Singularity Institute. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2010 .

^ Sandberg, Anders (14 February 2011).

"Why we should fear the Paperclipper" .

Andart . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ de Garis, Hugo (22 June 2009).

"The Coming Artilect War" .

Forbes . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Yudkowsky, Eliezer S. (May 2004).

"Coherent Extrapolated Volition" . Archived from the original on 15 August 2010.

^ Hibbard, Bill (2012), "Model-Based Utility Functions", Journal of Artificial General Intelligence , 3 (1): 1, arXiv : 1111.3934 , Bibcode : 2012JAGI....3....1H , doi : 10.2478/v10229-011-0013-5 , S2CID 8434596 .

^ a b Avoiding Unintended AI Behaviors.

Archived 2013-06-29 at the Wayback Machine Bill Hibbard. 2012 proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Artificial General Intelligence, eds. Joscha Bach, Ben Goertzel and Matthew Ikle.

This paper won the Machine Intelligence Research Institute's 2012 Turing Prize for the Best AGI Safety Paper Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Hibbard, Bill (2008), "The Technology of Mind and a New Social Contract" , Journal of Evolution and Technology , 17 , archived from the original on 15 February 2021 , retrieved 5 January 2013 .

^ Decision Support for Safe AI Design|.

Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine Bill Hibbard. 2012 proceedings of the Fifth Conference on Artificial General Intelligence, eds. Joscha Bach, Ben Goertzel and Matthew Ikle.

^ a b c Kemp, D. J.; Hilbert, M.; Gillings, M. R. (2016).

"Information in the Biosphere: Biological and Digital Worlds" .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

31 (3): 180– 189.

Bibcode : 2016TEcoE..31..180G .

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2015.12.013 .

PMID 26777788 .

S2CID 3561873 .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2016 . Retrieved 24 May 2016 .

^ Hilbert, Martin.

"Information Quantity" (PDF) .

^ a b Markoff, John (26 July 2009).

"Scientists Worry Machines May Outsmart Man" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 1 July 2017.

^ Robinson, Frank S. (27 June 2013).

"The Human Future: Upgrade or Replacement?" .

The Humanist .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ Eliezer Yudkowsky . "Artificial intelligence as a positive and negative factor in global risk." Global catastrophic risks (2008).

^ Bugaj, Stephan Vladimir, and Ben Goertzel. "Five ethical imperatives and their implications for human-AGI interaction." Dynamical Psychology (2007).

^ Sotala, Kaj, and Roman V. Yampolskiy. "Responses to catastrophic AGI risk: a survey." Physica Scripta 90.1 (2014): 018001.

^ Naam, Ramez (2014).

"The Singularity Is Further Than It Appears" .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 May 2014 .

^ Naam, Ramez (2014).

"Why AIs Won't Ascend in the Blink of an Eye – Some Math" .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 May 2014 .

^ Hall, J. Storrs (2008).

"Engineering Utopia" (PDF) .

Artificial General Intelligence, 2008: Proceedings of the First AGI Conference : 460– 467.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 December 2014 . Retrieved 16 May 2014 .

^ Goertzel, Ben (26 September 2014).

"Superintelligence — Semi-hard Takeoff Scenarios" . h+ Magazine.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2014 . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ More, Max.

"Singularity Meets Economy" .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2009 . Retrieved 10 November 2014 .

^ K. Eric Drexler , Engines of Creation , 1986 ^ Feynman, Richard P.

(December 1959).

"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom" . Archived from the original on 11 February 2010.

^ Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity Is Near, p. 215. Penguin Group, 2005.

^ The Singularity Is Near , p. 216.

^ Lanier, Jaron (2010).

You Are Not a Gadget: A Manifesto . New York, New York: Alfred A. Knopf . p.

26 .

ISBN 978-0307269645 .

^ Prasad, Mahendra (2019).

"Nicolas de Condorcet and the First Intelligence Explosion Hypothesis" .

AI Magazine .

40 (1): 29– 33.

doi : 10.1609/aimag.v40i1.2855 .

^ Campbell, Jr., John W. (August 1932).

"The Last Evolution" .

Amazing Stories . Project Gutenberg.

^ Moravec, Hans (1977).

Intelligent machines: How to get there from here and What to do afterwards ( wikidata ).

^ a b c Smart, John (1999–2008), A Brief History of Intellectual Discussion of Accelerating Change ^ Moravec, Hans (1979).

Today's Computers, Intelligent Machines and Our Future Archived 19 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine , wikidata .

^ Solomonoff, R.J.

"The Time Scale of Artificial Intelligence: Reflections on Social Effects" , Human Systems Management, Vol 5, pp. 149–153, 1985.

^ Vinge, Vernor (1 October 2004).

Marooned in Realtime . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4299-1512-0 .

^ David Pringle (28 September 1986).

"Time and Time Again" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 6 July 2021 .

^ Vinge, Vernor (1988).

Threats and Other Promises . Baen.

ISBN 978-0-671-69790-7 .

^ Dooling, Richard.

Rapture for the Geeks: When AI Outsmarts IQ (2008), p. 89 ^ "Will Robots Inherit the Earth?" .

web.media.mit.edu . Retrieved 14 June 2023 .

^ Oppy, Graham (2000).

"Colonizing the galaxies" .

Sophia .

39 (2). Springer Science and Business Media LLC: 117– 142.

doi : 10.1007/bf02822399 .

ISSN 0038-1527 .

S2CID 170919647 .

^ " "The Daily Show" Season 11, Episode 109: Frederick Lane (aired 23 August 2006)" .

IMDb .

^ Sandberg, Anders. "An overview of models of technological singularity." Roadmaps to AGI and the Future of AGI Workshop, Lugano, Switzerland, March. Vol. 8. 2010.

^ Singularity University Archived 2021-02-15 at the Wayback Machine at its official website ^ Guston, David H. (14 July 2010).

Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Society . SAGE Publications.

ISBN 978-1-4522-6617-6 .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

^ "Nanotechnology: The Future is Coming Sooner Than You Think" (PDF) . Joint Economic Committee United States Congress. March 2007.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 29 April 2012 .

^ Treder, Mike (31 March 2007).

"Congress and the Singularity" .

Responsible Nanotechnology .

Archived from the original on 7 April 2007 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

^ Dadich, Scott (12 October 2016).

"Barack Obama Talks AI, Robo Cars, and the Future of the World" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 3 December 2017 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

Sources [ edit ] Kurzweil, Ray (2005).

The Singularity Is Near . New York, New York: Penguin Group.

ISBN 9780715635612 .

William D. Nordhaus , "Why Growth Will Fall" (a review of Robert J. Gordon , The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living Since the Civil War , Princeton University Press, 2016.

ISBN 978-0691147727 , 762 pp., $39.95), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXIII, no. 13 (August 18, 2016), pp. 64, 66, 68.

John R. Searle , "What Your Computer Can't Know" (review of Luciano Floridi , The Fourth Revolution:  How the Infosphere Is Reshaping Human Reality , Oxford University Press, 2014; and Nick Bostrom , Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies , Oxford University Press, 2014), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXI, no. 15 (October 9, 2014), pp. 52–55.

Good, I. J.

(1965), "Speculations Concerning the First Ultraintelligent Machine" , in Franz L. Alt; Morris Rubinoff (eds.), Advances in Computers Volume 6 (PDF) , vol. 6, Academic Press , pp.

31– 88, doi : 10.1016/S0065-2458(08)60418-0 , hdl : 10919/89424 , ISBN 9780120121069 , archived from the original on 27 May 2001 , retrieved 7 August 2007 Hanson, Robin (1998), Some Skepticism , Robin Hanson, archived from the original on 28 August 2009 , retrieved 19 June 2009 Berglas, Anthony (2008), Artificial Intelligence will Kill our Grandchildren , archived from the original on 23 July 2014 , retrieved 13 June 2008 Bostrom, Nick (2002), "Existential Risks" , Journal of Evolution and Technology , 9 , archived from the original on 27 April 2011 , retrieved 7 August 2007 Hibbard, Bill (5 November 2014). "Ethical Artificial Intelligence".

arXiv : 1411.1373 [ cs.AI ].

Further reading [ edit ] Krüger, Oliver , Virtual Immortality. God, Evolution, and the Singularity in Post- and Transhumanism.

, Bielefeld: transcript 2021.

ISBN 978-3-8376-5059-4 .

Marcus, Gary , "Am I Human?: Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind", Scientific American , vol. 316, no. 3 (March 2017), pp. 58–63.

Multiple tests of artificial-intelligence efficacy are needed because, "just as there is no single test of athletic prowess, there cannot be one ultimate test of intelligence." One such test, a "Construction Challenge", would test perception and physical action—"two important elements of intelligent behavior that were entirely absent from the original Turing test ." Another proposal has been to give machines the same standardized tests of science and other disciplines that schoolchildren take. A so far insuperable stumbling block to artificial intelligence is an incapacity for reliable disambiguation . "[V]irtually every sentence [that people generate] is ambiguous , often in multiple ways." A prominent example is known as the "pronoun disambiguation problem": a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentence—such as "he", "she" or "it"—refers.

External links [ edit ] Listen to this article ( 52 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 3 November 2018 ( 2018-11-03 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) singularity | technology , britannica.com The Coming Technological Singularity: How to Survive in the Post-Human Era (on Vernor Vinge's web site, retrieved Jul 2019) Intelligence Explosion FAQ by the Machine Intelligence Research Institute Blog on bootstrapping artificial intelligence by Jacques Pitrat Why an Intelligence Explosion is Probable (Mar 2011) Why an Intelligence Explosion is Impossible (Nov 2017) How Close are We to Technological Singularity and When?

The AI Revolution: Our Immortality or Extinction – Part 1 and Part 2 ( Tim Urban , Wait But Why, January 22/27, 2015) v t e Existential risk from artificial intelligence Concepts AGI AI alignment AI boom AI capability control AI safety AI takeover Consequentialism Effective accelerationism Ethics of artificial intelligence Existential risk from artificial intelligence Friendly artificial intelligence Instrumental convergence Vulnerable world hypothesis Intelligence explosion Longtermism Machine ethics Suffering risks Superintelligence Technological singularity Organizations Alignment Research Center Center for AI Safety Center for Applied Rationality Center for Human-Compatible Artificial Intelligence Centre for the Study of Existential Risk EleutherAI Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Google DeepMind Humanity+ Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies Leverhulme Centre for the Future of Intelligence Machine Intelligence Research Institute OpenAI Safe Superintelligence People Scott Alexander Sam Altman Yoshua Bengio Nick Bostrom Paul Christiano Eric Drexler Sam Harris Stephen Hawking Dan Hendrycks Geoffrey Hinton Bill Joy Shane Legg Elon Musk Steve Omohundro Huw Price Martin Rees Stuart J. Russell Ilya Sutskever Jaan Tallinn Max Tegmark Frank Wilczek Roman Yampolskiy Eliezer Yudkowsky Other Artificial Intelligence Act Do You Trust This Computer?

Human Compatible Open letter on artificial intelligence (2015) Our Final Invention Roko's basilisk Statement on AI risk of extinction Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies The Precipice Category v t e Emerging technologies Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pm455
Cached time: 20250814235321
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.482 seconds
Real time usage: 1.711 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11201/1000000
Revision size: 117891/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 332680/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11034/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 503534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.945/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27061568/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1460.404      1 -total
 48.84%  713.214      2 Template:Reflist
 13.76%  200.985     46 Template:Cite_web
  9.13%  133.309     23 Template:Cite_book
  7.66%  111.830      6 Template:Annotated_link
  7.52%  109.778      9 Template:Cite_news
  6.29%   91.867     19 Template:Citation
  4.58%   66.896      1 Template:Futures_studies
  4.47%   65.240      1 Template:Sidebar
  4.46%   65.090      4 Template:Harvtxt Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54245:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814235321 and revision id 1305410598. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technological_singularity&oldid=1305410598 " Categories : Singularitarianism Existential risk from artificial intelligence Philosophy of artificial intelligence Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 Harv and Sfn no-target errors Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from October 2021 All articles that may have off-topic sections Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 22:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technological singularity 49 languages Add topic

