Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Great Britain 1.2 United States 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Game law 8 languages العربية Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Hausa Nederlands Polski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Regulations for hunting For laws regulating video games, see Video game controversy § Regulation of video games .

Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Game laws are statutes which regulate the right to pursue and hunt certain kinds of wild animals ( games or quarries ) and fish [ 1 ] (although the latter often comes under the jurisdiction of fisheries law ). The scope of game laws can include the following: Restricting the days to harvest fish or game (i.e.

open and closed seasons ); Restricting the number of animals per person; Restricting species, sex and age of animals allowed to be harvested; Restricting the region where hunting is allowed to take place, and; Limiting the weapons, gears and techniques that can be used.

Hunters, fishermen and lawmakers generally agree that the purposes of such laws is to balance the needs for preservation and harvest and to manage both environment and populations of game and fish.

[ 2 ] Game laws can provide a legal structure to collect license fees and other money which is used to fund conservation efforts as well as to obtain harvest information used in wildlife management practice.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Great Britain [ edit ] In Great Britain the game laws have developed out of the forest laws , which in the time of the Norman kings were very oppressive. Under William the Conqueror , it was as great a crime to kill one of the king's deer as to kill one of his subjects.

A certain rank and standing, or the possession of a certain amount of property, were for a long time necessary to confer upon anyone the right of pursuing and killing game. The first game qualification law was instituted in 1389 under Richard II. It stated that anyone without lands or tenements of 40 shillings a year, or clergyman under £10 a year, were forbidden from keeping greyhounds, hounds, other hunting dogs, and any other hunting equipment.

[ 4 ] The preamble to the Act states that commoners tended to poach on Holy Days when their superiors attended church and that these gatherings encouraged social unrest.

[ 5 ] The game qualifications were further elaborated under James I and then Charles II . These new laws heightened property value thresholds for keeping game hunting animals and instruments. It also introduced qualifications specifically relating to deer, rabbits, pheasants, and partridges.

[ 6 ] Game laws such as the British Night Poaching Act 1828 and Game Act 1831 , both still in force in modified form, and still more their predecessors, such as the notorious Black Act 1723 , enacted savage penalties for poaching .  But the Game Act installed under William IV did greatly mitigate the game laws: the necessity for any qualification except the possession of a game certificate was abolished, and the right was given to anyone to kill game on their own land, or on that of another with permission.

[ 7 ] United States [ edit ] During the early history of the United States , colonists who were concerned about the decline in populations of game animals struggled to find effective ways to protect them. Probably the earliest law on the subject was adopted by the town of Portsmouth, Rhode Island, in 1646, which closed the hunting season for deer "from the first of May till the first of November; and if any shall shoot a deere within that time he shall forfeit five pounds."  Several other colonies passed similar ordinances before 1720.  However, there was no effective enforcement of these early restrictions.

[ 8 ] Much later, a law passed in Massachusetts in 1817, established closed seasons for certain animals shot as game.

[ 9 ] Eventually wild game, whether of forest, field or stream, became perhaps better protected than in any other country in the world. All states passed game laws of their own. Nearly every state instituted a game and fish commission and numerous game wardens.

[ 7 ] A national game law, known as the Lacey Act , passed by the U.S. Congress in 1900, gave to the United States Department of Agriculture certain powers, by which, among other provisions, no importation of wild animals could be made without a permit from Secretary of Agriculture. Many important additions and amendments to the Federal laws were passed during the succeeding 10 years, all tending to protect game and game birds in their natural state without interfering with the importation of birds' eggs or animals for breeding purposes. During 1910 there was an increase in these importations.

[ 7 ] Congress then came to adopt the theory that the migratory birds, being in most cases mere travelers across states, were not local residents nor state property, but belonged to the people at large; and if they were to be saved to the people the national authority must intervene. Therefore, Congress passed (4 March 1913) the Weeks–McLean Act , the gist of which was: [ 9 ] “All wild geese, wild swans, brant, wild ducks, plover, woodcock, rail, wild pigeons, and all other migratory game and insectivorous birds which in their northern and southern migrations pass through or do not remain permanently the entire year within the borders of any State or Territory, shall hereafter be deemed to be within the custody and protection of the Government of the United States, and shall not be destroyed or taken contrary to regulations hereinafter provided therefor. The Department of Agriculture is hereby authorized and directed to adopt suitable regulations to give effect to the previous paragraph.” The most important effect of this law — and a very far-reaching benefit — was the stoppage of the shooting of wild fowl in the spring, which was especially prevalent in the Mississippi River Valley .

[ 9 ] Because of a constitutional weakness, this act was later replaced by the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 .

See also [ edit ] Common law Conservation movement Enclosure Environmental law Federal Duck Stamp Fisheries management Fishing Fox hunting legislation Game Act 1831 Hunting Hunting license Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Opposition to hunting Poaching Species affected by poaching Wildlife management References [ edit ] ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Game Laws" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 11 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 440.

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-01-07 . Retrieved 2007-01-07 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-12-30 . Retrieved 2007-01-07 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Burn, Richard (1772).

The Justice of the Peace, and Parish Officer, Volume 2 . London: W. Strahan, M Woodfall, Law-Printers to the King. p. 224.

^ Peter Cook, 'The "Prerogative Property" Basis of the English Game Law System' in Brian W. Harvey, Frank Meisel, Peter J Cook (eds.), Property and Protection: Essays in Honour of Brian W. Harvey, Bloomsbury Academic, 2000, 110 ^ Burn, Richard (1772).

The Justice of the Peace, and Parish Officer, Volume 2 . London: W. Strahan, M Woodfall, Law-Printers to the King. p. 225.

^ a b c Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Game Laws" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

^ Trefethen, James (1975).

An American Crusade for Wildlife . Boone and Crockett Club. pp.

39– 40.

ISBN 0-940864-02-9 .

^ a b c Rines, George Edwin, ed. (1920).

"Birds, Protection of" .

Encyclopedia Americana .

v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Game_law&oldid=1265847386 " Category : Hunting legislation Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: archived copy as title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 December 2024, at 23:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Game law 8 languages Add topic

