Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In economy and trade 2 In social policy and government 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalization 34 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Lombard Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română Русский سنڌي Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relaxation of previous government restrictions Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Liberalization ( American English ) or liberalisation ( British English ) is a broad term that refers to the practice of making laws, systems, or opinions less severe, [ 1 ] usually in the sense of eliminating certain government regulations or restrictions. The term is used most often in relation to economics , where it refers to economic liberalization , the removal or reduction of restrictions placed upon (a particular sphere of) economic activity.

[ 2 ] However, liberalization can also be used as a synonym for decriminalization or legalization (the act of making something legal after it used to be illegal), for example when describing drug liberalization .

In economy and trade [ edit ] Main article: Economic liberalization Economic liberalization refers to the reduction or elimination of government regulations or restrictions on private business and trade.

[ 3 ] It is usually promoted by advocates of free markets and free trade , whose ideology is also called economic liberalism . Economic liberalization also often involves reductions of taxes, social security, and unemployment benefits.

Economic liberalization is often associated with privatization , which is the process of transferring ownership or outsourcing of a business, enterprise, agency, public service or public property from the public sector to the private sector . For example, the European Union has liberalized gas and electricity markets, instituting a competitive system. Some leading European energy companies such as France's EDF and Sweden's Vattenfall remain partially or completely in government ownership.

[ citation needed ] Liberalized and privatized public services may be dominated by big companies, particularly in sectors with high capital, water, gas, or electricity costs.

[ citation needed ] In some cases they may remain legal monopolies, at least for some segments of the market like consumers.

[ citation needed ] Liberalization, privatization and stabilization are the Washington Consensus 's trinity strategy for economies in transition.

[ citation needed ] The Bretton Woods Conference of 1944, which recommended the establishment of International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank , had also recommended the establishment of an International Trade Organization (ITO). Although, the IMF and the World Bank were established in 1946, the proposal for ITO did not materialize. Instead, the General Agreement on Tariff and Trade (GATT) , a less ambitious institution, was formed in 1948. The primary objective of GATT is to expand international trade by liberalizing trade so as to bring about all round economic prosperity. GATT was signed in 1947, came into effect in 1948 and lasted until 1994. It was replaced by the World Trade Organization in 1995. The original GATT text (GATT 1947) is still in effect under the WTO framework. Thus liberalization was born.

[ citation needed ] There is also a concept of hybrid liberalization. For instance, in Ghana , cocoa crops can be sold to competing private companies , but there is a minimum price for which it can be sold and all exports are controlled by the state.

[ 4 ] The term liberalization has its origin in the political ideology liberalism , which took form by the early 19th century.

In social policy and government [ edit ] In social policy, liberalization may refer to a relaxation of laws restricting certain practices or activities, such as divorce , abortion , or psychoactive drugs . Regarding civil rights , it may refer to the elimination of laws prohibiting homosexuality , private ownership of firearms or other items, same-sex marriage , inter-racial marriage , or inter-faith marriage .

[ citation needed ] There is a distinct difference between liberalization and democratization . Liberalization can take place without democratization, and deals with a combination of policy and social change specialized to a certain issue, such as the liberalization of government-held property for private purchase. Democratization is politically highly specialized; it can arise from a liberalization but works on a broader level of governmental liberalization.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Liberalism portal Libertarianism portal Artistic freedom Civil libertarianism Cultural liberalism Decriminalization of sex work Deregulation Drug liberalization Emancipation Energy liberalisation Free trade Freedom of speech Freedom of thought German reunification Libertarianism Liberty Marketization Oligopoly Sex-positive movement Sexual revolution Social liberalism References [ edit ] ^ Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary : Liberalization ^ Oxford English Dictionary : Liberalization ^ O'Sullivan, Arthur ; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003).

Economics: Principles in Action . New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall . p.

175 .

ISBN 0-13-063085-3 .

^ Marcella Vigneri and Paulo Santos (2007) " Ghana and the cocoa marketing dilemma: What has liberalization without price competition achieved?

Archived 7 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ", Overseas Development Institute Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalization&oldid=1298372305 " Categories : Market structure Economics of regulation Law reform Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 02:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalization 34 languages Add topic

