Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant 4 languages العربية Español فارسی 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of Immanuel Kant's political philosophy Part of a series on Immanuel Kant Major works Critique of Pure Reason Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics " Answering the Question: What Is Enlightenment?

" Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals Critique of Practical Reason Critique of Judgment Religion within the Bounds of Bare Reason Perpetual Peace The Metaphysics of Morals " On a Supposed Right to Tell Lies from Benevolent Motives " Opus Postumum Kantianism • Kantian ethics Transcendental idealism Critical philosophy Sapere aude Thing-in-itself Schema A priori and a posteriori Analytic–synthetic distinction Noumenon Category Categorical imperative Hypothetical imperative " Kingdom of Ends " Political philosophy Teleology People J. G. Fichte G. W. F. Hegel David Hume F. H. Jacobi Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Related topics German idealism Neo-Kantianism Category • Philosophy portal The political philosophy of Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) favoured a classical republican approach.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1795), Kant listed several conditions that he thought necessary for ending wars and creating a lasting peace. They included a world of constitutional republics  by establishment of political community .

[ 3 ] His classical republican theory was extended in Doctrine of Right (1797), the first part of Metaphysics of Morals .

[ 4 ] At the end of the 20th century Kant's political philosophy had been enjoying a remarkable renaissance in English-speaking countries with more major studies in a few years than had appeared in the preceding many decades.

[ 5 ] Overview [ edit ] Kant's most significant contribution to political philosophy and the philosophy of law is the doctrine of Rechtsstaat . According to this doctrine, the power of the state is limited in order to protect citizens from the arbitrary exercise of authority . The Rechtsstaat is a concept in continental European legal thinking, originally borrowed from German jurisprudence , which can be translated as "the legal state" or "state of rights". It is a  "constitutional state " in which the exercise of governmental power is constrained by the law , [ 6 ] and is often tied to the Anglo-American concept of the rule of law . Kant's political philosophy has been described as liberal for its presumption of limits on the state based on the social contract as a regulative matter.

[ 7 ] In a Rechtsstaat , the citizens share legally based civil liberties and they can use the courts . A country cannot be a liberal democracy without first being a Rechtsstaat . German writers usually place Immanuel Kant 's theories at the beginning of their accounts of the movement toward the Rechtsstaat .

[ 8 ] The Rechtsstaat in the meaning of "constitutional state" was introduced in the latest works of Immanuel Kant after US and French constitutions were adopted in the late 18th century.  Kant's approach is based on the supremacy of a country's written constitution. This supremacy must create guarantees for implementation of his central idea:  a permanent peaceful life as a basic condition for the happiness of its people and their prosperity.  Kant was basing his doctrine on none other but constitutionalism and constitutional government. Kant had thus formulated the main problem of constitutionalism, “The constitution of a state is eventually based on the morals of its citizens, which, in its turns, is based on the goodness of this constitution.” [ citation needed ] Kant's idea is the foundation for the constitutional theory of the twentieth century.

The Rechtsstaat concept is based on the ideas, discovered by Immanuel Kant, for example, in his Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals : "The task of establishing a universal and permanent peaceful life is not only a part of the theory of law within the framework of pure reason, but per se an absolute and ultimate goal. To achieve this goal, a state must become the community of a large number of people, living provided with legislative guarantees of their property rights secured by a common constitution. The supremacy of this constitution… must be derived a priori from the considerations for achievement of the absolute ideal in the most just and fair organization of people’s life under the aegis of public law." [ 9 ] The concept of the Rechtsstaat appeared in the German context in Robert von Mohl 's book Die deutsche Polizeiwissenschaft nach den Grundsätzen des Rechtsstaates ("German police science according to the principles of the constitutional state", 1832–1834), and was contrasted with the aristocratic police state .

Kant opposed "democracy" – which, in that era, meant direct democracy – believing that majority rule posed a threat to individual liberty. He stated, "…democracy is, properly speaking, necessarily a despotism, because it establishes an executive power in which "all" decide for or even against one who does not agree; that is, "all", who are not quite all, decide, and this is a contradiction of the general will with itself and with freedom." [ 10 ] As most writers at the time he distinguished three forms of government: democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy with mixed government as the most ideal form of government.

A distinctive feature of Kant's political philosophy is his conviction that the university should be a model of creative conflict: the philosopher's role within the university should be to "police" the higher faculties (which in his day were theology, law and medicine), making sure their teaching conforms to the principles of reason; likewise, the goal of perpetual peace in society can be achieved only when the rulers consult with philosophers on a regular basis.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Constitutionalism Roerich Pact Rule according to higher law Rule of law Universal History References [ edit ] ^ Kant’s Principles of Politics, including his essay on Perpetual Peace. A Contribution to Political Science , translation by W. Hastie, Edinburgh: Clark, 1891.

^ Varaba, Dinebari D.; Berebon, Charles N. (2021).

"The Philosophy of Law of Immanuel Kant" .

Tamaddun .

20 (2): 271– 282.

doi : 10.33096/tamaddun.v20i2.166 .

^ Kant, Immanuel.

Perpetual Peace . Trans. Lewis White Beck (377). For a summary and ^ Manfred Riedel Between Tradition and Revolution: The Hegelian Transformation of Political Philosophy , Cambridge 1984 ^ Smith, A. Anthony (1985-04-01). "Kant's Political Philosophy: Rechtsstaat or Council Democracy?".

The Review of Politics .

47 (2): 253– 280.

doi : 10.1017/s003467050003672x .

JSTOR 1406673 .

S2CID 144847787 .

^ Carl Schmitt , The Concept of the Political , ch. 7; Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy ^ • Gerald Gaus and Shane D. Courtland,  2011, "Liberalism" , 1.1, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

• Immanuel Kant, ([1797]).

The Metaphysics of Morals , Part 1), Bobbs-Merrill.

^ Friedrich Hayek , The Constitution of Liberty .

^ Immanuel Kant, in History of Political Philosophy , edited by Leo Strauss and Joseph Cropsey , University of Chicago Press, Chicago and London, 1987 ^ Kant, Immanuel.

Perpetual Peace . Trans. Lewis White Beck (352).

^ For an explanation and defense of these two aspects of Kant's political theory, see Stephen Palmquist's essays: "Kant's Ideal of the University as a Model for World Peace" , in Papers of International Conference on Two Hundred Years after Kant (Tehran, Iran: Allame Tabataba'i University Press, 2005), pp.207-222; and "The Philosopher as a 'Secret Agent' for Peace: Taking Seriously Kant's Revival of the 'Old Question'" , in Valerio Rohden, Ricardo R. Terra and Guido A. de Almeida (eds.), Recht und Frieden in der Philosophie Kants , vol. 4 of Akten des X. Internationalen Kant-Kongresses (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2008), pp.601-612.

Further reading [ edit ] Ebels-Duggan, Kyla (2012). "Kant's Political Philosophy".

Philosophy Compass .

7 (12): 896– 909.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-9991.2012.00525.x .

Maliks, Reidar (2014).

Kant's Politics in Context . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199645152 .

v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Political_philosophy_of_Immanuel_Kant&oldid=1304326569 " Categories : Kantianism Philosophy of law Classical liberalism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2014 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 10:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant 4 languages Add topic

