Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Editions 3 People of the Year 4 Other media 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Limca Book of Records 7 languages العربية বাংলা हिन्दी മലയാളം मराठी தமிழ் తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human and natural world records Limca Book of Records Editor Anirban Sarkar [ 1 ] Language English Series Limca Book of Records Subject National records by Indians Genre Indian National Record, Reference Book Published 1987–present Publisher Coca-Cola India (local division  of Coca Cola Company ) Publication date Annually Publication place India ISBN 9788190114868 Website coca-colaindia.com The Limca Book of Records is an annual reference book published in India documenting world records held by Indians. The records are further categorised into education, literature, agriculture, medical science, business, sports, nature, adventure, radio and cinema.

[ 2 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Limca Book of Records is published in English and is a promotional tool of Limca , a soft drink brand, owned by the Coca Cola Company , it is a localised equivalent of the Guinness World Records .

[ 3 ] [ non-primary source needed ] History [ edit ] The Limca Book of Records was first published in 1990, when the Limca soft drink brand was owned by Parle Bisleri . It was started originally by Ramesh Chauhan, who sold it to The Coca-Cola Company in 1993.

[ 4 ] The book continued to be published by Coca-Cola. The Limca Book of Records is now published with the patronage of Coca-Cola India which manufactures Limca.

Editions [ edit ] Its year 2006 edition was launched in New Delhi by Atul Singh, CEO of Coca-Cola India .

[ 5 ] On 25 September 2007, a special edition was released by Coca-Cola to commemorate 60 years of India's independence.

The 20th edition of this book was released by Amitabh Bachchan in March 2009.

[ 6 ] Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) chief G. Madhavan Nair also participated in this event.

[ 7 ] The 21st text edition of the book was launched on 29 March 2011. As the sports achievers special edition, it pays special tribute to the Indian athletes in the 2010 Commonwealth Games and Asian Games .

The 25th edition marking the Silver Jubilee of the book's publication was launched on International Women’s Day in 2014.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The 26th edition of Limca Book of Records was launched at the Jaipur Literature Festival in January 2015.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The 27th edition of Limca Book of Records is The Specially Abled Edition in 2016.

[ 12 ] People of the Year [ edit ] Main article: People of the Year Since 1992, Limca Book of Records has featured ' People of the Year '. A panel of judges (including the editorial team) selects people who have consistently contributed to 'Indian excellence'.

[ 13 ] Other media [ edit ] Coca-colaindia.com published an online Limca book of records archive [ 14 ] featuring several landmark records set in India.

In 1996, the Indian national television channel Doordarshan broadcast 19 episodes of Limca Book Of Records Ki Anokhi Duniya which were hosted by Siddharth Kak and featured events from the book.

In 2008, Star TV News Channel aired Limca Book of Records Wah India Show on Saturdays and Sundays from April to December.

[ 15 ] Siddarth Kak made the film Triumph of the Spirit about the Limca Book of Records .

[ 16 ] The film was broadcast by the National Geographic group Fox History and Entertainment channel in 2010.

References [ edit ] ^ "Letter from the Editor" .

Limca Book of Records . Archived from the original on 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "Rules for submission" .

Limca Book of Records . Archived from the original on 26 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

^ "India's Pride – Limca Book of Records (LBR) 2016 unveiled at the Make India Summit, Mumbai" . Coca-Cola, India. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 .

^ "Bisleri's Ramesh Chauhan offers to buy back Limca Book" .

timesofindia-economictimes . Archived from the original on 12 August 2011.

^ "The Hindu Business Line : Limca Book of Records 2006 edition" . Blonnet.com. 10 June 2006 . Retrieved 8 December 2009 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "People of the country give me inspiration: Big B" . The Indian Express . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Amitabh releases Limca Book of Records' 20th edition" . Hindustan Times.

^ "On its silver jubilee, Limca Book of Records celebrates Women's Day" . IBN Live. Archived from the original on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Women Achievers Honoured at Launch of Limca Book of Records" . The Indian Express. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Limca Book honours literary stalwarts in special edition" . Business Standard . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "Jaipur Literature Festival begins on grand note" .

^ "India's Pride – Limca Book of Records (LBR) 2016 unveiled at the Make India Summit, Mumbai" . Coca-Cola, India. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 May 2017 .

^ "People of The Year" .

Limca Book of Records . Archived from the original on 4 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 May 2016 .

^ "Limca book of records archive" .

The Coca-Cola Company . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ "Stunning stunts script record - Martial art expert wards off .22mm bullets with tongue" . The Telegraph. Archived from the original on 9 March 2015 . Retrieved 5 March 2015 .

^ "History" .

Limca Book of Records . Archived from the original on 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Records World records Category: World records Guinness World Records Limca Book of Records People Heaviest Oldest Shortest Tallest Sporting records Archery Chess Cricket Test One Day International Twenty20 International Cycling FIBA Basketball World Cup records FIFA World Cup records Formula One motorsport constructors drivers Grand Prix motorcycle racing Juggling World Rally Championship Speed skating Figure skating Swimming Athletics Athletics record progressions Olympic records National records Weightlifting Men 1993–1997 1998–2018 Women 1998–2018 Junior Youth In Australia National Rugby League Australian Football League In the US NBA Regular season Post-season All-Star NFL Individual Quarterback Team NHL Individual Team All-Star Major League Baseball Career Season Game Major League Soccer Track and field WNBA Regular season Post-season In India Indian Super League National records Japan Palestine Philippines Thailand Motion records Speed Wave Light Sound Vehicle Spacecraft Aircraft Propeller-driven Transcontinental Land vehicle (propulsively-driven Wheel-driven On rails Motorcycle Production model by top speed by acceleration Production car by top speed by acceleration Power output British Water-borne vehicle Sailing Submerged Transatlantic Distance Furthest spacecraft Furthest landing on another world Furthest humans Furthest travel on another world Closest to the Sun) Furthest flight Highest altitude) Deepest ocean vehicle Endurance Space Spaceflight On another world Person Spacecraft population Aircraft Spaceflight records Fédération Aéronautique Internationale records Structures List of tallest structures History of the world's tallest structures Tallest structures by category Category on tallest structures Superlative trees Physical phenomena Solar System extremes Extremes on Earth Extreme points of Earth List of weather records Organisms List of longest-living organisms Smallest organisms Largest organisms v t e The Coca-Cola Company Brands Soft drinks A&W Root Beer (Canada only) Ambasa Ameyal Barq's Beat Beverly Bjäre Julmust Blue Sky Cannings Coca-Cola Fanta Frutee Hit Icy Kist Royal Tropical Fioravanti Fresca Fruktime Frutonic Guaraná Jesus Inca Kola Iron Brew Joya Kia-Ora Kinley Kola Inglesa Krest Kuat Lemon & Paeroa Lift Mare Rosso Mello Yello Mezzo Mix Moxie Nordic Mist Northern Neck Ginger Ale OK Soda Pibb Xtra Portello Quatro Quwat Jabal Ramblin' Root Beer RimZim Red Flash Santiba Sarsi Seagram's Senzao Smart Sparkle Sparletta Sprite Chinotto Stoney Surge Urge Tab Tanora Tiky Vault VegitaBeta Victoria Yoli Juices and teas Ayataka Capri-Sun Delaware Punch Enviga Far Coast Five Alive Fruitopia Frutonic Fuze Glaceau Gold Peak Hi-C Honest Tea Innocent Matte Leão Minute Maid Cappy Oasis Odwalla Qoo Peace Iced Tea Simply Beverages Sokenbicha Sparkle Tum-E Yummies VitaminWater Zico Sports drinks Aquarius Bodyarmor SuperDrink Powerade Monster Beverage (17.9% stake) BPM Energy Burn Formula 50 Full Throttle Live+ Monster Mother NOS RAC 124 Relentless Tab Energy Von Dutch Bottled water Abbey Well AdeS Arwa Aquarius Ciel Dasani Deep River Rock Deep Spring Malvern Water Mount Franklin Water Neverfail Pump Smartwater Topo Chico Valpre Coffee-based Barista Bros Caribou Coffee Costa Coffee Dunkin' Donuts Georgia illy Dairy-based Fairlife Swerve Vio Purchased from Bisleri Citra Gold Spot Limca Thums Up Maaza Joint ventures Coca-Cola Beverages Africa (66.5%) Coca-Cola Europacific Partners (19.5%) Coca-Cola FEMSA (28%) Coca-Cola HBC (23.2%) Former holdings Beverage Partners Worldwide Coca-Cola Amatil Coca-Cola Enterprises Columbia Pictures Panamco TriStar Pictures Legal United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola (1916) Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co.

(1944) Sinaltrainal v. Coca-Cola (2001) POM Wonderful v. Coca-Cola (2014) Campaigns and slogans Ashita Ga Arusa Coke Zero Facial Profiler Coming Together Country Sunshine H 2 NO Hey Kid, Catch!

I'd like to buy the world a Coke The Lost Island of Alanna MagiCan Max Headroom Move to the Beat My Coke Rewards MyCoke Once Upon a Wheel Open Happiness Pepsi Invaders Coca-Cola polar bears The Polar Bears Share a Coke Other Assets Coca-Cola buildings and structures Criticism of Coca-Cola Cocacolonization Coca-Cola Freestyle Cola wars Limca Book of Records One, Two, Three (1961 film) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Limca_Book_of_Records&oldid=1264799895 " Categories : Book series introduced in 1990 Indian books Publications established in 1990 Records (superlatives) Trivia books World record databases Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Indian English from October 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from October 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from February 2024 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 23 December 2024, at 15:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Limca Book of Records 7 languages Add topic

