Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Weltanschauung and cognitive philosophy 3 Comparison of worldviews Toggle Comparison of worldviews subsection 3.1 Characteristics 4 Terror management theory 5 Religion 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Worldview 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Weltanschauungen ) Fundamental cognitive orientation of an individual or society This article is about the concept. For the WorldView satellite class, see DigitalGlobe . For the World View near-space balloon technology, see World View Enterprises . For the Worldview public television network owned by MHz Networks, see MHz Networks § MHz Worldview .

A worldview (also world-view ) or Weltanschauung is said to be the fundamental cognitive orientation of an individual or society encompassing the whole of the individual's or society's knowledge , culture , and point of view .

[ 1 ] However, when two parties view the same real world phenomenon, their world views may differ, one including elements that the other does not.

A worldview can include natural philosophy ; fundamental, existential, and normative postulates; or themes, values, emotions, and ethics.

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term worldview is a calque of the German word Weltanschauung [ˈvɛltʔanˌʃaʊ.ʊŋ] ⓘ , composed of Welt ('world') and Anschauung ('perception' or 'view').

[ 3 ] The German word is also used in English. It is a concept fundamental to German philosophy , especially epistemology and refers to a wide world perception . Additionally, it refers to the framework of ideas and beliefs forming a global description through which an individual, group or culture watches and interprets the world and interacts with it as a social reality .

Weltanschauung and cognitive philosophy [ edit ] Within cognitive philosophy and the cognitive sciences is the German concept of Weltanschauung . This expression is used to refer to the "wide worldview" or "wide world perception" of a people, family, or person. The Weltanschauung of a people originates from the unique world experience of a people, which they experience over several millennia. The language of a people reflects the Weltanschauung of that people in the form of its syntactic structures and untranslatable connotations and its denotations .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The term Weltanschauung is often wrongly attributed to Wilhelm von Humboldt , the founder of German ethnolinguistics . However, Humboldt's key concept was Weltansicht .

[ 6 ] Weltansicht was used by Humboldt to refer to the overarching conceptual and sensorial apprehension of reality shared by a linguistic community (Nation). On the other hand, Weltanschauung , first used by Immanuel Kant and later popularized by Hegel, was always used in German and later in English to refer more to philosophies, ideologies and cultural or religious perspectives, than to linguistic communities and their mode of apprehending reality.

In 1911, the German philosopher Wilhelm Dilthey published an essay entitled "The Types of Weltanschauung and their Development in Metaphysics" that became quite influential. Dilthey characterized worldviews as providing a perspective on life that encompasses the cognitive, evaluative, and volitional aspects of human experience. Although worldviews have always been expressed in literature and religion, philosophers have attempted to give them conceptual definition in their metaphysical systems. On that basis, Dilthey found it possible to distinguish three general recurring types of worldview. The first of these he called naturalism because it gives priority to the perceptual and experimental determination of what is and allows contingency to influence how we evaluate and respond to reality. Naturalism can be found in Democritus, Hobbes, Hume and many other modern philosophers. The second type of worldview is called the idealism of freedom and is represented by Plato, Descartes, Kant, and Bergson among others. It is dualistic and gives primacy to the freedom of the will. The organizational order of our world is structured by our mind and the will to know. The third type is called objective idealism and Dilthey sees it in Heraclitus, Parmenides, Spinoza, Leibniz and Hegel. In objective idealism the ideal does not hover above what is actual but inheres in it. This third type of worldview is ultimately monistic and seeks to discern the inner coherence and harmony among all things. Dilthey thought it impossible to come up with a universally valid metaphysical or systematic formulation of any of these worldviews, but regarded them as useful schema for his own more reflective kind of life philosophy. See Makkreel and Rodi, Wilhelm Dilthey, Selected Works, volume 6, 2019.

Anthropologically, worldviews can be expressed as the "fundamental cognitive, affective, and evaluative presuppositions a group of people make about the nature of things, and which they use to order their lives." [ 7 ] If it were possible to draw a map of the world on the basis of Weltanschauung , [ 8 ] it would probably be seen to cross political borders— Weltanschauung is the product of political borders and common experiences of a people from a geographical region, [ 8 ] environmental - climatic conditions, the economic resources available, socio-cultural systems , and the language family .

[ 8 ] (The work of the population geneticist Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza aims to show the gene- linguistic co- evolution of people).

According to James W. Underhill, worldview can periodically be used very differently by certain linguists and sociologists . It is for this reason that Underhill, and those who influenced him, attempted to wed metaphor in, for example, the sociology of religion , with discourse analysis . Underhill also proposed five subcategories for the study of worldview: world-perceiving, world-conceiving, cultural mindset, personal world, and perspective.

[ 6 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Comparison of worldviews [ edit ] See also: Social Axioms Survey One can think of a worldview as comprising a number of basic beliefs which are philosophically equivalent to the axioms of the worldview considered as a logical or consistent theory. These basic beliefs cannot, by definition, be proven (in the logical sense) within the worldview – precisely because they are axioms , and are typically argued from rather than argued for .

[ 11 ] However their coherence can be explored philosophically and logically.

If two different worldviews have sufficient common beliefs it may be possible to have a constructive dialogue between them.

[ 12 ] On the other hand, if different worldviews are held to be basically incommensurate and irreconcilable, then the situation is one of cultural relativism and would therefore incur the standard criticisms from philosophical realists .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Additionally, religious believers might not wish to see their beliefs relativized into something that is only "true for them".

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Subjective logic is a belief-reasoning formalism where beliefs explicitly are subjectively held by individuals but where a consensus between different worldviews can be achieved.

[ 17 ] [ clarification needed ] A third alternative sees the worldview approach as only a methodological relativism, as a suspension of judgment about the truth of various belief systems but not a declaration that there is no global truth. For instance, the religious philosopher Ninian Smart begins his Worldviews: Cross-cultural Explorations of Human Beliefs with "Exploring Religions and Analysing Worldviews" and argues for "the neutral, dispassionate study of different religious and secular systems—a process I call worldview analysis." [ 18 ] The comparison of religious, philosophical or scientific worldviews is a delicate endeavor, because such worldviews start from different presuppositions and cognitive values.

[ 19 ] Clément Vidal has proposed metaphilosophical criteria for the comparison of worldviews, classifying them in three broad categories: Objective consistency, comprising scientific validity and scope Subjective consistency, comprising personal utility and emotional satisfaction Intersubjective consistency, comprising collective utility and narrative coherence.

Characteristics [ edit ] While Leo Apostel and his followers clearly hold that individuals can construct worldviews, other writers regard worldviews as operating at a community level, or in an unconscious way. For instance, if one's worldview is fixed by one's language, as according to a strong version of the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis , one would have to learn or invent a new language in order to construct a new worldview.

According to Apostel, [ 20 ] a worldview is an ontology , or a descriptive model of the world. It should comprise these six elements: An explanation of the world A futurology , answering the question "Where are we heading?" Values, answers to ethical questions: "What should we do?" A praxeology , or methodology , or theory of action : "How should we attain our goals?" An epistemology , or theory of knowledge : "What is true and false?" An etiology . A constructed world-view should contain an account of its own "building blocks", its origins and construction.

Terror management theory [ edit ] Main article: Terror management theory In terror management theory , one's worldview helps to alleviate the anxiety caused by awareness of one's own mortality .

A worldview, according to terror management theory (TMT), serves as a buffer against death anxiety.

[ 21 ] It is theorized that living up to the ideals of one's worldview provides a sense of self-esteem which provides a sense of transcending the limits of human life (e.g. literally, as in religious belief in immortality; symbolically, as in art works or children to live on after one's death, or in contributions to one's culture).

[ 21 ] Evidence in support of terror management theory includes a series of experiments by Jeff Schimel and colleagues in which a group of Canadians found to score highly on a measure of patriotism were asked to read an essay attacking the dominant Canadian worldview.

[ 21 ] Using a test of death-thought accessibility (DTA), involving an ambiguous word completion test (e.g. "COFF__" could either be completed as either "COFFEE" or "COFFIN" or "COFFER"), participants who had read the essay attacking their worldview were found to have a significantly higher level of DTA than the control group, who read a similar essay attacking Australian cultural values. Mood was also measured following the worldview threat, to test whether the increase in death thoughts following worldview threat were due to other causes, for example, anger at the attack on one's cultural worldview.

[ 21 ] No significant changes on mood scales were found immediately following the worldview threat.

[ 21 ] To test the generalisability of these findings to groups and worldviews other than those of nationalistic Canadians, Schimel et al conducted a similar experiment on a group of religious individuals whose worldview included that of creationism .

[ 21 ] Participants were asked to read an essay which argued in support of the theory of evolution, following which the same measure of DTA was taken as for the Canadian group.

[ 21 ] Religious participants with a creationist worldview were found to have a significantly higher level of death-thought accessibility than those of the control group.

[ 21 ] Goldenberg et al found that highlighting the similarities between humans and other animals increases death-thought accessibility, as does attention to the physical rather than meaningful qualities of sex.

[ 22 ] Religion [ edit ] Religious practices will tie closely to a religion's worldview.

Nishida Kitaro wrote extensively on "the Religious Worldview" in exploring the philosophical significance of Eastern religions.

[ 23 ] According to Neo-Calvinist David Naugle 's World view: The History of a Concept , "Conceiving of Christianity as a worldview has been one of the most significant developments in the recent history of the church." [ 24 ] The Christian thinker James W. Sire defines a worldview as "a commitment, a fundamental orientation of the heart, that can be expressed as a story or in a set of presuppositions (assumptions which may be true, partially true, or entirely false) which we hold (consciously or subconsciously, consistently or inconsistently) about the basic construction of reality , and that provides the foundation on which we live and move and have our being." He suggests that "we should all think in terms of worldviews, that is, with a consciousness not only of our own way of thought but also that of other people, so that we can first understand and then genuinely communicate with others in our pluralistic society." [ 25 ] The commitment mentioned by James W. Sire can be extended further. The worldview increases the commitment to serve the world. With the change of a person's view towards the world, he/she can be motivated to serve the world. This serving attitude has been illustrated by Tareq M Zayed as the 'Emancipatory Worldview' in his writing "History of emancipatory worldview of Muslim learners".

[ 26 ] David Bell has also raised questions on religious worldviews for the designers of superintelligences – machines much smarter than humans.

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Life stance Belief#Belief systems Mindset References [ edit ] ^ Funk, Ken (21 March 2001).

"What is a Worldview?" . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ Palmer, Gary B. (1996).

Toward A Theory of Cultural Linguistics . University of Texas Press. p. 114.

ISBN 978-0-292-76569-6 .

^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" . Etymonline.com . Retrieved 2 December 2019 .

^ "Weltanschauung – Definition of Weltanschauung by Merriam-Webster" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 17 December 2019 .

^ "Worldview (philosophy) – Encyclopedia.com" .

Encyclopedia.com . 14 December 2019 . Retrieved 17 December 2019 .

^ a b Underhill, James W. (2009).

Humboldt, Worldview and Language (Transferred to digital print. ed.). Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0748638420 .

^ Hiebert, Paul G. (2008).

Transforming Worldviews: an anthropological understanding of how people change . Grand Rapids, Michigan: Baker Academic. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-8010-2705-5 .

^ a b c Whorf, Benjamin Lee (1964) [1st pub. 1956].

Carroll, John Bissell (ed.).

Language, Thought, and Reality. Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf . Cambridge, Mass.: Technology Press of Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

ISBN 978-0-262-73006-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Pp.

25 , 36 , 29-30 , 242 , 248 .

^ Underhill, James W. (2011).

Creating worldviews : metaphor, ideology and language . Edinburgh, Scotland: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0748679096 .

^ Underhill, James W. (2012).

Ethnolinguistics and Cultural Concepts: truth, love, hate & war . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107532847 .

^ See for example Daniel Hill and Randal Rauser: Christian Philosophy A–Z Edinburgh University Press (2006) ISBN 978-0-7486-2152-1 p200 ^ In the Christian tradition this goes back at least to Justin Martyr 's Dialogues with Trypho, A Jew , and has roots in the debates recorded in the New Testament For a discussion of the long history of religious dialogue in India, see Amartya Sen 's The Argumentative Indian ^ Cognitive Relativism , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ The problem of self-refutation is quite general. It arises whether truth is relativized to a framework of concepts, of beliefs, of standards, of practices.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Pope Benedict warns against relativism ^ Ratzinger, J.

Relativism, the Central Problem for Faith Today ^ Jøsang, Audun (21 November 2011).

"A Logic For Uncertain Probabilities" (PDF) .

International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and Knowledge-Based Systems .

09 (3): 279– 311.

doi : 10.1142/S0218488501000831 .

^ Ninian Smart Worldviews: Crosscultural Explorations of Human Beliefs (3rd Edition) ISBN 0-13-020980-5 p14 ^ Vidal, Clément (April 2012). "Metaphilosophical Criteria for Worldview Comparison".

Metaphilosophy .

43 (3): 306– 347.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.508.631 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9973.2012.01749.x .

^ Diederik Aerts , Leo Apostel , Bart de Moor, Staf Hellemans, Edel Maex, Hubert van Belle & Jan van der Veken (1994).

"World views. From Fragmentation to Integration" . VUB Press. Translation of Apostel and Van der Veken 1991 with some additions. – The basic book of World Views, from the Center Leo Apostel.

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f g h Schimel, Jeff; Hayes, Joseph; Williams, Todd; Jahrig, Jesse (2007). "Is death really the worm at the core? Converging evidence that worldview threat increases death-thought accessibility".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

92 (5): 789– 803.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.92.5.789 .

PMID 17484605 .

^ Goldenberg, Jamie L.; Cox, Cathy R.; Pyszczynski, Tom; Greenberg, Jeff; Solomon, Sheldon (November 2002). "Understanding human ambivalence about sex: The effects of stripping sex of meaning".

Journal of Sex Research .

39 (4): 310– 320.

doi : 10.1080/00224490209552155 .

PMID 12545414 .

S2CID 24419836 .

^ Indeed Kitaro's final book is Last Writings: Nothingness and the Religious Worldview ^ David K. Naugle Worldview: The History of a Concept ISBN 0-8028-4761-7 page 4 ^ James W. Sire The Universe Next Door: A Basic World view Catalog pp. 15–16 (text readable at Amazon.com) ^ Zayed, Tareq M.

"History of emancipatory worldview of Muslim learners" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Bell, David (2016).

Superintelligence and World-views: Putting the Spotlight on Some Important Issues . Guildford, Surrey, UK: Grosvenor House Publishing Limited.

ISBN 9781786237668 .

OCLC 962016344 .

[ page needed ] External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Worldview .

Wikiversity has learning resources about Exploring Worldviews Wikibook:The scientific world view Wiki Worldview Themes: A Structure for Characterizing and Analyzing Worldviews includes links to roughly 1000 Wikipedia articles " You are what you speak " (PDF) . Archived from the original on 20 September 2009.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) (5.15 MB) – a 2002 essay on research in linguistic relativity (Lera Boroditsky) "Cobern, W.

World View, Metaphysics, and Epistemology " (PDF) . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) (50.3 KB) inTERRAgation.com—A documentary project. Collecting and evaluating answers to "the meaning of life" from around the world.

Archived 19 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine The God Contention—Comparing various worldviews, faiths, and religions through the eyes of their advocates.

Cole, Graham A., Do Christians have a Worldview?

A paper examining the concept of worldview as it relates to and has been used by Christianity. Contains a helpful annotated bibliography.

World View article on the Principia Cybernetica Project Archived 5 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine Pogorskiy, E. (2015). Using personalisation to improve the effectiveness of global educational projects. E-Learning and Digital Media, 12(1), 57–67.

Worldviews – An Introduction from Project Worldview "Studies on World Views Related to Science" (list of suggested books and resources) Archived 4 February 2010 at the Wayback Machine from the American Scientific Affiliation (a Christian perspective) Eugene Webb, Worldview and Mind: Religious Thought and Psychological Development.

Columbia, MO: University of Missouri Press, 2009.

Benjamin Gal-Or, Cosmology, Physics and Philosophy , Springer Verlag, 1981, 1983, 1987, ISBN 0-387-90581-2 , ISBN 0-387-96526-2 .

v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐prbxs
Cached time: 20250817224029
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.714 seconds
Real time usage: 0.884 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2800/1000000
Revision size: 24165/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 132843/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3078/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100157/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.446/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14896760/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  717.887      1 -total
 32.45%  232.925      1 Template:Reflist
 16.47%  118.232     12 Template:Lang
 12.40%   89.022      1 Template:World_view
 12.05%   86.535      4 Template:Cite_web
 11.88%   85.282      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.86%   63.610      1 Template:Short_description
  6.09%   43.739      7 Template:Cite_book
  5.77%   41.416      1 Template:IPA
  5.43%   38.995      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:213446:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817224029 and revision id 1304242458. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Worldview&oldid=1304242458 " Categories : Conceptual modelling Belief Consensus reality Psychological attitude Psychological concepts Concepts in epistemology Epistemology of religion Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2020 CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 Articles containing German-language text Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Worldview 60 languages Add topic

