Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Larry Wall 41 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American computer programmer and author This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( July 2023 ) Larry Wall Wall in 2007 Born Larry Arnold Wall ( 1954-09-27 ) September 27, 1954 (age 70) Los Angeles, California , US Alma mater Seattle Pacific University UC Berkeley Occupation(s) Computer programmer, author Known for Perl , patch , Raku Spouse Gloria Wall Children 4, including Aron Website www .wall .org /~larry / Larry Arnold Wall (born September 27, 1954) [ 1 ] is an American computer programmer , linguist, and author known for creating the Perl programming language and the patch tool.

Early life and education [ edit ] Wall grew up in Los Angeles and Bremerton, Washington . He started higher education at Seattle Pacific University in 1976, majoring in chemistry and music and later pre-medicine . After a hiatus of several years working in the university's computing center, he graduated with a bachelor's degree in Natural and Artificial Languages.

[ 2 ] While in graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley , Wall and his wife were studying linguistics with the intention of finding an unwritten language, perhaps in Africa, and creating a writing system for it. They would then use this new writing system to translate various texts into the language, among them the Bible.

[ 3 ] For health reasons these plans were cancelled, and they remained in the United States, where Wall instead joined the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory after he finished graduate school.

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] Wall is the author of the rn Usenet client and the widely used patch program. He has won the International Obfuscated C Code Contest twice and was the recipient of the first Free Software Foundation Award for the Advancement of Free Software in 1998.

[ 3 ] Wall developed the Perl interpreter and language while working for System Development Corporation , which later became part of Burroughs and then Unisys .

[ 5 ] He is the co-author of Programming Perl (often referred to as the Camel Book and published by O'Reilly), which is the definitive resource for Perl programmers; and edited the Perl Cookbook . He then became employed full-time by O'Reilly Media to further develop Perl and write books on the subject.

[ 5 ] Wall's training as a linguist is apparent in his books, interviews, and lectures. He often compares Perl to a natural language and explains his decisions in Perl's design with linguistic rationale. He also often uses linguistic terms for Perl language constructs, so instead of traditional terms such as "variable", "function", and "accessor" he sometimes says " noun ", " verb ", and " topicalizer ".

Personal life [ edit ] Wall is an active member of the New Life, Church of the Nazarene .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] He also works with his local church for Bible Quizzing for the Nor-Cal district.

Wall's Christian faith has influenced some of the terminology of Perl, such as the name itself, a biblical reference to the "pearl of great price" ( Matthew 13:46).

[ 8 ] Similar references are the function name bless , and the organization of Raku (previously known as Perl 6) design documents with categories such as apocalypse and exegesis . Wall has also alluded to his faith when speaking at conferences, including at the Perl Conference 3.0 on August 23, 1999.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Free software portal List of computer scientists List of programmers Timeline of programming languages References [ edit ] ^ "The man behind the Perl - Things you might not know about Larry Wall" .

blog.builtinperl.com . Archived from the original on February 28, 2018 . Retrieved June 19, 2017 .

^ Marjorie Richardson (May 1, 1999).

"Larry Wall, the Guru of Perl" .

Linux Journal . Retrieved January 12, 2012 .

^ a b Larry Wall interviewed on the TV show Triangulation on the TWiT.tv network ^ Sims, David (April 8, 1998).

"Q&A With Larry Wall, Creator of Perl" . TechWeb. Archived from the original on December 5, 1998 . Retrieved August 15, 2011 .

^ a b "Larry Wall" . O’Reilly net . Retrieved January 12, 2012 .

^ "Larry Wall, Fundamentalist, non-Creationist, programmer" .

Gene Expression .

^ New Life Church ^ Silberman, Steve (2000), "Scripting on the Lido Deck" , Wired , vol. 8, no. 10, archived from the original on March 7, 2016 ^ Wall, Larry (August 30, 1999).

"Third State of the Onion" .

Perl.com . Retrieved January 15, 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Slightly Skeptical View on Larry Wall and Perl (Softpanorama Larry Wall's page) Perl, the first Postmodern Language External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Larry Wall .

Listen to this article ( 3 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 27 June 2006 ( 2006-06-27 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) Official website v t e Perl Things CPAN Perl Foundation Perl Mongers PerlMonks archives module Perl VM YAPC Frameworks BioPerl Catalyst Dancer DBI DBIx::Class LWP Mojolicious Moose Plack PSGI Template Toolkit Software Amavis Argus @SSP AWStats BackupPC Bricolage Bugzilla Dada Mail ikiwiki Makepp Movable Type Munin OTRS Request Tracker SpamAssassin TWiki / Foswiki W3Perl Webmin Related Parrot Raku Rakudo rules MoarVM Books Programming Perl Learning Perl Intermediate Perl Perl Best Practices People Larry Wall Randal L. Schwartz Damian Conway Allison Randal Audrey Tang Sean M. Burke chromatic brian d foy Jesse Vincent Outline Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Association for Computing Machinery DBLP People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Larry_Wall&oldid=1282973072 " Categories : 1954 births American computer programmers American members of the Church of the Nazarene Free software programmers Living people O'Reilly writers Perl writers Programming language designers Seattle Pacific University alumni UC Berkeley College of Letters and Science alumni Engineers from California People from Los Angeles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from July 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Use mdy dates from October 2012 Articles with hCards Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 18:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Larry Wall 41 languages Add topic

