Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Discovery and invention 1.2 Early use in Europe 1.3 Early use in the United States 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Limelight 19 languages Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of stage lighting once used in theatres and music halls For other uses, see Limelight (disambiguation) .

Diagram of a limelight burner Limelight (also known as Drummond light or calcium light ) [ 1 ] is a non-electric type of stage lighting that was once used in theatres and music halls . An intense illumination is created when a flame fed by oxygen and hydrogen is directed at a cylinder of quicklime ( calcium oxide ), [ 2 ] due to a combination of incandescence and candoluminescence . Although it has long since been replaced by electric lighting, the term has nonetheless survived, as someone in the public eye is still said to be "in the limelight". The actual lamps are called "limes", a term which has been transferred to electrical equivalents.

History [ edit ] Discovery and invention [ edit ] Heating calcium hydroxide (slaked lime) in a stove burner causes it to glow, although this is not as bright as a real limelight The limelight effect was discovered in the 1820s by Goldsworthy Gurney , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] based on his work with the "oxy-hydrogen blowpipe ", credit for which is normally given to Robert Hare .  In 1825, a Scottish engineer, Thomas Drummond (1797–1840), saw a demonstration of the effect by Michael Faraday [ 5 ] and realized that the light would be useful for surveying.  Drummond built a working version in 1826, and the device is sometimes called the Drummond light after him.

Early use in Europe [ edit ] 19th century limelight used for stage lighting (collection: Stadsschouwburg (city theatre) Bruges, Belgium) The earliest known use of limelight at a public performance was outdoors, over Herne Bay Pier , Kent, on the night of 3 October 1836 to illuminate a juggling performance by magician Ching Lau Lauro . This performance was part of the celebrations following the laying of the foundation stone of the Clock Tower . The playbill called it koniaphostic light and announced that "the whole pier is overwhelmed with a flood of beautiful white light".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Limelight was first used for indoor stage illumination in the Covent Garden Theatre in London in 1837 and enjoyed widespread use in theatres around the world in the 1860s and 1870s.

[ 8 ] Limelights were employed to highlight solo performers in the same manner as modern spotlights .

[ 9 ] Early use in the United States [ edit ] During the American Civil War in July and August 1863 calcium lights were used during the siege of Fort Wagner , allowing Union forces to illuminate their artillery target at night while supposedly blinding Confederate gunners and riflemen. Calcium lights were also installed on Union Navy ships.

[ 10 ] Limelight was replaced by electric arc lighting in the late 19th century.

See also [ edit ] Look up limelight or in the limelight in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Black-body radiation – Thermal electromagnetic radiation Timeline of hydrogen technologies List of light sources – Devices and processes that produce light Zirconia light – Chemical light Nineteenth-century theatrical scenery Klieg light – Carbon arc lamp References [ edit ] ^ James R. Smith (2004).

San Francisco's Lost Landmarks , Quill Driver Books.

^ "Chemical of the Week – Lime" .

scifun.chem.wisc.edu . Archived from the original on 17 February 2008 . Retrieved 24 December 2017 .

^ Limelight – Leeds University Archived 19 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Retrieved 18 October 2013.

^ Faraday, Michael; James, Frank A. J. L (1999).

The Correspondence of Michael Faraday . p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-86341-251-6 .

^ Carver, Craig M. (1991).

A history of English in its own words . New York: HarperCollins. p.

158 .

ISBN 0-06-270013-8 .

^ Bundock 2000 , p. 6.

^ The Mechanic and Chemist: A Magazine of the Arts and Sciences . 1839. p. 354.

^ Almqvist, Ebbe (2003).

History of industrial gases . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

72 –73.

ISBN 978-0-306-47277-0 .

^ Reid, Francis (2001).

The Stage Lighting Handbook (Stage and Costume) (6 Rev ed.). UK: A & C Black Publishers Ltd.

ISBN 0-7136-5396-5 .

^ In the Limelight: A Civil War Military Innovation Bibliography [ edit ] Bundock, Mike (2000).

Herne Bay Clock Tower: A Descriptive History . Herne Bay: Pierhead Publications.

ISBN 978-0953897704 .

Art Gallery of South Australia History of Limelights External links [ edit ] Media related to Limelight at Wikimedia Commons v t e Lighting Concepts Accent lighting Color rendering index Color temperature Electric light Glare Light fixture Light pollution Hawaii Hong Kong Lightbulb socket Bi-pin lamp base Edison screw Luminous efficacy Task lighting Methods of generation Incandescent Regular Edison Halogen Nernst Luminescent Cathodoluminescent Electron-stimulated Chemiluminescent Electrochemiluminescence Electroluminescent field-induced polymer Fluorescent Fluorescent lamp ( compact ) Fluorescent induction Photoluminescent Laser headlamp Radioluminescence Solid-state LED lamp Combustion Acetylene/Carbide Argand Campfire Candle Carcel Diya Flare Gas Kerosene Petromax Lantern Fanous Paper Limelight Luchina Magnesium torch Oil Qulliq Rushlight Safety Tilley Torch Electric arc Carbon arc Klieg light Yablochkov candle Gas discharge Deuterium arc Neon Neon lamp Plasma Sulfur Xenon arc Xenon flash High-intensity discharge (HID) Mercury-vapor Metal-halide ceramic Hydrargyrum medium-arc iodide (HMI) Hydrargyrum quartz iodide (HQI) Sodium vapor Stationary Reflector Ellipsoidal reflector Multifaceted reflector Parabolic aluminized reflector (PAR) Aviation obstruction Balanced-arm lamp Chandelier Emergency light Gas lighting Gooseneck lamp Intelligent street lighting Light tube Marine aid to navigation light Nightlight Neon lighting Pendant light Recessed light Sconce Street light in the US Torchère Track lighting Troffer Portable Bicycle lighting Flashlight Mechanically powered Tactical Glow stick Headlamp outdoor Lantern Laser pointer Navigation light Searchlight Solar lamp Automotive Automotive light bulb types Daytime running lamp Headlamp hidden high-intensity discharge sealed beam Rear position lights Reversing lights Safety reflector retroreflector Stop lights Turn signals trafficators Display Decorative Aroma lamp Blacklight Bubble light Christmas lights Crackle tube DJ lighting Electroluminescent wire Lava lamp Marquee Plasma globe Strobe light Theatrical Cinematic Floodlight Footlight Gobo Scoop Spotlight ellipsoidal reflector Stage lighting instrument Industrial Scientific Germicidal Grow light Infrared lamp Stroboscope Tanning Related topics Battlefield illumination Bioluminescence Laser Light art Luminous gemstones Signal lamp Sources Reflected Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Limelight&oldid=1303496424 " Categories : Types of lamp Stage lighting Scottish inventions Hydrogen technologies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from September 2022 Use dmy dates from September 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 09:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Limelight 19 languages Add topic

