Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Eighth century 2 Ninth century 3 Tenth century 4 Eleventh century 5 Twelfth century 6 Thirteenth century 7 Fourteenth century 8 Fifteenth century 9 Seventeenth century 10 Modern science 11 See also 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Sources 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Timeline of science and engineering in the Muslim world 4 languages العربية বাংলা Башҡортса اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards .

No cleanup reason has been specified. Please help improve this article if you can.

( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( April 2019 ) This timeline of science and engineering in the Muslim world covers the time period from the eighth century AD to the introduction of European science to the Muslim world in the nineteenth century. All year dates are given according to the Gregorian calendar except where noted.

Eighth century [ edit ] Astronomers and astrologers d 777 CE Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrahim ibn Habib ibn Sulayman ibn Samura ibn Jundab al-Fazari ( Arabic : إبراهيم بن حبيب بن سليمان بن سمرة بن جندب الفزاري‎) (died 777 CE) was an 8th-century Muslim mathematician and astronomer at the Abbasid court of the Caliph Al-Mansur (r. 754–775). He should not be confused with his son Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī , also an astronomer. He composed various astronomical writings ("on the astrolabe ", "on the armillary spheres", "on the calendar").

d 796 Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Habib ibn Sulayman ibn Samra ibn Jundab al-Fazari ( Arabic : إبراهيم بن حبيب بن سليمان بن سمرة بن جندب الفزاري‎) (died 796 or 806) was a Muslim philosopher , mathematician and astronomer . He is not to be confused with his father Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī , also an astronomer and mathematician. Some sources refer to him as an Arab , other sources state that he was a Persian . Al-Fazārī translated many scientific books into Arabic and Persian . He is credited to have built the first astrolabe in the Islamic world . Along with Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq and his father he helped translate the Indian astronomical text by Brahmagupta (fl. 7th century), the Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta , into Arabic as Az-Zīj ‛alā Sinī al-‛Arab ., or the Sindhind . This translation was possibly the vehicle by means of which the Hindu numerals were transmitted from India to Islam.

Biologists , neuroscientists , and psychologists (654–728) Ibn Sirin Muhammad Ibn Sirin ( Arabic : محمد بن سيرين‎) (born in Basra ) was a Muslim mystic and interpreter of dreams who lived in the 8th century. He was a contemporary of Anas ibn Malik . Once regarded as the same person as Achmet son of Seirim , this is no longer believed to be true, as shown by Maria Mavroudi .

Mathematics 780 – 850: al-Khwarizmi Developed the "calculus of resolution and juxtaposition" ( hisab al-jabr w'al-muqabala ), more briefly referred to as al-jabr, or algebra .

Ninth century [ edit ] The Conica of Apollonius of Perga , "the great geometer", translated into Arabic in the ninth century Chemistry 801 – 873: al-Kindi writes on the distillation of wine as that of rose water and gives 107 recipes for perfumes , in his book Kitab Kimia al-'otoor wa al-tas`eedat (Book of the Chemistry of Perfumes and Distillations.) [ citation needed ] 865 – 925: al-Razi wrote on Naft (naphta or petroleum) and its distillates in his book " Kitab sirr al-asrar " (book of the secret of secrets.) When choosing a site to build Baghdad's hospital, he hung pieces of fresh meat in different parts of the city. The location where the meat took the longest to rot was the one he chose for building the hospital. Advocated that patients not be told their real condition so that fear or despair do not affect the healing process. Wrote on alkali , caustic soda , soap and glycerine . Gave descriptions of equipment processes and methods in his book Kitab al-Asrar (Book of Secrets).

Mathematics 826 – 901: Thabit ibn Qurra (Latinized, Thebit.) Studied at Baghdad's House of Wisdom under the Banu Musa brothers. Discovered a theorem that enables pairs of amicable numbers to be found.

[ citation needed ] Later, al-Baghdadi (b. 980) developed a variant of the theorem.

Miscellaneous c . 810: Bayt al-Hikma ( House of Wisdom ) set up in Baghdad. There Greek and Indian mathematical and astronomy works are translated into Arabic .

810 – 887: Abbas ibn Firnas .

Planetarium , artificial crystals. According to one account that was written seven centuries after his death, Ibn Firnas was injured during an elevated winged trial flight.

Tenth century [ edit ] By this century, three systems of counting are used in the Arab world. Finger-reckoning arithmetic, with numerals written entirely in words, used by the business community; the sexagesimal system , a remnant originating with the Babylonians , with numerals denoted by letters of the arabic alphabet and used by Arab mathematicians in astronomical work; and the Indian numeral system , which was used with various sets of symbols. Its arithmetic at first required the use of a dust board (a sort of handheld blackboard ) because "the methods required moving the numbers around in the calculation and rubbing some out as the calculation proceeded." Chemistry 957: Abul Hasan Ali Al-Masudi , wrote on the reaction of alkali water with zaj ( vitriol ) water giving sulfuric acid .

Mathematics 920: al-Uqlidisi . Modified arithmetic methods for the Indian numeral system to make it possible for pen and paper use. Hitherto, doing calculations with the Indian numerals necessitated the use of a dust board as noted earlier.

940: Born Abu'l-Wafa al-Buzjani . Wrote several treatises using the finger-counting system of arithmetic and was also an expert on the Indian numerals system. About the Indian system, he wrote: "[It] did not find application in business circles and among the population of the Eastern Caliphate for a long time." [ 1 ] Using the Indian numeral system, abu'l Wafa was able to extract roots .

980: al-Baghdadi Studied a slight variant of Thabit ibn Qurra 's theorem on amicable numbers .

[ 1 ] Al-Baghdadi also wrote about and compared the three systems of counting and arithmetic used in the region during this period.

Eleventh century [ edit ] Mathematics 1048 – 1131: Omar Khayyam . Persian mathematician and poet. "Gave a complete classification of cubic equations with geometric solutions found by means of intersecting conic sections ." [ 1 ] Extracted roots using the decimal system (the Indian numeral system).

Twelfth century [ edit ] Cartography 1100–1165: Muhammad al-Idrisi , aka Idris al-Saqalli aka al-sharif al-idrissi of Andalusia and Sicily . Known for having drawn some of the most advanced ancient world maps .

Mathematics 1130–1180: Al-Samawal . An important member of al-Karaji's school of algebra. Gave this definition of algebra : "[it is concerned] with operating on unknowns using all the arithmetical tools, in the same way as the arithmetician operates on the known." [ 1 ] 1135: Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi . Follows al-Khayyam's application of algebra of geometry, rather than follow the general development that came through al-Karaji's school of algebra. Wrote a treatise on cubic equations which [ 2 ] [ page needed ] describes thus: "[the treatise] represents an essential contribution to another algebra which aimed to study curves by means of equations , thus inaugurating the beginning of algebraic geometry ." (quoted in [ 1 ] ).

Thirteenth century [ edit ] Chemistry Al-Jawbari describes the preparation of rose water in the work "Book of Selected Disclosure of Secrets" (Kitab kashf al-Asrar).

Materials; glassmaking : Arabic manuscript on the manufacture of false gemstones and diamonds . Also describes spirits of alum , spirits of saltpetre and spirits of salts ( hydrochloric acid ).

An Arabic manuscript written in Syriac script gives description of various chemical materials and their properties such as sulfuric acid , sal-ammoniac , saltpetre and zaj ( vitriol ).

Mathematics 1260: al-Farisi . Gave a new proof of Thabit ibn Qurra 's theorem, introducing important new ideas concerning factorization and combinatorial methods. He also gave the pair of amicable numbers 17296, 18416 which have also been joint attributed to Fermat as well as Thabit ibn Qurra .

[ 3 ] Astronomy Manuscript of al-Mulakhkhas fi al-Hay’ah in the Khalili Collection of Islamic Art Jaghmini completed the al-Mulakhkhas fi al-Hay’ah ("Epitome of plain theoretical astronomy"), an astronomical textbook which spawned many commentaries and whose educational use lasted until the 18th century.

[ 4 ] Miscellaneous Mechanical engineering: Ismail al-Jazari described 100 mechanical devices, some 80 of which are trick vessels of various kinds, along with instructions on how to construct them.

Medicine; Scientific method: Ibn Al-Nafis (1213–1288) Damascene physician and anatomist. Discovered the lesser circulatory system (the cycle involving the ventricles of the heart and the lungs ) and described the mechanism of breathing and its relation to the blood and how it nourishes on air in the lungs. Followed a "constructivist" path of the smaller circulatory system: "blood is purified in the lungs for the continuance of life and providing the body with the ability to work". During his time, the common view was that blood originates in the liver then travels to the right ventricle, then on to the organs of the body; another contemporary view was that blood is filtered through the diaphragm where it mixes with the air coming from the lungs. Ibn al-Nafis discredited all these views including ones by Galen and Avicenna (ibn Sina). At least an illustration of his manuscript is still extant.

William Harvey explained the circulatory system without reference to ibn al-Nafis in 1628. Ibn al-Nafis extolled the study of comparative anatomy in his "Explaining the dissection of [Avicenna's] Al-Qanoon " which includes a preface, and citations of sources. Emphasized the rigours of verification by measurement, observation and experiment . Subjected conventional wisdom of his time to a critical review and verified it with experiment and observation, discarding errors.

[ citation needed ] Fourteenth century [ edit ] Astronomy 1393–1449: Ulugh Beg commissions an observatory at Samarqand in present-day Uzbekistan .

[ citation needed ] Mathematics 1380–1429: al-Kashi . According to, [ 1 ] "contributed to the development of decimal fractions not only for approximating algebraic numbers , but also for real numbers such as pi . His contribution to decimal fractions is so major that for many years he was considered as their inventor. Although not the first to do so, al-Kashi gave an algorithm for calculating nth roots which is a special case of the methods given many centuries later by Ruffini and Horner ." Fifteenth century [ edit ] Mathematics Ibn al-Banna and al-Qalasadi used symbols for mathematics "and, although we do not know exactly when their use began, we know that symbols were used at least a century before this." [ 1 ] Seventeenth century [ edit ] Mathematics The Persian mathematician Muhammad Baqir Yazdi discovered the pair of amicable numbers 9,363,584 and 9,437,056 for which he is jointly credited with Descartes .

[ 3 ] A seventeenth-century celestial globe was made by Diya’ ad-din Muhammad in Lahore , 1663 (now in Pakistan ).

[ 5 ] It is now housed at the National Museum of Scotland . It is encircled by a meridian ring and a horizon ring.

[ 6 ] The latitude angle of 32° indicates that the globe was made in the Lahore workshop.

[ 7 ] This specific 'workshop claims 21 signed globes—the largest number from a single shop’ making this globe a good example of Celestial Globe production at its peak.

[ 8 ] Modern science [ edit ] Muslim scientists made significant contributions to modern science. These include the development of the electroweak unification theory by Abdus Salam , development of femtochemistry by Ahmed Zewail , invention of the graphite anode for lithium-ion battery by Rachid Yazami , invention of quantum dots by Moungi Bawendi , and development of fuzzy set theory by Lotfi A. Zadeh . Other major contributions include introduction of Kardar–Parisi–Zhang equation by Mehran Kardar , the development of Circuit topology by Alireza Mashaghi , and the first description of Behçet's disease by Hulusi Behçet .

Contributions of Muslim scientists have been recognized by 4 Nobel Prizes.

Abdus Salam was the first Muslim to win a Nobel Prize in science.

Rachid Yazami was the first Arab engineer to win the Draper Prize , considered the Nobel in engineering.

See also [ edit ] Arab Agricultural Revolution Islamic Golden Age Science in the medieval Islamic world Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences List of inventions in the medieval Islamic world References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Arabic Mathematics at the University of St-Andrews, Scotland ^ Rashed, R (1994).

The development of Arabic mathematics: between arithmetic and algebra . London, England.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b "Various AP Lists and Statistics" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2012 . Retrieved 9 November 2006 .

^ Ragep, Sally P. (2007).

"Jaghmīnī: Sharaf al-Dīn Maḥmūd ibn Muḥammad ibn ʿUmar al-Jaghmīnī al-Khwārizmī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

584– 5.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) ^ "Celestial globe" .

National Museums Scotland . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Savage-Smith, Emilie (1985).

Islamicate Celestial Globes: Their History, Construction, and Use . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. p. 67.

^ Savage-Smith, Emilie (1985).

Islamicate Celestial Globes: Their History, Construction, and Use . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. p. 69.

^ Savage-Smith, Emilie (1985).

Islamicate Celestial Globes: Their History, Construction, and Use . Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press. p. 43.

Sources [ edit ] Donald Routledge Hill and Ahmad Y Hassan (1986), Islamic technology–an illustrated history , ISBN 0-521-26333-6 .

Rashed, Roshdi; Morelon, Régis (1996).

Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science .

Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-12410-7 .

External links [ edit ] Qatar Digital Library - an online portal providing access to previously undigitised British Library archive materials relating to Gulf history and Arabic science "How Greek Science Passed to the Arabs" by De Lacy O'Leary St-Andrew's chronology of mathematics v t e Inventions and discoveries Lists of inventions or discoveries by country/region Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Brazil Britain England Scotland Wales Canada China inventions discoveries Croatia Czech Republic Denmark Egypt France Germany Greece India Indonesia Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Korea Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Inventions discoveries explorations Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal inventions discoveries Russia Serbia South Africa Spain Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Vietnam United States inventions before 1890 1890–1945 after 1991 discoveries by topic chemistry cosmology multiple discoveries science Historic inventions Byzantine Empire Indus Valley Medieval Islamic Military Native American Lost inventions Spurious inventions Lists of inventors or discoverers by country/region Worldwide African American African-American Puerto Rican Armenian Austrian British English Welsh Bulgarian German Italian New Zealand Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Swedish Swiss v t e Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Gardens Geometric pattern Literature Music Poetry Pottery Influences on Western art Economics History Agency Banking Capitalism Poverty Socialism Trust Usury Welfare History Timeline Historiography Early social change Early conquests Golden Age Contributions to Medieval Europe Reception in early modern Europe Law and politics Democracy consensus consultation Feminism Jurisprudence use of analogy decision-making schools Peace Quietism Secularism Early social change State Philosophy Early Contemporary Theology dialectic Ethics Logic Astrology Early sociology solidarity Medieval science Timeline Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy cosmology Geography and cartography Inventions Mathematics Medicine ophthalmology Physics Psychology Other fields Arab Agricultural Revolution Education Ijazah elementary school Sufi studies mysticism cosmology philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timeline_of_science_and_engineering_in_the_Muslim_world&oldid=1296154382 " Categories : Science in the medieval Islamic world Timelines of Muslim history Science timelines Technology timelines Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing cleanup from September 2011 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles without a reason field from September 2011 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from September 2011 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2021 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2021 Incomplete lists from April 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2014 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timeline of science and engineering in the Muslim world 4 languages Add topic

