Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mining claim (United States) Toggle Mining claim (United States) subsection 1.1 Staking a claim 1.2 Claim jumping 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Land claim 3 languages Deutsch Español Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legal declaration of desired control over an area For territorial claims by states, see Territorial dispute .

This article's lead section contains information that is not included elsewhere in the article .

If this information is appropriate for the lead, it should also be included in the article's body. Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Claim at the South Yuba River A land claim is "the pursuit of recognized territorial ownership by a group or individual".

[ 1 ] The phrase is usually only used with respect to disputed or unresolved land claims. Some types of land claims include aboriginal land claims , Antarctic land claims , and post-colonial land claims.

The term is also sometimes used when referring to disputed territories like Western Sahara or to refer to the claims of displaced persons.

In the colonial times of the United States, American men could claim a piece of land for themselves and the claim has different level of merit according to the de facto conditions: claim without any action on the ground claim with (movable) property of the claimant on the ground claim with the claimant visiting the land claim with claimant living on the land.

Today, only small areas of unclaimed land remain, yet large plots of land with little economical value (e.g., in Alaska) can still be bought for very low prices. Also, in certain parts of the world, land can still be obtained by making productive use of it.

Mining claim (United States) [ edit ] A mining claim is the claim of the right to extract minerals from a tract of public land. In the United States, the practice began with the California gold rush of 1849. In the absence of organized government, the miners in each new mining camp made up their own rules, and to a large extent adopted Mexican mining law. The Mexican law gave the right to mine to the first one to discover the mineral deposit and begin mining it. The area that could be claimed by one person was limited to that which could be mined by a single individual or a small group.

The US system of mining claims is an application of the legal theory of prior appropriation , by which public property is granted to the first one to put it to beneficial use.  Other applications of appropriation theory were the Homestead Act , which granted public land to farmers, and water rights in the west.

The California miners spread the concept of mining claims to other mining districts all over the western United States.  The US Congress legalized the practice in 1866, and amended it in the Mining Act of 1872 .  All land in the public domain , that is, federal land whose use has not been restricted by the government to some specific purpose, was subject to being claimed.  The mining law has been changed numerous times, but still retains some features similar to those settled on by the California 49ers .

The concept was also used in other countries, for example during the Australian gold rushes which occurred at a similar time starting from the 1850s, and included similar groups of people including miners that migrated from the American gold rushes. The Oriental Claims in Victoria are one example of this.

Staking a claim [ edit ] Corner post of the claim of the Blue Ribbon Mine in Alaska Staking a claim involves first the discovery of a valuable mineral in quantities that a "prudent man" (the Prudent Man Rule) would invest time and expenses to recover. Next, marking the claim boundaries, typically with wooden posts or capped steel posts, which must be four feet tall, or stone cairns, which must be three feet tall. Finally, filing a claim with both the land management agency (USFS or BLM), and the local county registrar.

There are four main types of mining claims: Placer (minerals free of the local bedrock, and deposited in benches or streams) Lode (minerals in place in the mother rock), Tunnel (a location for a proposed tunnel which claims all veins discovered during the driving of it) Millsite (a maximum five-acre site for processing ore) A mining claim always starts out as an unpatented claim. The owner of an unpatented claim must continue mining or exploration activities on an unpatented claim, or he may pay a fee to the land management agency by September 1 of each year, or it is considered abandoned and becomes null. Activities on unpatented claims must be restricted to those necessary to mining. A patented claim is one for which the federal government has issued a patent (deed). To obtain a patent, the owner of a mining claim must prove to the federal government that the claim contains locatable minerals that can be extracted at a profit. A patented claim can be used for any purpose desired by the owner, just like any other real estate. However, Congress has ceased funding for the patenting process, so at this time a claim cannot be patented.

[ citation needed ] Claim jumping [ edit ] A dispute when one party (a "claim jumper") attempts to seize the land on which another party has already made claim is known as "claim jumping".

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Gold placer claim Indigenous land claims in Canada Indigenous specific land claims in Canada Land grant Land rights Land reform Terra nullius (no man's land) Guano Islands Act Extraterrestrial real estate Claim club Land reform in South Africa References [ edit ] ^ "Land Claims" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 31 March 2020 .

^ "Definition" .

dictionary.com . Retrieved Jan 21, 2019 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_claim&oldid=1296073739 " Categories : Geography terminology Mining Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2024 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2024 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 16:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land claim 3 languages Add topic

