Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Publication 3 Style and influence 4 Notes 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Parerga and Paralipomena 10 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1851 German-language essay collection by Schopenhauer German original edition, 1851 Parerga and Paralipomena ( Greek for "Appendices" and "Omissions", respectively; German : Parerga und Paralipomena ) is a collection of philosophical reflections by Arthur Schopenhauer published in 1851.

[ 1 ] The selection was compiled not as a summation of or introduction to Schopenhauer's philosophy, but as augmentary readings for those who had already embraced it, [ 2 ] although the author maintained it would be comprehensible and of interest to the uninitiated nevertheless. The collection is divided into two volumes, covering first the parerga and thereafter the paralipomena to that philosophy. The parerga are six extended essays intended as supplementary to the author's thought. The paralipomena , shorter elaborations divided by topic into thirty-one subheadings, cover material hitherto unaddressed by the philosopher but deemed by him to be complementary to the parerga .

[ 2 ] Contents [ edit ] Volume One ( Parerga ) Preface Sketch of a History of the Doctrine of the Ideal and the Real Fragments for the History of Philosophy On Philosophy at the Universities Transcendent Speculation on the Apparent Deliberateness in the Fate of the Individual Essay on Spirit Seeing and everything connected therewith Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life: Fundamental division What a Man is What a Man has What a Man represents Counsels and Maxims On the Different Periods of Life Volume Two ( Paralipomena ) Stray yet Systematically Arranged Thoughts on a Variety of Subjects: On Philosophy and its Method On Logic and Dialectic 1 Ideas concerning the Intellect generally and in all Respects Some Observations on the Antithesis of the Thing-in-itself and the Phenomenon A few Words on Pantheism On Philosophy and Natural Science On the Theory of Colours On Ethics On Jurisprudence and Politics On the Doctrine of the Indestructibility of our True Nature by Death Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Vanity of Existence Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Suffering of the World On Suicide Additional Remarks on the Doctrine of the Affirmation and Denial of the Will-to-Live On Religion Some Remarks on Sanskrit Literature Some Archaeological Observations Some Mythological Observations On the Metaphysics of the Beautiful and Aesthetics On Judgement, Criticism, Approbation, and Fame On Learning and the Learned On Thinking for Oneself On Authorship and Style On Reading and Books On Language and Words Psychological Remarks On Women On Education On Physiognomy On Din and Noise Similes, Parables, and Fables 2 1 includes an introduction to The Art of Being Right , Schopenhauer's posthumously published discourse on rhetoric.

[ 3 ] 2 describes the hedgehog's dilemma , an analogy about the challenges of human intimacy.

Publication [ edit ] In light of the unenthusiastic reception of the philosopher's earlier publications, publishers were reluctant to commit to this, his last major work. It was only after significant difficulty and through the persuasion of the philosopher's disciple Julius Frauenstädt that Hayn of Berlin consented to publish the two volumes in a print run of 750 copies—with an honorarium of only ten copies for its author.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] Parerga and Paralipomena drew the attention of John Oxenford , a noted observer and translator of German literary culture, who contributed a favourable, albeit anonymous, review of the work for the English quarterly journal Westminster Review in 1852.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] The following year, Oxenford would write for the journal an article on Schopenhauer's philosophy entitled "Iconoclasm in German Philosophy", which, translated into German and printed in the Vossische Zeitung would spark immediate interest of Schopenhauer's work in Germany and propel the obscure figure to lasting philosophical prominence.

[ 2 ] In the following years, Schopenhauer succeeded in publishing new editions of all his previous work on the strength of the revived interest, although his plans for a revised edition of Parerga and Paralipomena were stymied by the deterioration of his health in the months preceding his death in 1860.

[ 4 ] Style and influence [ edit ] The subject matter and stylistic arrangement of the paralipomena were significant influences on the work of philosopher and psychologist Paul Rée , and through him most notably the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche , whose later work explores—following Schopenhauer—the relation of man to himself, the universe, the state, and women through the art of aphorism .

[ 5 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Wicks, Robert (November 17, 2007).

"Arthur Schopenhauer" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Center for the Study of Language and Information, Stanford University . Retrieved August 23, 2010 .

^ a b c d e E. F. J. Payne, "Translator's Introduction, Schopenhauer 2000 , p. xi ^ Warnock, Mary (May 8, 2005).

"With respect, you're an idiot" .

The Observer . Guardian Media Group . Retrieved August 23, 2010 .

^ a b c Cartwright, David (2005).

Historical Dictionary of Schopenhauer's Philosophy . Metuchen: Scarecrow Press. pp.

118– 121.

ISBN 0-8108-5324-8 .

^ Gordon, Daniel (2001).

Postmodernism and the Enlightenment . New York: Routledge. p. 183.

ISBN 0-415-92797-8 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Magee, Bryan (1997).

The Philosophy of Schopenhauer . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-823723-5 .

Schopenhauer, Arthur (2000) [1851].

Parerga and Paralipomena . E. F. J. Payne translation. Oxford: Clarendon Press .

ISBN 0-19-924220-8 .

Singh, Ravindra (2007).

Death, Contemplation and Schopenhauer . Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-7546-6050-7 .

External links [ edit ] Studies in Pessimism public domain audiobook at LibriVox (contains selections from Parerga and Paralipomena ) Essays of Schopenhauer by Arthur Schopenhauer contains selections from Parerga and Paralipomena The Essays of Arthur Schopenhauer; Religion, a Dialogue, Etc.

contains selections from Parerga and Paralipomena "Iconoclasm in German Philosophy" in The Westminster Review , Volume 59, 1853 (see p. 388) Pararerga und Paralipomena – Link to the book at archive.org (German fraktur) Schopenhauer Α. Sämtliche Werke. In 5 Bde. Stuttgart / Frankfurt am Main, 1976.

Bd. 4 ; Bd. 5 .

v t e Arthur Schopenhauer Books On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason On Vision and Colours The World as Will and Representation Critique of the Kantian philosophy On the Freedom of the Will On the Basis of Morality Parerga and Paralipomena The Art of Being Right Philosophy Aesthetics Animal rights Criticism of Kant's schemata Hedgehog's dilemma Metaphysical voluntarism Family Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer (father) Johanna Schopenhauer (mother) Adele Schopenhauer (sister) Andreas Schopenhauer (grandfather) Christian Heinrich Trosiener (grandfather) Johann Schopenhauer (great-grandfather) Hendrik Soermans (great-grandfather) Works about Critique of the Schopenhauerian philosophy In the Presence of Schopenhauer Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy The Schopenhauer Cure Related Arthur Schopenhauer (sculpture) Schopenhauer Society Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parerga_and_Paralipomena&oldid=1253719631 " Categories : 1851 non-fiction books Essay collections Philosophy essays Books by Arthur Schopenhauer Works about philosophical pessimism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 14:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parerga and Paralipomena 10 languages Add topic

