Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Acoustical properties 2 Atomic properties 3 Chemical properties 4 Electrical properties 5 Magnetic properties 6 Manufacturing properties 7 Mechanical properties 8 Optical properties 9 Radiological properties 10 Thermal properties 11 See also 12 References Toggle the table of contents List of materials properties 15 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Simple English Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mechanical properties ) A material property is an intensive property of a material , i.e., a physical property or chemical property that does not depend on the amount of the material. These quantitative properties may be used as a metric by which the benefits of one material versus another can be compared, thereby aiding in materials selection .

A property having a fixed value for a given material or substance is called material constant or constant of matter .

[ 1 ] (Material constants should not be confused with physical constants , that have a universal character.) A material property may also be a function of one or more independent variables , such as temperature. Materials properties often vary to some degree according to the direction in the material in which they are measured, a condition referred to as anisotropy . Materials properties that relate to different physical phenomena often behave linearly (or approximately so) in a given operating range [ further explanation needed ] . Modeling them as linear functions can significantly simplify the differential constitutive equations that are used to describe the property.

Equations describing relevant materials properties are often used to predict the attributes of a system.

The properties are measured by standardized test methods . Many such methods have been documented by their respective user communities and published through the Internet; see ASTM International .

Acoustical properties [ edit ] Acoustical absorption Speed of sound Sound reflection Sound transfer Third order elasticity ( Acoustoelastic effect ) Atomic properties [ edit ] Atomic mass : (applies to each element) the average mass of the atoms of an element, in daltons (Da), a.k.a. atomic mass units (amu).

Atomic number : (applies to individual atoms or pure elements) the number of protons in each nucleus Relative atomic mass , a.k.a. atomic weight: (applies to individual isotopes or specific mixtures of isotopes of a given element) (no units) Standard atomic weight : the average relative atomic mass of a typical sample of the element (no units) Chemical properties [ edit ] Main article: Chemical property Corrosion resistance Hygroscopy pH Reactivity Specific internal surface area Surface energy Surface tension Electrical properties [ edit ] Capacitance Dielectric constant Dielectric strength Electrical resistivity and conductivity Electric susceptibility Electrocaloric coefficient Electrostriction Magnetoelectric polarizability Nernst coefficient (thermoelectric effect) Permittivity Piezoelectric constants Pyroelectricity Seebeck coefficient Magnetic properties [ edit ] Curie temperature Diamagnetism Hall coefficient Hysteresis Magnetostriction Magnetocaloric coefficient Magnetothermoelectric power ( magneto-Seebeck effect coefficient ) Magnetoresistance Maximum energy product Permeability Piezomagnetism Pyromagnetic coefficient Spin Hall effect Manufacturing properties [ edit ] Castability : How easily a high-quality casting can be obtained from the material Machinability rating Machining speeds and feeds Mechanical properties [ edit ] Brittleness : Ability of a material to break or shatter without significant deformation when under stress; opposite of plasticity, examples: glass, concrete, cast iron, ceramics etc.

Bulk modulus : Ratio of pressure to volumetric compression (GPa) or ratio of the infinitesimal pressure increase to the resulting relative decrease of the volume Coefficient of restitution : The ratio of the final to initial relative velocity between two objects after they collide. Range: 0–1, 1 for perfectly elastic collision.

Compressive strength : Maximum stress a material can withstand before compressive failure (MPa) Creep : The slow and gradual deformation of an object with respect to time. If the s in a material exceeds the yield point, the strain caused in the material by the application of load does not disappear totally on the removal of load. The plastic deformation caused to the material is known as creep. At high temperatures, the strain due to creep is quite appreciable.

[ 2 ] Density : Mass per unit volume (kg/m^3) Ductility : Ability of a material to deform under tensile load (% elongation). It is the property of a material by which it can be drawn into wires under the action of tensile force. A ductile material must have a high degree of plasticity and strength so that large deformations can take place without failure or rupture of the material. In ductile extension, a material that exhibits a certain amount of elasticity along with a high degree of plasticity.

[ 3 ] Durability : Ability to withstand wear, pressure, or damage; hard-wearing Elasticity : Ability of a body to resist a distorting influence or stress and to return to its original size and shape when the stress is removed Fatigue limit : Maximum stress a material can withstand under repeated loading (MPa) Flexural modulus Flexural strength : Maximum bending stress a material can withstand before failure (MPa) Fracture toughness : Ability of a material containing a crack to resist fracture (J/m^2) Friction coefficient : The amount of force normal to surface which converts to force resisting relative movement of contacting surfaces between material pairs Hardness : Ability to withstand surface indentation and scratching (e.g. Brinell hardness number) Malleability : Ability of the material to be flattened into thin sheets under applications of heavy compressive forces without cracking by hot or cold working means.This property of a material allows it to expand in all directions without rupture.

[ 4 ] Mass diffusivity : Ability of one substance to diffuse through another Plasticity : Ability of a material to undergo irreversible or permanent deformations without breaking or rupturing; opposite of brittleness Poisson's ratio : Ratio of lateral strain to axial strain (no units) Resilience : Ability of a material to absorb energy when it is deformed elastically (MPa); combination of strength and elasticity Shear modulus : Ratio of shear stress to shear strain (MPa) Shear strength : Maximum shear stress a material can withstand Slip : A tendency of a material's particles to undergo plastic deformation due to a dislocation motion within the material. Common in Crystals.

Specific modulus : Modulus per unit volume (MPa/m^3) Specific strength : Strength per unit density (Nm/kg) Specific weight : Weight per unit volume (N/m^3) Surface roughness : The deviations in the direction of the normal vector of a real surface from its ideal form Tensile strength : Maximum tensile stress of a material can withstand before failure (MPa) Toughness : Ability of a material to absorb energy (or withstand shock) and plastically deform without fracturing (or rupturing); a material's resistance to fracture when stressed; combination of strength and plasticity Viscosity : A fluid's resistance to gradual deformation by tensile or shear stress; thickness Yield strength : The stress at which a material starts to yield plastically (MPa) Young's modulus : Ratio of linear stress to linear strain (MPa) (influences the stiffness and flexibility of an object ) Optical properties [ edit ] Main article: Optical properties Absorbance : How strongly a chemical attenuates light Birefringence Color Electro-optic effect Luminosity Optical activity Photoelasticity Photosensitivity Reflectivity Refractive index Scattering Transmittance Radiological properties [ edit ] Attenuation coefficients Half-life Neutron cross section Specific activity Thermal properties [ edit ] Phase diagram Boiling point Coefficient of thermal expansion Critical temperature Curie point Ductile-to-brittle transition temperature Emissivity Eutectic point Flammability Flash point Glass transition temperature Heat of vaporization Inversion temperature Melting point Thermal conductivity Thermal diffusivity Thermal expansion Triple point Vapor pressure Specific heat capacity See also [ edit ] Physical property Strength of materials Supervenience List of thermodynamic properties References [ edit ] ^ "ISO 80000-1:2022 Quantities and units — Part 1: General" .

iso.org . Retrieved 2023-08-31 .

^ SS Rattan, Strength of Materials (17 June 2016).

"Strength of Materials book" .

^ SS Rattan, Strength of Materials (17 June 2016).

"Strength of Materials book" .

^ Rattan, S S (17 June 2016).

"Strength of Materials book" .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8g2tb
Cached time: 20250812003441
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.190 seconds
Real time usage: 0.265 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 707/1000000
Revision size: 9892/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 8362/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 707/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 14691/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.112/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4505268/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  226.457      1 -total
 44.14%   99.961      1 Template:Reflist
 38.94%   88.188      4 Template:Cite_web
 30.51%   69.083      1 Template:Short_description
 15.67%   35.485      2 Template:Pagetype
 15.26%   34.560      1 Template:Explain
 13.46%   30.484      1 Template:Fix
  9.76%   22.109      3 Template:Main_other
  8.81%   19.955      1 Template:SDcat
  8.77%   19.856      2 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6318968:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003441 and revision id 1279917945. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_materials_properties&oldid=1279917945#Mechanical_properties " Categories : Chemical properties Materials science Physical quantities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2018 This page was last edited on 11 March 2025, at 10:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of materials properties 15 languages Add topic

