Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Participants in the 1957 exhibition Contemporary Bay Area Figurative Painting Toggle Participants in the 1957 exhibition Contemporary Bay Area Figurative Painting subsection 1.1 David Park 1.2 Elmer Bischoff 1.3 Richard Diebenkorn 1.4 Theophilus Brown and Paul John Wonner 1.5 Bruce McGaw 2 Other Notable Bay Area Figurative Artists Toggle Other Notable Bay Area Figurative Artists subsection 2.1 Joan Brown 2.2 Manuel Neri 2.3 Nathan Oliveira 2.4 Henrietta Berk 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bay Area Figurative Movement 3 languages Deutsch Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American art movement The Bay Area Figurative Movement (also known as the Bay Area Figurative School , Bay Area Figurative Art , Bay Area Figuration , and similar variations) was a mid-20th-century art movement made up of a group of artists in the San Francisco Bay Area who abandoned working in the prevailing style of Abstract Expressionism in favor of a return to figuration in painting during the 1950s and onward into the 1960s.

The New York School of Abstract Expressionism was the first American style of art to have international importance. The San Francisco Bay Area was the center for an independent variant of Abstract Expressionism .

The Bay Area Figurative Movement was in response to both.

[ 1 ] Because Bay Area Figuration often employed the spontaneity of Abstract Expressionism , it is considered a hybrid style that produced challenging or problematic pictures.

The first exhibition to present this movement, Contemporary Bay Area Figurative Painting was organized by Paul Mills for the Oakland Art Museum. The exhibition ran September 8 - 29, 1957 and then traveled to the following museums: Los Angeles County Museum, Exposition Park, Los Angeles, California, 13 November 1957 - 22 December 1957, Dayton Art Institute, Ohio, 7 January 1958 - 9 February 1958, The Colorado Springs Fine Arts Center, Colorado, 1 March 1958 - 1 March 1958. The artists in the show, chosen by Paul Mills and David Park , were Richard Diebenkorn , David Park , Elmer Bischoff , Joseph Brooks, Theophilus Brown , Robert Downs, Bruce McGaw , Robert Qualters , Walter Snelgrove, Henry Villierme , James Weeks , and Paul Wonner .

[1] Many of the pioneering artists in this movement were Abstract Expressionists until several of them abandoned non-objective painting in favor of working with the figure. Among these  artists were David Park , Richard Diebenkorn , Elmer Bischoff , Paul Wonner , Theophilus Brown , and James Weeks .

They were followed by painter Joan Brown and the sculptor Manuel Neri who were briefly married. Other Bay Area artists who became associated with the style include Nathan Oliveira , Henrietta Berk and Frank Lobdell , an abstract painter who made figurative life drawings. Artists who taught at UC Davis also developed figurative work, including Wayne Thiebaud , Roland Petersen and William Wiley , but because their work developed outside the Bay Area and had different stylistic roots, they are generally not considered part of the Bay Area Figurative Movement The California School of Fine Arts (which later became the San Francisco Art Institute , where many former GIs used their benefits to take art classes after WWII, was the center of this style. David Park, Elmer Bischoff and Richard Diebenkorn met there and developed close personal friendships. Many other Bay Area schools and institutions were also important to the development and refinement of this art movement, including the California College of Arts and Crafts , where Nathan Oliveira taught, and the University of California, Berkeley where David Park , Elmer Bischoff and Joan Brown taught.

Participants in the 1957 exhibition Contemporary Bay Area Figurative Painting [ edit ] David Park [ edit ] David Park (1911–1960) was the initiator of the Bay Area Figurative Movement. An influential teacher at the California School of Fine Arts beginning in 1943, he painted abstractly until late 1949 when he took his non-objective paintings to the dump. In the spring of 1951, Park won a prize for a figurative canvas, "Kids on Bikes" that he submitted to a competitive exhibition. Park's turn to figurative style baffled some of his colleagues, as at the time, abstract painting was the only way to go for progressive artists. This stylistic shift, which some of his peers initially thought was a joke, gradually influenced his peers, including Elmer Bischoff and Richard Diebenkorn , to experiment with figuration.

During the decade that followed Park's oil paintings evolved from using firm brushwork towards a lush, painterly style that included heavy, wet-on-wet brushstrokes, alongside drips and spatters. Before his death from bone cancer in 1960 Park was the subject of a one-man show at the Staempfli Gallery in New York City in October of 1959. That show included many large canvases including "Four Men," now in the collection of the Whitney Museum.

In 2004, Hackett Freedman Gallery in San Francisco held an exhibition of 35 of David Park's works from 1953 to 1960. These were the works that marked the final years of his life and the exhibition was held to celebrate his life as well as his return to figure painting in 1950, which was instrumental in starting the movement. Some of the earlier works in the exhibition suggest that Park responded to the art of Max Beckmann and his influence is particularly visible in The Band (1955). Over the years, Park's palette turned towards an ebullient chromaticism, but his carving approach to paint handling could be seen in his work throughout until finally he decided to give up oils in 1959.

Some of David Park's important works are Mother in Law (1954–55), Violin and Cello (1939), Torso (1959), and Figure in Chair (1960).

[ 2 ] Elmer Bischoff [ edit ] Elmer Bischoff (1916–1991), in his late thirties and forties, had an extensive phase of what he called " Picassoesque mouthings".

[ 3 ] After returning from war in 1945, he felt impelled to challenge all the assumptions that he held about art as well as life. When asked about this in an interview, he said, “Until then art had been an external acquisition; [but now it] became more of a quest.” It was around this time that he was hired as a short-term replacement at the school of fine arts.

Just like his abstract work, Bischoff achieved great success with his early figurative works. Bischoff entered his painting Figure and Red Wall in the Fifth Annual Oil and Sculpture Exhibition at the Richmond Art Center and won the $200 first prize for it.

[ 4 ] This feat earned him a solo show at the Paul Kantor Gallery in Los Angeles. However, it was a one-person show of paintings and drawings in January 1956 at the California School of Fine Arts gallery that Bischoff believed had the biggest impact on his future.

Some of Bischoff's important works are Figure at window with Boat (1964), Playground (1954), and The River (1953).

[ 5 ] Richard Diebenkorn [ edit ] Out of all the early artists, it was Richard Diebenkorn (1922–1993) who took the biggest risk by turning to figuration in 1955. Diebenkorn was nationally recognized for his abstract work.

James Johnson Sweeney 's exhibition "Younger American Painters", [ 6 ] resulted in his work was extensively shown by dealers in Los Angeles and Chicago. Along with his national reputation for his abstract work, Diebenkorn was also a beloved abstractionist among the locals in Sausalito.

After that he focused on figurative art but it was not until 1956 that he attempted complex figurative paintings. His earliest figurative works seemed to loosely be based on self-portraits. He returned to abstraction in the mid-1960s.

[ 7 ] Theophilus Brown and Paul John Wonner [ edit ] Theophilus Brown (1919–2012) and Paul John Wonner (1920–2008) were a gay couple whose careers were chronicled in the  2023-24 exhibition "Breaking the Rules: Paul Wonner and Theophilus Brown." Both were influenced by each other, and by their peers, to experiment with figurative art. In 1955, both Brown and Wonner rented studio spaces within the same building which was also the building where Richard Diebenkorn worked. Diebenkorn, Bischoff and Park joined Brown and Wonner to hold life-drawing sessions. They were occasionally joined by James Weeks and Nathan Oliviera.

Wonner's figurative works were displayed in an exhibition held at the California School of Fine Arts gallery late in 1956. From the very beginning Wonner was committed to conventions of representation, and identified line as a firm descriptive boundary and edge. Brown's early figurative works included semi-abstract images of football players influenced by the paintings of Willem de Kooning . Some of these works were featured in a 1956 Life Magazine feature article which helped launch Brown's career.

Some of Brown's works are Male Nude Seated (1960) and Sun and Moon (1960), while Wonner's works include Side of the house, Malibu (1965) and Mountain Near Tucson (1963).

[ 8 ] Bruce McGaw [ edit ] Bruce McGaw was born in 1935 and was the youngest artist to be included in the 1957 Contemporary Bay Area Figurative Painting exhibition.

[ 9 ] He studied at California College of Arts and Crafts and took one of the first classes taught by Diebenkorn in 1955. McGaw had a close relationship with Diebenkorn, [ 10 ] who even met with McGaw's parents to show them his support for their son's works. McGaw also studied with Leon Goldin , where he worked with abstraction.

[ citation needed ] McGaw was not confined to any particular style and moved from one style to the other. One of McGaw's first mature figurative paintings clearly showed influences from Diebenkorn but McGaw also showed a lot of new features of his own. He was not aggressive in promoting his art and did not achieve the commercial success enjoyed by his peers. McGaw was associated with Beat poets including Gary Snyder and Philip Whalen. He taught at the San Francisco Art Institute for 60 years, making him its longest serving faculty member.

[ 11 ] Other Notable Bay Area Figurative Artists [ edit ] Joan Brown [ edit ] Joan Brown created colorful, expansive paintings depicting her life and experiences in San Francisco, where she lived and worked in for nearly all her life.

[ 12 ] Her time as a figurative artist was intense and productive and provided some of the most important works of the Movement.

[ 13 ] Brown earned a BFA and MFA from the California School of Fine Arts (which became the San Francisco Art Institute). It was there that she met a key mentor, artist Elmer Bischoff , and began gaining recognition for her paintings. In 1960, she was the youngest artist exhibited as part of Young America 1960 (Thirty American Painters Under Thirty-Six) at the Whitney Museum of American Art.

[ 12 ] Some of Joan Brown's works are Woman and Dog in Room with Chinese Rug (1975) and Noel at the Table with a Large Bowl of Fruit (1963).

[ 14 ] Manuel Neri [ edit ] Manuel Neri was a sculptor. Neri explored abstraction during the early stages of his career, like all the younger Bay Area Figurative artists.

[ citation needed ] It was only after he left school in 1959 that he took up figuration. It allowed him to synthesize his interests in color and form and to play with the ambiguities of content. It is the non-specificity of his figures and their abstract qualities that make his sculptures part of the Bay Area Figurative Movement and not just any contemporary figurative sculpture in America.

Neri, only two years younger than Nathan Oliveira, had a similar childhood and like Oliveira had no interest in art as a kid. The only reason Neri took a course in ceramics in school was to lighten his load. His ceramics teacher was Roy Walker who encouraged him to pursue art further by taking advanced classes. Neri soon dropped his engineering classes and in 1951 started taking courses at the California College of Arts and Crafts , where he officially enrolled in 1952.

Some of Neri's important works are Untitled Standing Figure (1956–57) and College Painting No. 1 (1958–59).

[ 15 ] Nathan Oliveira [ edit ] Nathan Oliveira (1928–2010) is associated with Bay Area Figuration although he personally felt more connected to postwar European art and was influenced by Max Beckmann , Alberto Giacometti and Francis Bacon (artist) .

During an early trip to M. H. de Young Memorial Museum , Oliveira decided to become a portrait painter after being entranced by the work of Rembrandt. He later went on to serve in the army where he managed to keep up with his art scene. He did not consider himself avant-garde or part of a specific movement.

[ 16 ] Oliveira's early figurative works tend to have more detail and color which can be seen in his Seated Man with Dog . His works completed in the San Leandro studio in 1959, in his own words, "became the very foundation of [his] whole identity as a painter in [his] country." Some of Nathan's important works are Seated Man with Dog (1957), Man Walking (1958), and Adolescent by the Bed (1959).

Henrietta Berk [ edit ] Henrietta Berk (1919–1990) painted mostly in oil. Her work was noted for its strong colors and shapes. Berk developed her own unique approach to art with daring use of color and unique interpretation of shape and light. Her work is remarkable considering the challenging times for female artists in the 1960s and the glass ceiling she fought so hard to break.

[ 17 ] Berk attended the California College of Arts and Crafts in Oakland from 1955 to 1959, [ 18 ] [ 19 ] where she studied with Richard Diebenkorn and Harry Krell.

[ 17 ] Some of Berk's most noted works are Me or Facade (1960), Picnic (1961), Golden Gate (1961), Three Figures (1962), Racing (1964), Leaning Figure (1967), and Lagoon Valley Road (1968).

A retrospective exhibit of her work opened at The Hilbert Museum at Chapman University June 13, 2020, in conjunction with a book on the artist, "In Living Color, The Art & Life of Henrietta Berk", edited by Cindy Johnson and published by Cool Titles.

See also [ edit ] Paula Kirkeby , local gallery owner and printing press owner that published and represented Bay Area Figurative Movement artists References [ edit ] ^ Jones, Caroline A. (1990).

Bay Area Figurative Art, 1950-1965 . Berkeley and Los Angeles California: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art and University of California Press. pp. Foreword XV.

ISBN 0520068416 .

^ "David Park" .

SFMOMA . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Susan Landauer; Elmer Bischoff; Oakland Museum; Orange County Museum of Art (Calif.), Norton Museum of Art (2001).

Elmer Bischoff: The Ethics of Paint . University of California Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-520-23042-2 .

^ Susan Landauer; Elmer Bischoff; Oakland Museum; Orange County Museum of Art (Calif.), Norton Museum of Art (2001).

Elmer Bischoff: The Ethics of Paint . University of California Press. p. 188.

ISBN 978-0-520-23042-2 .

^ "Elmer Bischoff: Figurative Paintings - Exhibitions - George Adams Gallery" .

www.georgeadamsgallery.com .

^ Timothy Anglin Burgard; Steven Nash; Steven A. Nash; Emma Acker (28 July 2013).

Richard Diebenkorn: The Berkeley Years, 1953-1966 . Yale University Press. pp. 15–.

ISBN 978-0-300-19078-6 .

^ "Richard Diebenkorn 14 March — 7 June 2015" .

Royal Academy of Arts . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ "Paul Wonner - Artists - Berggruen Gallery" .

www.berggruen.com . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Bruce McGaw, influential Bay Area figurative painter and teacher, dies at 89 ^ E. Bischoff (1991).

Conversations with Elmer Bischoff . Рипол Классик. pp. 68–.

ISBN 978-5-87489-931-8 .

^ Bruce McGaw, influential Bay Area figurative painter and teacher, dies at 89 ^ a b "San Francisco or Nowhere: The Necessity of the Bay to Joan Brown's Art" .

SFMOMA . Retrieved 2023-01-29 .

^ FitzSimons, Casey. "'Transformation: The Art Of Joan Brown' At The Berkeley Art Museum And The Oakland Museum Of California." Artweek 29.12 (1998): 12-13. Art Full Text (H.W. Wilson). Web. 5 May 2016.

^ "Joan Brown - artnet" .

www.artnet.com . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ "Manuel Neri - artnet" .

www.artnet.com . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Stanford News Service (January/February, 2011) "Obituary: Nathan Oliveira" ^ a b "About" .

The Henrietta Berk Research Project . Steven Stern Fine Arts . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

^ Thomas Albright (1985).

Art in the San Francisco Bay Area, 1945-1980: An Illustrated History . University of California Press. p. 261.

ISBN 978-0-520-05193-5 .

^ "Henrietta Berk" .

askART . Retrieved 31 March 2018 .

Sources [ edit ] Boas, Nancy (2012). David Park: A Painter's Life. Berkeley: University of California.

ISBN 9780520268418 Chadwick, Witney (1984). “Narrative Imagism and the Figurative Tradition in Northern California Painting”. Art Journal 45(4), 309.

Falk, Peter Hastings. (1999) Who Was Who in American Art: 1564-1975 , Madison, CT: Sound View Press, Vol. I, p. 143.

Gomez, Edward M. (February 5, 1990). “ The San Francisco Rebellion ”. Time.

Jones, Caroline A. (1990) Bay Area Figurative Art: 1950-1965 , Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, ISBN 0-520-06842-4 Knight, Christopher (December 15, 1989). “ ART REVIEW: Figurative ‘50s Work Whose Time Has Come ”. Los Angeles Times.

Landauer, Susan (2000) The Lighter Side of Bay Area Figuration , San Jose, CA: Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art, ISBN 1-891246-03-8 Landauer, Susan (2001). Elmer Bischoff: The Ethics of Paint. Berkeley: University of California.

ISBN 0520230426 Livingston, Jane, John Elderfield (1997). The Art of Richard Diebenkorn. New York: Whitney Museum of American Art, 1997.

ISBN 0520212584 Van Proyen, Mark. "David Park at Hackett-Freedman." Art In America 92, no. 4 (April 2004): 140–141. Art Full Text (H.W. Wilson), EBSCOhost (accessed May 13, 2016).

External links [ edit ] "Review/Art: San Francisco Revolution in Style Recalled in a Traveling Exhibition" by Roberta Smith, The New York Times , August 29, 1990.

"The Lighter Side of Bay Area Figuration" , San Jose Museum of Art , September 3–November 26, 2000.

[2] The Richard Diebenkorn Foundation: Exhibitions This Should Not Happen: The First Exhibition of Bay Area Figurative Art (Video) Bruce McGaw, influential Bay Area figurative painter and teacher, dies at 89 Elmer Bischoff: I Have taught All my Life Breaking the Rules: Paul Wonner and Theophilus Brown v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bay_Area_Figurative_Movement&oldid=1298469801 " Categories : American Figurative Expressionism Artists from California American art movements Abstract expressionism Figurative art Art in the San Francisco Bay Area Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bay Area Figurative Movement 3 languages Add topic

