Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Phonology and pronunciation Toggle Phonology and pronunciation subsection 2.1 Vowels 2.2 Consonants 2.3 Pronunciation 3 Variation Toggle Variation subsection 3.1 Regional variation 3.2 Sociocultural variation 4 Vocabulary Toggle Vocabulary subsection 4.1 Intrinsic traits 4.1.1 Commonly known 4.1.2 Historical references 4.1.3 British English similarities and differences 4.1.4 Aboriginal-derived words 4.1.5 Places 4.1.6 Figures of speech and abbreviations 4.1.7 Measures 4.2 Comparison with other varieties 4.2.1 Terms with different meanings in Australian English 4.2.2 Idioms taking different forms in Australian English 4.2.3 British and American English terms not commonly used in Australian English 5 Grammar 6 Spelling and style Toggle Spelling and style subsection 6.1 Spelling 6.2 Punctuation and style 6.3 Keyboard layout 7 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 7.1 By ancestry 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Works cited 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Australian English 40 languages अंगिका العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Brezhoneg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Pangcah Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла සිංහල Simple English سنڌي کوردی Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikifunctions Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of varieties of English language For Australians of English descent, see English Australians .

Australian English Native to Australia Native speakers 18.5 million in Australia (2021) [ 1 ] 5 million L2 speakers of English in Australia (approx. 2021) Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic North Sea Germanic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English Australian English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Modern English 18th century British English & Hiberno-English Writing system Latin (English alphabet) Unified English Braille [ 2 ] Language codes ISO 639-3 – Glottolog aust1314 IETF en-AU [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

Part of a series on the English language Features Phonology history Grammar Vocabulary Orthography English alphabet Societal aspects History English-speaking world Commonwealth As a second language teaching As a lingua franca Linguistic purism Dialects ( full list ) American AAVE Southern Australian Bangladeshi British in England Scottish Welsh Cameroonian Canadian Caribbean Belizean Trinidadian and Tobagonian Jamaican Fijian Ghanaian Hong Kong Indian Irish Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malaysian Namibian Nepali New Zealand Nigerian Pakistani Philippine Sierra Leonean Singapore South African Sri Lankan Ugandan Zimbabwean v t e The percentage of people who speak only the English language at home, 2021 Australian English ( AusE , AusEng , AuE , AuEng , en-AU ) is the set of varieties of the English language native to Australia . It is the country's common language and de facto national language . While Australia has no official language , English is the first language of the majority of the population , and has been entrenched as the de facto national language since the onset of British settlement , being the only language spoken in the home for 72% of Australians in 2021.

[ 5 ] It is also the main language used in compulsory education, as well as federal, state and territorial legislatures and courts.

Australian English began to diverge from British and Hiberno-English after the First Fleet established the Colony of New South Wales in 1788. Australian English arose from a dialectal melting pot created by the intermingling of early settlers who were from a variety of dialectal regions of Great Britain and Ireland , [ 6 ] though its most significant influences were the dialects of South East England .

[ 7 ] By the 1820s, the native-born colonists' speech was recognisably distinct from speakers in Britain and Ireland.

[ 8 ] Australian English differs from other varieties in its phonology , pronunciation , lexicon , idiom , grammar and spelling .

[ 9 ] Australian English is relatively consistent across the continent, although it encompasses numerous regional and sociocultural varieties . "General Australian" describes the de facto standard dialect , which is perceived to be free of pronounced regional or sociocultural markers and is often used in the media.

History [ edit ] Similar to early American English , Australian English passed through a process of extensive dialect levelling and mixing which produced a relatively homogeneous new variety of English which was easily understood by all.

[ 6 ] The earliest Australian English was spoken by the first generation of native-born colonists in the Colony of New South Wales from the end of the 18th century. These native-born children were exposed to a wide range of dialects from across the British Isles . The dialects of South East England , including most notably the traditional Cockney dialect of London, were particularly influential on the development of the new variety and constituted "the major input of the various sounds that went into constructing" Australian English. All the other regions of England were represented among the early colonists. A large proportion of early convicts and colonists were from Ireland (comprising the 25% of the total convict population), and many of them spoke Irish as a sole or first language . They were joined by other non-native speakers of English from the Scottish Highlands and Wales .

Peter Miller Cunningham 's 1827 book Two Years in New South Wales described the distinctive accent and vocabulary that had developed among the native-born colonists.

[ 7 ] The first of the Australian gold rushes in the 1850s began a large wave of immigration , during which about two percent of the population of the United Kingdom emigrated to the colonies of New South Wales and Victoria .

[ 10 ] The Gold Rushes brought immigrants and linguistic influences from many parts of the world. An example was the introduction of vocabulary from American English , including some terms later considered to be typically Australian, such as bushwhacker and squatter .

[ 11 ] This American influence was continued with the popularity of American films from the early 20th century and the influx of American military personnel that settled in Australia and New Zealand during World War II ; seen in the enduring persistence of such universally-accepted terms as okay and guys .

[ 12 ] The publication of Edward Ellis Morris 's Austral English: A Dictionary Of Australasian Words, Phrases And Usages in 1898, which extensively catalogued Australian English vocabulary, started a wave of academic interest and codification during the 20th century which resulted in Australian English becoming established as an endonormative variety with its own internal norms and standards. This culminated in publications such as the 1981 first edition of the Macquarie Dictionary , a major English language dictionary based on Australian usage, and the 1988 first edition of The Australian National Dictionary , a historical dictionary documenting the history of Australian English vocabulary and idiom.

The First Fleet , which brought the English language to Australia The Australian gold rushes saw many external influences on the language.

Phonology and pronunciation [ edit ] Main article: Australian English phonology The most obvious way in which Australian English is distinctive from other varieties of English is through its unique pronunciation. It shares most similarity with New Zealand English .

[ 13 ] Like most dialects of English, it is distinguished primarily by the phonetic quality of its vowels.

[ 14 ] Vowels [ edit ] Australian English monophthongs [ 15 ] Part 1 of Australian English diphthongs [ 15 ] Part 2 of Australian English diphthongs [ 15 ] The vowels of Australian English can be divided according to length. The long vowels, which include monophthongs and diphthongs , mostly correspond to the tense vowels used in analyses of Received Pronunciation (RP) as well as its centring diphthongs. The short vowels, consisting only of monophthongs, correspond to the RP lax vowels.

There exist pairs of long and short vowels with overlapping vowel quality giving Australian English phonemic length distinction , which is also present in some regional south-eastern dialects of the UK and eastern seaboard dialects in the US.

[ 16 ] An example of this feature is the distinction between ferry /ˈfeɹiː/ and fairy /ˈfeːɹiː/ .

As with New Zealand English and General American English, the weak-vowel merger is complete in Australian English: unstressed /ɪ/ is merged into /ə/ ( schwa ), unless it is followed by a velar consonant. Examples of this feature are the following pairings, which are pronounced identically in Australian English: Rosa's and roses , as well as Lennon and Lenin . Other examples are the following pairs, which rhyme in Australian English: abbott with rabbit , and dig it with bigot .

Most varieties of Australian English exhibit only a partial trap-bath split . The words bath , grass and can't are always pronounced with the "long" /ɐː/ of father . Throughout the majority of the country, the "flat" /æ/ of man is the dominant pronunciation for the a vowel in the following words: dance , advance , plant , example and answer . The exception is the state of South Australia , where a more advanced trap-bath split is found, and where the dominant pronunciation of all the preceding words incorporates the "long" /ɐː/ of father .

monophthongs diphthongs short vowels long vowels IPA examples IPA examples IPA examples ʊ f oo t , h oo d , ch oo k ʉː [ nb 1 ] g oo se , b oo , wh o' d ɪə n ear , b ear d , h ear [ nb 2 ] ɪ k i t , b i d , h i d , iː [ nb 3 ] fl ee ce , b ea d , h ea t æɔ m ou th , b owe d , h ow' d e/ɛ dr e ss , l e d , h ea d eː /ɛː squ are , b are d , h aire d əʉ g oa t , b o d e , h oe d ə comm a , a bout , wint er ɜː n ur se , b ir d , h ear d æɪ f a ce , b ai t , m a de æ tr a p , l a d , h a d æː b a d, s a d, m a d ɑe pr i ce , b i te , h i de ɐ str u t , b u d , h u d ɐː st ar t , p al m , b a th oɪ ch oi ce , b oy , oi l ɔ l o t , cl o th , h o t oː th ou ght , n or th , f or ce ^ The vowel /ʉː/ is diphthongised in all the major Australian accents; in General Australian, the most widespread Australian accent, the vowel is pronounced as [ɪ̈ɯ]. See Australian English phonology for a more detailed analysis.

^ The boundary between monophthongs and diphthongs is somewhat fluid: /ɪə/ , for example, is commonly realised as [ɪː] , particularly in closed syllables, though also found in open syllables such as we're , here , and so on. In open syllables particularly, the pronunciation varies from the bisyllabic [ɪːa] , through the diphthong [ɪə] , to the long vowel [ɪː] .

^ The vowel /iː/ has an onset [ɪi̯], except before laterals. The onset is often lowered to [əi], so that "beat" is [bəit] for some speakers.

Consonants [ edit ] There is little variation in the sets of consonants used in different English dialects but there are variations in how these consonants are used. Australian English is no exception.

Australian English consonant phonemes [ 17 ] Labial Dental Alveolar Post- alveolar Palatal Velar Glottal Nasal m n ŋ Plosive fortis p t k lenis b d ɡ Affricate fortis tʃ lenis dʒ Fricative fortis f θ s ʃ h lenis v ð z ʒ Approximant central ɹ j w lateral l Australian English is uniformly non-rhotic ; that is, the /ɹ/ sound does not appear at the end of a syllable or immediately before a consonant.

[ 8 ] As with many non-rhotic dialects, linking /ɹ/ can occur when a word that has a final ⟨r⟩ in the spelling comes before another word that starts with a vowel. An intrusive /ɹ/ may similarly be inserted before a vowel in words that do not have ⟨r⟩ in the spelling in certain environments, namely after the long vowel /oː/ and after word final /ə/ . This can be heard in "law-r-and order", where an intrusive R is voiced between the AW and the A.

As with North American English, intervocalic alveolar flapping is a feature of Australian English: prevocalic /t/ and /d/ surface as the alveolar tap [ɾ] after sonorants other than /m, ŋ/ as well as at the end of a word or morpheme before any vowel in the same breath group. Examples of this feature are that the following pairs are pronounced similarly or identically: latter and ladder , as well as rated and raided .

Yod -dropping generally occurs after /s/ , /l/ , /z/ , /θ/ but not after /t/ , /d/ and /n/ .

[ 18 ] Accordingly, suit is pronounced as /sʉːt/ , lute as /lʉːt/ , Zeus as /zʉːs/ and enthusiasm as /enˈθʉːziːæzəm/ . Other cases of /sj/ and /zj/ , as well as /tj/ and /dj/ , have coalesced to /ʃ/ , /ʒ/ , /tʃ/ and /dʒ/ respectively for many speakers.

/j/ is generally retained in other consonant clusters .

[ citation needed ] In common with most varieties of Scottish English and American English , the phoneme /l/ is pronounced by Australians as a "dark" (velarised) l ( [ɫ] ) in almost all positions, unlike other dialects such as Received Pronunciation , Hiberno (Irish) English , etc.

Pronunciation [ edit ] Differences in stress, weak forms and standard pronunciation of isolated words occur between Australian English and other forms of English, which while noticeable do not impair intelligibility.

The affixes -ary , -ery , -ory , -bury , -berry and -mony (seen in words such as necessary, mulberry and matrimony ) can be pronounced either with a full vowel ( /ˈnesəseɹiː, ˈmalbeɹiː, ˈmætɹəməʉniː/ ) or a schwa  ( /ˈnesəsəɹiː, ˈmalbəɹiː, ˈmætɹəməniː/ ). Although some words like necessary are almost universally pronounced with the full vowel, older generations of Australians are relatively likely to pronounce these affixes with a schwa as is typical in British English. Meanwhile, younger generations are relatively likely to use a full vowel.

Words ending in unstressed -ile derived from Latin adjectives ending in -ilis are pronounced with a full vowel, so that fertile /ˈfɜːtɑel/ sounds like fur tile rather than rhyming with turtle /ˈtɜːtəl/ .

In addition, miscellaneous pronunciation differences exist when compared with other varieties of English in relation to various isolated words, with some of those pronunciations being unique to Australian English. For example: As with American English, the vowel in yoghurt /ˈjəʉɡət/ and the prefix homo- /ˈhəʉməʉ/ (as in homosexual or homophobic ) are pronounced with GOAT rather than LOT ; Vitamin , migraine and privacy are all pronounced with /ɑe/ in the stressed syllable ( /ˈvɑetəmən, ˈmɑeɡɹæɪn, ˈpɹɑevəsiː/ ) rather than /ˈvɪtəmən, ˈmiːɡɹæɪn, ˈpɹɪvəsiː/ ; Dynasty and patronise , by contrast, are usually subject to trisyllabic laxing ( /ˈdɪnəstiː, ˈpætɹɔnɑez/ ) like in Britain, alongside US-derived /ˈdɑenəstiː, ˈpæɪtɹɔnɑez/ ; The prefix paedo- (as in paedophile ) is pronounced /ˈpedəʉ/ rather than /ˈpiːdəʉ/ ; In loanwords, the vowel spelled with ⟨a⟩ is often nativized as the PALM vowel ( /ɐː/ ), similar to American English ( /ɑː/ ), rather than the TRAP vowel ( /æ/ ), as in British English. For example, pasta is pronounced /ˈpɐːstə/ , analogous to American English /ˈpɑstə/ , rather than /ˈpæstə/ , as in British English.

Urinal is stressed on the first syllable and with the schwa for I : /ˈjʉːɹənəl/ ; Harass and harassment are pronounced with the stress on the second, rather than the first syllable; The suffix -sia (as in Malaysia , Indonesia and Polynesia , but not Tunisia ) is pronounced /-⁠ʒə/ rather than /-ziːə/ ; The word foyer is pronounced /ˈfoɪə/ , rather than /ˈfoɪæɪ/ ; Tomato , vase and data are pronounced with /ɐː/ instead of /æɪ/ : /təˈmɐːtəʉ, vɐːz, ˈdɐːtə/ , with /ˈdæɪtə/ being uncommon but acceptable; Zebra and leisure are pronounced /ˈzebɹə/ and /ˈleʒə/ rather than /ˈziːbɹə/ and /ˈliːʒə/ , both having disyllabic laxing; Status varies between British-derived /ˈstæɪtəs/ with the FACE vowel and American-derived /ˈstætəs/ with the TRAP vowel; Conversely, precedence , precedent and derivatives are mainly pronounced with the FLEECE vowel in the stressed syllable, rather than DRESS : /ˈpɹiːsədəns ~ pɹiːˈsiːdəns, ˈpɹiːsədənt/ ; Basil is pronounced /ˈbæzəl/ , rather than /ˈbæɪzəl/ ; Conversely, cache is usually pronounced /kæɪʃ/ , rather than the more conventional /kæʃ/ ; Buoy is pronounced as /boɪ/ (as in boy ) rather than /ˈbʉːiː/ ; The E in congress and progress is not reduced: /ˈkɔnɡɹes, ˈpɹəʉɡɹes/ ; Conversely, the unstressed O in silicon , phenomenon and python stands for a schwa: /ˈsɪlɪkən, fəˈnɔmənən, ˈpɑeθən/ ; In Amazon , Lebanon , marathon and pantheon , however, the unstressed O stands for the LOT vowel, somewhat as with American English: /ˈæməzɔn, ˈlebənɔn, ˈmæɹəθɔn, ˈpænθæɪɔn/ ; The colour name maroon is pronounced with the GOAT vowel: /məˈɹəʉn/ .

Variation [ edit ] Variation in Australian closing diphthongs [ 19 ] updated to match the HCE system [ 20 ] Phoneme Lexical set Phonetic realization Cultivated General Broad /iː/ FLEECE [ɪi] [ɪ̈i] [əːɪ] /ʉː/ GOOSE [ʊu] [ɪ̈ɯ, ʊʉ] [əːʉ] /æɪ/ FACE [ɛɪ] [æ̠ɪ] [æ̠ːɪ, a̠ːɪ] /əʉ/ GOAT [ö̞ʊ] [æ̠ʉ] [æ̠ːʉ, a̠ːʉ] /ɑe/ PRICE [a̠e] [ɒe] [ɒːe] /æɔ/ MOUTH [a̠ʊ] [æo] [ɛːo, ɛ̃ːɤ] Main article: Variation in Australian English Relative to many other national dialect groupings, Australian English is relatively homogeneous across the country. Some relatively minor regional differences in pronunciation exist. A limited range of word choices is strongly regional in nature. Consequently, the geographical background of individuals may be inferred if they use words that are peculiar to particular Australian states or territories and, in some cases, even smaller regions. In addition, some Australians speak creole languages derived from Australian English, such as Australian Kriol , Torres Strait Creole and Norfuk .

Academic research has also identified notable sociocultural variation within Australian English, which is mostly evident in phonology.

[ 21 ] Regional variation [ edit ] Although Australian English is relatively homogeneous, there are some regional variations. The dialects of English spoken in the various states and territories of Australia differ slightly in vocabulary and phonology.

Most regional differences are in word usage. Swimming clothes are known as cossies , /ˈkɔziːz/ togs or swimmers in New South Wales, togs in Queensland, and bathers in Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and South Australia.

[ 22 ] What Queensland calls a stroller is usually called a pram in Victoria, Western Australia, South Australia, New South Wales, and Tasmania.

[ 23 ] Preference for some synonymous words also differ between states.

Garbage (i.e., garbage bin, garbage truck) dominates over rubbish in New South Wales and Queensland, while rubbish is more popular in Victoria, Tasmania, Western Australia and South Australia.

[ 23 ] Additionally, the word footy generally refers to the most popular football code in an area; that is, rugby league or rugby union depending on the local area, in most of New South Wales and Queensland. More commonly "rugby" is used to distinguish rugby union from "footy" which refers to the more popular rugby league. Footy commonly is used for Australian rules football elsewhere however the term refers to the both  prominent codes, rugby league and Australian rules football, interchangeably, depending on context of usage outside of regional perrameters. In some pockets of Melbourne & Western Sydney "football" and more rarely "footy" will refer to Association football although unlike more common international terminology, Australian English uses the term soccer and not football or footy. Beer glasses are also named differently in different states. Distinctive grammatical patterns exist such as the use of the interrogative eh (also spelled ay or aye ), which is particularly associated with Queensland.

Secret Santa ( [ citation needed ] ) and Kris Kringle are used in all states, with the former being more common in Queensland.

South Australia The most pronounced variation in phonology is between South Australia and the other states and territories. The trap–bath split is more complete in South Australia, in contrast to the other states. Accordingly, words such as dance , advance , plant , example and answer are pronounced with /ɐː/ (as in father ) far more frequently in South Australia while the older /æ/ (as in mad ) is dominant elsewhere in Australia.

[ 23 ] L -vocalisation is also more common in South Australia than other states.

Centring diphthongs In Western Australian and Queensland English, the vowels in near and square are typically realised as centring diphthongs ( [nɪə, skweə] ), whereas in the other states they may also be realised as monophthongs: [nɪː, skweː] .

[ 24 ] Salary–celery merger A feature common in Victorian English is salary–celery merger , whereby a Victorian pronunciation of Ellen may sound like Alan and Victoria's capital city Melbourne may sound like Malbourne to speakers from other states. There is also regional variation in /ʉː/ before /l/ (as in school and pool ).

Full-fool allophones In some parts of Australia, notably Victoria, a fully backed allophone of /ʉː/ , transcribed [ʊː] , is common before /l/ . As a result, the pairs full/fool and pull/pool differ phonetically only in vowel length for those speakers. The usual allophone for /ʉː/ is further forward in Queensland and New South Wales than Victoria.

Final particle but A final particle but , where "but" is the concluding word in a sentence, has also evolved as a distinctive feature in Australian English, particularly in Western Australia and Queensland. In conversational Australian English it is thought to be a turn-yielding particle that marks contrastive content in the utterance it closes. It is a linguistic trait sometimes employed in Australian literature to indicate that the character is quintessentially Australian.

[ 25 ] Sociocultural variation [ edit ] The General Australian accent serves as the standard variety of English across the country. According to linguists, it emerged during the 19th century.

[ 26 ] General Australian is the dominant variety across the continent, and is particularly so in urban areas.

[ 27 ] The increasing dominance of General Australian reflects its prominence on radio and television since the latter half of the 20th century.

Recent generations have seen a comparatively smaller proportion of the population speaking with the Broad sociocultural variant, which differs from General Australian in its phonology. The Broad variant is found across the continent and is relatively more prominent in rural and outer-suburban areas.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] A largely historical Cultivated sociocultural variant, which adopted features of British Received Pronunciation and which was commonplace in official media during the early 20th century, had become largely extinct by the onset of the 21st century.

[ 30 ] Australian Aboriginal English is made up of a range of forms which developed differently in different parts of Australia, and are said to vary along a continuum, from forms close to Standard Australian English to more non-standard forms. There are distinctive features of accent, grammar, words and meanings, as well as language use.

Academics have noted the emergence of numerous ethnocultural dialects of Australian English that are spoken by people from some minority non-English speaking backgrounds.

[ 31 ] These ethnocultural varieties contain features of General Australian English as adopted by the children of immigrants blended with some non-English language features, such as Afro-Asiatic languages and languages of Asia .

Samoan English is also influencing Australian English.

[ 32 ] Other ethnolects include those of Lebanese and Vietnamese Australians.

[ 33 ] A high rising terminal in Australian English was noted and studied earlier than in other varieties of English.

[ 34 ] The feature is sometimes called Australian questioning intonation . Research published in 1986, regarding vernacular speech in Sydney , suggested that high rising terminal was initially spread by young people in the 1960s. It found that the high rising terminal was used more than twice as often by young people than older people, and is more common among women than men.

[ 35 ] In the United Kingdom , it has occasionally been considered one of the variety's stereotypical features, and its spread there is attributed to the popularity of Australian soap operas .

[ 36 ] Vocabulary [ edit ] Intrinsic traits [ edit ] Main article: Australian English vocabulary Bush poets such as Banjo Paterson captured the Australian vocabulary of the 19th century in their bush ballads .

Australian English has many words and idioms which are unique to the dialect.

Commonly known [ edit ] Internationally well-known examples of Australian terminology include outback , meaning a remote, sparsely populated area, the bush , meaning either a native forest or a country area in general, and g'day , a greeting.

Dinkum , or fair dinkum means "true", "legitimate" or "is that true?", among other things, depending on context and inflection.

[ 37 ] The derivative dinky-di means "true" or devoted: a "dinky-di Aussie" is a "true Australian".

[ citation needed ] Historical references [ edit ] Australian poetry , such as " The Man from Snowy River ", as well as folk songs such as " Waltzing Matilda ", contain many historical Australian words and phrases that are understood by Australians even though some are not in common usage today.

[ citation needed ] British English similarities and differences [ edit ] Australian English, in common with British English , uses the word mate to mean friend , as well as the word bloody as a mild expletive or intensifier .

[ citation needed ] "Mate" is also used in multiple ways including to indicate "mateship" or formally call out the target of a threat or insult, depending on intonation and context.

Several words used by Australians were at one time used in the UK but have since fallen out of usage or changed in meaning there. For example, creek in Australia, as in North America, means a stream or small river, whereas in the UK it is typically a watercourse in a marshy area; paddock in Australia means field, whereas in the UK it means a small enclosure for livestock; bush or scrub in Australia, as in North America, means a natural, uncultivated area of vegetation or flora, whereas in England they are commonly used only in proper names (such as Shepherd's Bush and Wormwood Scrubs ).

[ citation needed ] Aboriginal-derived words [ edit ] Further information: List of English words of Australian Aboriginal origin Some elements of Aboriginal languages have been adopted by Australian English —mainly as names for places, flora and fauna (for example dingo ) and local culture. Many such are localised, and do not form part of general Australian use, while others, such as kangaroo , boomerang , budgerigar , wallaby and so on have become international. Other examples are cooee and hard yakka . The former is used as a high-pitched call, for attracting attention, (pronounced /ˈkʉːiː/ ) which travels long distances.

Cooee is also a notional distance: "if he's within cooee , we'll spot him".

Hard yakka means "hard work" and is derived from yakka , from the Jagera /Yagara language once spoken in the Brisbane region.

The word bung , meaning "dead" was originally a Yagara word which was used in the pidgin widely spoken across Australia.

[ 38 ] Places [ edit ] Many towns or suburbs of Australia have also been influenced or named after Aboriginal words. The best-known example is the capital, Canberra , named after a local Ngunnawal language word thought to mean "women's breasts" or "meeting place".

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Figures of speech and abbreviations [ edit ] Litotes , such as "not bad", "not much" and "you're not wrong", are also used.

[ citation needed ] Diminutives and hypocorisms are common and are often used to indicate familiarity.

[ 41 ] Some common examples are arvo (afternoon), barbie (barbecue), smoko (cigarette break), Aussie (Australian) and Straya (Australia). This may also be done with people's names to create nicknames (other English speaking countries create similar diminutives ). For example, "Gazza" from Gary, or "Smitty" from John Smith. The use of the suffix -o originates in Irish : ó , [ citation needed ] which is both a postclitic and a suffix with much the same meaning as in Australian English.

[ citation needed ] In informal speech, incomplete comparisons are sometimes used, such as "sweet as" (as in "That car is sweet as."). "Full", "fully" or "heaps" may precede a word to act as an intensifier (as in "The waves at the beach were heaps good."). This was more common in regional Australia and South Australia [ when?

] but has been in common usage in urban Australia for decades. The suffix "-ly" is sometimes omitted in broader Australian English. For instance, "really good" can become "real good".

[ citation needed ] Measures [ edit ] Australia's switch to the metric system in the 1970s changed most of the country's vocabulary of measurement from imperial to metric measures.

[ 42 ] Since the switch to metric, heights of individuals are listed in centimetres on official documents and distances by road on signs are listed in terms of kilometres and metres .

[ 43 ] Comparison with other varieties [ edit ] Where British and American English vocabulary differs , sometimes Australian English shares a usage with one of those varieties, as with petrol (AmE: gasoline ) and mobile phone (AmE: cellular phone ) which are shared with British English, or truck (BrE: lorry ) and eggplant (BrE: aubergine ) which are shared with American English.

In other circumstances, Australian English sometimes favours a usage which is different from both British and American English as with: [ 44 ] (the) bush (AmE and BrE: (the) woods ) bushfire (Ame and BrE: wildfire ) capsicum (AmE: bell pepper ; BrE (green/red) pepper ) Esky (AmE and BrE: cooler or ice box ) doona (AmE: comforter ; BrE duvet ) footpath (AmE: sidewalk ; BrE: pavement ) ice block or icy pole (AmE: popsicle BrE: ice lolly ) lollies (AmE: candy ; BrE: sweets ) overseas (AmE and BrE: abroad ) peak hour (Ame and BrE: rush hour ) powerpoint (AmE: electrical outlet ; BrE: electrical socket ) thongs (AmE and BrE: flip-flops ) ute /jʉːt/ (AmE and BrE: pickup truck ) Differences exist between Australian English and other varieties of English, where different terms can be used for the same subject or the same term can be ascribed different meanings. Non-exhaustive examples of terminology associated with food, transport and clothing is used below to demonstrate the variations which exist between Australian English and other varieties: Food – capsicum (BrE: (red/green) pepper ; AmE: bell pepper ); (potato) chips (refers both to BrE crisps and AmE French fries ); chook (sanga) (BrE and AmE: chicken (sandwich) ); coriander (shared with BrE. AmE: cilantro ); entree (refers to AmE appetizer whereas AmE entree is referred to in AusE as main course ); eggplant (shared with AmE. BrE: aubergine ); fairy floss (BrE: candy floss ; AmE: cotton candy ); ice block or icy pole (BrE: ice lolly ; AmE: popsicle ); jelly (refers to AmE Jell-o whereas AmE jelly refers to AusE jam ); lollies (BrE: sweets ; AmE: candy ); marinara (sauce) (refers to a tomato-based sauce in AmE and BrE but a seafood sauce in AusE); mince or minced meat (shared with BrE. AmE: ground meat ); prawn (which in BrE refers to large crustaceans only, with small crustaceans referred to as shrimp . AmE universally: shrimp ); snow pea (shared with AmE. BrE mangetout ); pumpkin (AmE: squash , except for the large orange variety – AusE squash refers only to a small number of uncommon species; BrE: marrow ); tomato sauce (also used in BrE. AmE: ketchup ); zucchini (shared with AmE. BrE: courgette ) Transport – aeroplane (shared with BrE. AmE: airplane ); bonnet (shared with BrE. AmE: hood ); bumper (shared with BrE. AmE: fender ); car park (shared with BrE. AmE: parking lot ); convertible (shared with AmE. BrE: cabriolet ); footpath (BrE: pavement ; AmE: sidewalk ); horse float (BrE: horsebox ; AmE: horse trailer ); indicator (shared with BrE. AmE: turn signal ); peak hour (BrE and AmE: rush hour ); petrol (shared with BrE. AmE: gasoline ); railway (shared with BrE. AmE: railroad ); sedan (car) (shared with AmE. BrE: saloon (car) ); semitrailer (shared with AmE. BrE: artic or articulated lorry ); station wagon (shared with AmE. BrE: estate car ); truck (shared with AmE. BrE: lorry ); ute (BrE and AmE: pickup truck ); windscreen (shared with BrE. AmE: windshield ) Clothing – gumboots (BrE: Wellington boots or Wellies ; AmE: rubber boots or galoshes ); jumper (shared with BrE. AmE: sweater ); nappy (shared with BrE. AmE: diaper ); overalls (shared with AmE. BrE: dungarees ); raincoat (shared with AmE. BrE: mackintosh or mac ); runners or sneakers (footwear) (BrE: trainers . AmE: sneakers ); sandshoe (BrE: pump or plimsoll . AmE: tennis shoe ); singlet (BrE: vest . AmE: tank top or wifebeater ); skivvy (BrE: polo neck ; AmE: turtleneck ); swimmers or togs or bathers (BrE: swimming costume . AmE: bathing suit or swimsuit ); thongs (refers to BrE and AmE flip-flops (footwear) . In BrE and AmE refers to g-string (underwear) ) Terms with different meanings in Australian English [ edit ] There also exist words which in Australian English are ascribed different meanings from those ascribed in other varieties of English, for instance: [ 44 ] Asian in Australian (and American) English commonly refers to people of East Asian ancestry, while in British English it commonly refers to people of South Asian ancestry Biscuit in Australian (and British) English refers to AmE cookie and cracker , while in American English it refers to a leavened bread product (potato) Chips refers both to British English crisps (which is not commonly used in Australian English) and to American English French fries (which is used alongside hot chips ) Football in Australian English most commonly refers to Australian rules football , rugby league or rugby union . In British English, football is most commonly used to refer to association football , while in North American English football is used to refer to gridiron Pants in Australian (and American) English most commonly refers to British English trousers , but in British English refers to Australian English underpants Nursery in Australian English generally refers to a plant nursery , whereas in British English and American English it also often refers to a child care or daycare for pre-school age children [ 45 ] Paddock in Australian English refers to an open field or meadow whereas in American and British English it refers to a small agricultural enclosure Premier in Australian English refers specifically to the head of government of an Australian state , whereas in British English it is used interchangeably with Prime Minister Public school in Australian (and American) English refers to a state school. Australian and American English use private school to mean a non-government or independent school, in contrast with British English which uses public school to refer to the same thing Pudding in Australian (and American) English refers to a particular sweet dessert dish , while in British English it often refers to dessert (the food course ) in general Thongs in Australian English refer to British and American English flip-flop (footwear), whereas in both American and British English it refers to Australian English G-string (underwear) (in Australian English the singular "thong" can refer to one half of a pair of the footwear or to a G-string, so care must be taken as to context) Vest in Australian (and American) English refers to a padded upper garment or British English waistcoat but in British English refers to Australian English singlet Idioms taking different forms in Australian English [ edit ] In addition to the large number of uniquely Australian idioms in common use, there are instances of idioms taking different forms in Australian English than in other varieties, for instance: A drop in the ocean (shared with BrE usage) as opposed to AmE a drop in the bucket A way to go (shared with BrE usage) as opposed to AmE a ways to go Home away from home (shared with AmE usage) as opposed to BrE home from home Take (something) with a grain of salt (shared with AmE usage) as opposed to BrE take with a pinch of salt Touch wood (shared with BrE usage) as opposed to AmE knock on wood Wouldn't touch (something) with a ten-foot pole (shared with AmE usage) as opposed to BrE wouldn't touch with a barge pole British and American English terms not commonly used in Australian English [ edit ] There are extensive terms used in other varieties of English which are not widely used in Australian English. These terms usually do not result in Australian English speakers failing to comprehend speakers of other varieties of English, as Australian English speakers will often be familiar with such terms through exposure to media or may ascertain the meaning using context.

Non-exhaustive selections of British English and American English terms not commonly used in Australian English together with their definitions or Australian English equivalents are found in the collapsible table below: [ 46 ] [ 47 ] British English terms not widely used in Australian English [ 46 ] Allotment (gardening): A community garden not connected to a dwelling Artic or articulated lorry (vehicle): Australian English semi-trailer Aubergine (vegetable): Australian English eggplant Bank holiday : Australian English public holiday Barmy : Crazy, mad or insane.

Bedsit : Australian English studio (apartment) Belisha beacon : A flashing light atop a pole used to mark a pedestrian crossing Bin lorry : Australian English: rubbish truck or garbage truck Bobby : A police officer, particularly one of lower rank Cagoule : A lightweight raincoat or windsheeter Candy floss (confectionery): Australian English fairy floss Cash machine : Australian English automatic teller machine Chav : Lower socio-economic person comparable to Australian English bogan Child-minder : Australian English babysitter Chivvy : To hurry (somebody) along. Australian English nag Chrimbo : Abbreviation for Christmas comparable to Australian English Chrissy Chuffed : To be proud (especially of oneself) Cleg (insect): Australian English horsefly Clingfilm : A plastic wrap used in food preparation. Australian English Glad wrap/ cling wrap Community payback : Australian English community service Comprehensive school : Australian English state school or public school Cooker : A kitchen appliance. Australian English stove and/or oven Coppice : An area of cleared woodland Council housing : Australian English public housing Counterpane : A bed covering. Australian English bedspread Courgette : A vegetable. Australian English zucchini Creche : Australian English child care centre (potato) Crisps : Australian English (potato) chips Current account : Australian English transaction account Dell : A small secluded hollow or valley Do : Australian English party or social gathering Doddle : An easy task Doss (verb): To spend time idly Drawing pin : Australian English thumb tack Dungarees : Australian English overalls Dustbin : Australian English garbage bin /rubbish bin Dustcart : Australian English garbage truck /rubbish truck Duvet : Australian English doona Elastoplast or plaster : An adhesive used to cover small wounds. Australian English band-aid Electrical lead : Australian English electrical cord Estate car : Australian English station wagon Fairy cake : Australian English cupcake Father Christmas : Australian English Santa Claus Fen : A low and frequently flooded area of land, similar to Australian English swamp Free phone : Australian English toll-free Gammon : Meat from the hind leg of pork . Australian English makes no distinction between gammon and ham Git : A foolish person. Equivalent to idiot or moron Goose pimples : Australian English goose bumps Hacked off : To be irritated or upset, often with a person Hairgrip : Australian English hairpin or bobbypin Half-term : Australian English school holiday Haulier : Australian English hauler Heath : An area of dry grass or shrubs, similar to Australian English shrubland Hoover (verb): Australian English to vacuum Horsebox : Australian English horse float Ice lolly : Australian English ice block or icy pole Juicy bits : Small pieces of fruit residue found in fruit juice. Australian English pulp Kip : To sleep Kitchen roll : Australian English paper towel Landslip : Australian English landslide Lavatory : Australian English toilet ( lavatory is used in Australian English for toilets on aeroplanes) Lido : A public swimming pool Lorry : Australian English truck Loudhailer : Australian English megaphone Mackintosh or mac : Australian English raincoat Mangetout : Australian English snow pea Marrow : Australian English squash Minidish : A satellite dish for domestic (especially television) use Moggie : A domestic short-haired cat Moor : A low area prone to flooding, similar to Australian English swampland Nettled : Irritated (especially with somebody) Nosh : A meal or spread of food Off-licence : Australian English bottle shop /Bottle-o Pak choi : Australian English bok choy Pavement : Australian English footpath Pelican crossing : Australian English pedestrian crossing or zebra crossing Peaky : Unwell or sickly (red or green) Pepper (vegetable): Australian English capsicum People carrier (vehicle): Australian English people mover Pikey : An itinerant person. Similar to Australian English tramp Pillar box : Australian English post box Pillock : A mildly offensive term for a foolish or obnoxious person, similar to idiot or moron . Also refers to male genitalia Plimsoll (footwear): Australian English sandshoe Pneumatic drill : Australian English jackhammer Polo neck (garment): Australian English skivvy Poorly : Unwell or sick Press-up (exercise): Australian English push-up Pushchair : A wheeled cart for pushing a baby. Australian English: stroller or pram Pusher : A wheeled cart for pushing a baby. Australian English: stroller or pram Rodgering : A mildly offensive term for sexual intercourse, similar to Australian English rooting Saloon (car): Australian English sedan Scratchings (food): Solid material left after rendering animal (especially pork) fat. Australian English crackling Sellotape : Australian English sticky tape Shan't : Australian English will not Skive (verb): To play truant, particularly from an educational institution. Australian English to wag Sleeping policeman : Australian English speed hump or speed bump Snog (verb): To kiss passionately, equivalent to Australian English pash Sod : A mildly offensive term for an unpleasant person Spinney : A small area of trees and bushes Strimmer : Australian English whipper snipper or line trimmer Swan (verb): To move from one plact to another ostentatiously Sweets : Australian English lollies Tailback : A long queue of stationary or slow-moving traffic Tangerine : Australian English mandarin Tat (noun): Cheap, tasteless goods Tipp-Ex : Australian English white out or liquid paper Trainers : Athletic footwear. Australian English runners or sneakers .

Turning (noun): Where one road branches from another. Australian English turn Utility room : A room containing washing or other home appliances, similar to Australian English laundry Value-added tax (VAT) : Australian English goods and services tax (GST) Wellington boots : Australian English gumboots White spirit : Australian English turpentine American English terms not widely used in Australian English [ 47 ] Acclimate : Australian English acclimatise Airplane : Australian English aeroplane Aluminum : Australian English aluminium Baby carriage : Australian English stroller or pram Bangs : A hair style. Australian English fringe Baseboard (architecture): Australian English skirting board Bayou : Australian English swamp / billabong Bell pepper : Australian English capsicum Bellhop : Australian English hotel porter Beltway : Australian English ring road Boondocks : An isolated, rural area. Australian English the sticks or Woop Woop or Beyond the black stump Broil (cooking technique): Australian English grill Bullhorn : Australian English megaphone Burglarize : Australian English burgle Busboy : A subclass of (restaurant) waiter Candy : Australian English lollies Cellular phone : Australian English mobile phone Cilantro : Australian English coriander Comforter : Australian English doona Condominium : Australian English apartment Counter-clockwise : Australian English anticlockwise Coveralls : Australian English overalls Crapshoot : A risky venture Diaper : Australian English nappy Downtown : Australian English central business district Drapes : Australian English curtains Drugstore : Australian English pharmacy or chemist Drywall : Australian English plasterboard Dumpster : Australian English skip bin Fall (season): Australian English autumn Fanny pack : Australian English bum bag Faucet : Australian English tap Flashlight : Australian English torch Freshman : A first year student at a highschool or university Frosting (cookery): Australian English icing Gasoline : Australian English petrol Gas pedal : Australian English accelerator Gas Station : Australian English service station or petrol station Glove compartment : Australian English glovebox Golden raisin : Australian English sultana Grifter : Australian English con artist Ground beef : Australian English minced beef or mince Hood (vehicle): Australian English bonnet Hot tub : Australian English spa or spa bath Jell-o : Australian English jelly Ladybug : Australian English ladybird Mail-man : Australian English postman or postie Mass transit : Australian English public transport Math : Australian English maths Mineral spirits : Australian English turpentine Nightstand : Australian English bedside table Out-of-state : Australian English interstate Pacifier : Australian English dummy Parking lot : Australian English car park Penitentiary : Australian English prison or jail Period (punctuation): Australian English full stop Play hooky (verb): To play truant from an educational institution. Equivalent to Australian English (to) wag Popsicle : Australian English ice block or icy pole Railroad : Australian English railway Railroad ties : Australian English Railway sleepers Rappel : Australian English abseil Realtor : Australian English real estate agent Root (sport): To enthusiastically support a sporting team. Equivalent to Australian English barrack Row house : Australian English terrace house Sales tax : Australian English goods and services tax (GST) Saran wrap : Australian English plastic wrap or cling wrap Scad : Australian English a large quantity Scallion : Australian English spring onion Sharpie (pen): Australian English permanent marker or texta or felt pen Shopping cart : Australian English shopping trolley Sidewalk : Australian English footpath Silverware or flatware : Australian English cutlery Soda pop : Australian English soft drink Streetcar : Australian English tram Sweater :Australian English jumper Sweatpants : Australian English tracksuit pants /trackies Tailpipe : Australian English exhaust pipe Takeout : Australian English takeaway Trash can : Australian English garbage bin or rubbish bin Trunk (vehicle): Australian English boot Turn signal : Australian English indicator Turtleneck : Australian English skivvy Upscale and downscale : Australian English upmarket and downmarket Vacation : Australian English holiday Windshield : Australian English windscreen Grammar [ edit ] The general rules which apply to Australian English are described at English grammar . Grammatical differences between varieties of English are minor relative to differences in phonology and vocabulary and do not generally affect intelligibility. Examples of grammatical differences between Australian English and other varieties include: Collective nouns are generally singular in construction, e.g., the government was unable to decide as opposed to the government were unable to decide or the group was leaving as opposed to the group were leaving .

[ 48 ] This is in common with American English .

Australian English has an extreme distaste for the modal verbs shall (in non-legal contexts), shan't and ought (in place of will , won't and should respectively), which are encountered in British English.

[ 49 ] However, shall is found in the Australian Constitution , Acts of Parliament, and other formal or legal documents such as contracts, and ought sees use in some academic contexts (such as philosophy).

Using should with the same meaning as would , e.g.

I should like to see you , encountered in British English, is almost never encountered in Australian English and is often contracted to I'd .

River follows the name of the river in question, e.g., Brisbane River , rather than the British convention of coming before the name, e.g., River Thames . This is also the case in North American and New Zealand English . In South Australian English however, the reverse applies when referring to the following three rivers: Murray , Darling and Torrens .

[ 50 ] The Derwent in Tasmania also follows this convention.

While prepositions before days may be omitted in American English, i.e., She resigned Thursday , they are retained in Australian English: She resigned on Thursday . This is shared with British English.

The institutional nouns hospital and university do not take the definite article : She's in hospital , He's at university .

[ 51 ] This is in contrast to American English where the is required: In the hospital , At the university .

On the weekend is used in favour of the British at the weekend which is not encountered in Australian English.

[ 52 ] Ranges of dates use to , i.e., Monday to Friday , rather than Monday through Friday . This is shared with British English and is in contrast to American English.

When speaking or writing out numbers, and is always inserted before the tens, i.e., one hundred and sixty-two rather than one hundred sixty-two . This is in contrast to American English, where the insertion of and is acceptable but nonetheless either casual or informal.

The preposition to in write to (e.g. "I'll write to you") is always retained, as opposed to American usage where it may be dropped.

Australian English does not share the British usage of read (v) to mean "study" (v). Therefore, it may be said that "He studies medicine" but not that "He reads medicine".

When referring to time, Australians will refer to 10:30 as half past ten and do not use the British half ten . Similarly, a quarter to ten is used for 9:45 rather than (a) quarter of ten , which is sometimes found in American English.

Australian English does not share the British English meaning of sat to include sitting or seated . Therefore, uses such as I've been sat here for an hour are not encountered in Australian English.

To have a shower or have a bath are the most common usages in Australian English, in contrast to American English which uses take a shower and take a bath .

[ 53 ] The past participle of saw is sawn (e.g.

sawn-off shotgun ) in Australian English, in contrast to the American English sawed .

The verb visit is transitive in Australian English. Where the object is a person or people, American English also uses visit with , which is not found in Australian English.

An outdoor event which is cancelled due to inclement weather is rained out in Australian English. This is in contrast to British English where it is said to be rained off .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] In informal speech, sentence-final but may be used, e.g. "I don't want to go but" in place of "But I don't want to go".

[ 49 ] This is also found in Scottish English .

In informal speech, the discourse markers yeah no (or yeah nah ) and no yeah (or nah yeah ) may be used to mean "no" and "yes" respectively.

[ 56 ] Extended discourse markers of this nature are sometimes used for comedic effect, but the meaning is generally found in the final affirmative/negative.

Spelling and style [ edit ] As in all English-speaking countries, there is no central authority that prescribes official usage with respect to matters of spelling , grammar, punctuation or style.

Spelling [ edit ] There are several dictionaries of Australian English which adopt a descriptive approach. The Macquarie Dictionary and the Australian Oxford Dictionary are most commonly used by universities, governments and courts as the standard for Australian English spelling.

[ 57 ] Australian spelling is significantly closer to British than American spelling , as it did not adopt the systematic reforms promulgated in Noah Webster 's 1828 Dictionary . Notwithstanding, the Macquarie Dictionary often lists most American spellings as acceptable secondary variants.

The minor systematic differences which occur between Australian and American spelling are summarised below: [ 58 ] French-derived words which in American English end with or , such as col or , hon or , behavi or and lab or , are spelt with our in Australian English: col our , hon our , behavi our and lab our . Exceptions are the Australian Lab or Party and some (especially South Australian ) placenames which use Harb or , notably Victor Harb or .

Words which in American English end with ize , such as real ize , recogn ize and apolog ize are spelt with ise in Australian English: real ise , recogn ise and apolog ise . The British Oxford spelling , which uses the ize endings, remains a minority variant. The Macquarie Dictionary says that the -ise form as opposed to -ize sits at 3:1. The sole exception to this is capsize , which is used in all varieties.

Words which in American English end with yze , such as anal yze , paral yze and catal yze are spelt with yse in Australian English: anal yse , paral yse and catal yse .

French-derived words which in American English end with er , such as fib er , cent er and met er are spelt with re in Australian English: fib re , cent re and met re (the unit of measurement only, not physical devices; so gasomet er , voltmet er ).

Words which end in American English end with log , such as cata log , dia log and mono log are usually spelt with logue in Australian English: cata logue , dia logue and mono logue ; however, the Macquarie Dictionary lists the log spelling as the preferred variant for ana log .

A double-consonant l is retained in Australian English when adding suffixes to words ending in l where the consonant is unstressed, contrary to American English. Therefore, Australian English favours cance ll ed , counse ll or , and trave ll ing over American cance l ed , counse l or and trave l ing .

Where American English uses a double-consonant ll in the words ski ll ful , wi ll ful , enro ll , disti ll , enthra ll , fulfi ll and insta ll ment , Australian English uses a single consonant: ski l ful , wi l ful , enro l , disti l , enthra l , fulfi l and insta l ment . However, the Macquarie Dictionary has noted a growing tendency to use the double consonant.

[ 59 ] The American English defen se and offen se are spelt defen ce and offen ce in Australian English.

In contrast with American English, which uses pract ice and lic ense for both nouns and verbs, pract ice and licen ce are nouns while pract ise and licen se are verbs in Australian English.

Words with ae and oe are often maintained in words such as oe strogen and p ae dophilia , in contrast to the American English practice of using e alone (as in e strogen and p e dophilia ). The Macquarie Dictionary has noted a shift within Australian English towards using e alone, and now lists some words such as encyclop e dia , f e tus , e on or h e matite with the e spelling as the preferred variant and hence Australian English varies by word when it comes to these sets of words.

Minor systematic difference which occur between Australian and British spelling are as follows: [ 58 ] Words often ending in eable in British English end in able in Australian English. Therefore, Australian English favours liv able over liv eable , siz able over siz eable , mov able over mov eable , etc., although both variants are acceptable.

Words often ending in eing in British English end in ing in Australian English. Therefore, Australian English favours a ging over ag eing , or rout ing over rout eing , etc., although both variants are acceptable.

Words often ending in mme in British English end in m in Australian English. Therefore, Australian English favours progra m over progra mme (in all contexts) and aerogra m over aerogra mme , although both variants are acceptable. Similar to Canada, New Zealand and the United States, (kilo)gra m is the only spelling.

Other examples of individual words where the preferred spelling is listed by the Macquarie Dictionary as being different from current British spellings include ana log as opposed to ana logue , gue r illa as opposed to gue rr illa , verand ah as opposed to verand a , bur q a as opposed to bur k a , past ie (noun) as opposed to past y , neuro n as opposed to neuro ne , hicc up as opposed to hicc ough , anne x as opposed to anne xe , ra cc oon as opposed to ra c oon etc.

[ 58 ] Unspaced forms such as onto , anytime , alright and anymore are also listed as being equally as acceptable as their spaced counterparts.

[ 58 ] There is variation between and within varieties of English in the treatment of -t and -ed endings for past tense verbs. The Macquarie Dictionary does not favour either, but it suggests that leap ed , lean ed or learn ed (with -ed endings) are more common but spel t and burn t (with -t endings) are more common.

[ 58 ] Different spellings have existed throughout Australia's history. What are today regarded as American spellings were popular in Australia throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, with the Victorian Department of Education endorsing them into the 1970s and The Age newspaper until the 1990s. This influence can be seen in the spelling of the Australian Labor Party and also in some place names such as Victor Harbor . The Concise Oxford English Dictionary has been credited with re-establishing the dominance of the British spellings in the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 60 ] For a short time during the late 20th century, Harry Lindgren 's 1969 spelling reform proposal ( Spelling Reform 1 or SR1 ) gained some support in Australia and was adopted by the Australian Teachers' Federation and minister Doug Everingham in personal correspondence.

[ 61 ] Punctuation and style [ edit ] Prominent general style guides for Australian English include the Cambridge Guide to Australian English Usage , the Australian Government Style Manual [ 62 ] (formerly the Style Manual: For Authors, Editors and Printers ), the Australian Handbook for Writers and Editors and the Complete Guide to English Usage for Australian Students .

Both single and double quotation marks are in use, with single quotation marks preferred for use in the first instance, with double quotation marks reserved for quotes of speech within speech.

Logical (as opposed to typesetter's) punctuation is preferred for punctuation marks at the end of quotations. For instance, Sam said he 'wasn't happy when Jane told David to "go away " '.

is used in preference to Sam said he "wasn't happy when Jane told David to 'go away.

' " The DD/MM/YYYY date format is followed and the 12-hour clock is generally used in everyday life (as opposed to service, police, and airline applications).

With the exception of screen sizes, metric units are used in everyday life, having supplanted imperial units upon the country's switch to the metric system in the 1970s, although imperial units persist in casual references to a person's height. Tyre and bolt sizes (for example) are defined in imperial units where appropriate for technical reasons.

In betting , decimal odds are used in preference to fractional odds, as used in the United Kingdom, or moneyline odds in the United States.

Keyboard layout [ edit ] There are two major English language keyboard layouts , the United States layout and the United Kingdom layout. Keyboards and keyboard software for the Australian market universally uses the US keyboard layout, which lacks the pound (£) , euro and negation symbols and uses a different layout for punctuation symbols from the UK keyboard layout.

Demographics [ edit ] By ancestry [ edit ] Percentage of people from different ancestries that speak English ( 2021 ) [ 63 ] Nationality Percentage Native [ a ] Fluent [ b ] Afghan <4.0% 68.6% American 89.4% 93.2% Argentinian 20.2% 92.6% Austrian 63.9% 95.1% Bangladeshi 6.8% 93.5% Bosnian 11.7% 75.8% Brazilian 15.1% 93.9% British 97.3% >99.0% Burmese 11.6% 57.0% Cambodian 8.7% 56.4% Canadian 88.1% 95.9% Chilean 19.0% 85.6% Chinese 3.4% 66.1% Colombian 10.7% 90.5% Croatian 23.8% 78.5% Cypriot 17.3% 76.3% Dutch 71.2% 96.1% East Timorese 15.1% 67.2% Egyptian 21.6% 89.2% Ethiopian 12.1% 84.4% Fijian 25.8% 95.2% Filipino 25.0% 96.8% French 34.1% 96.9% German 59.5% 96.1% Greek 10.8% 65.1% Hong Kong 15.3% 86.5% Hungarian 41.8% 89.2% Indian 13.4% 94.7% Indonesian 20.7% 89.6% Iranian 8.2% 85.5% Iraqi <5.0% 67.0% Irish 94.8% 90.0% Israeli 33.1% 96.5% Italian 25.8% 78.9% Japanese 20.3% 85.2% Kenyan 35.5% 96.3% Lao 13.5% 61.2% Lebanese 10.5% 76.8% Macedonian 11.1% 73.5% Malaysian 32.8% 86.4% Maltese 49.0% 87.8% Mauritian 28.5% 96.5% Mexican 18.2% 96.6% Nepali 3.1% 96.1% New Zealand 89.1% 91.5% Pakistani 7.7% 92.9% Palestinian 14.2% 80.8% Papua New Guinean 76.9% 93.8% Peruvian 21.8% 93.5% Polish 28.8% 87.8% Portuguese 28.1% 75.9% Romanian 27.1% 88.5% Russian 18.6% 86.1% Samoan 16.9% 88.0% Saudi Arabian 16.2% 92.2% Serbian 15.6% 81.2% Singaporean 54.5% 96.4% Somali 6.5% 79.1% South African 73.6% 98.1% South Korean 10.3% 70.3% South Sudanese 7.5% 86.5% Spanish 29.0% 86.4% Sri Lankan 21.8% 93.5% Sudanese 10.2% 83.5% Swedish 44.9% 98.3% Syrian 3.2% 65.9% Taiwanese 7.5% 73.7% Thai 21.0% 78.3% Tongan 15.4% 81.0% Turkish 12.1% 69.1% Ukrainian 19.2% 82.9% Venezuelan 13.7% 93.9% Vietnamese 5.2% 58.7% Zimbabwean 61.7% 98.4% ^ Percentage of people who speak English at home.

^ Percentage of people who speak another language at home who are fluent in English.

See also [ edit ] Australia portal Language portal The Australian National Dictionary Australian English vocabulary New Zealand English South African English Zimbabwean English Falkland Islands English Commonwealth English Diminutives in Australian English Sound correspondences between English accents Strine References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ English (Australia) at Ethnologue (19th ed., 2016) ^ "Unified English Braille" .

Australian Braille Authority . 18 May 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2017 .

^ "English" .

IANA language subtag registry . 16 October 2005 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "Australia" .

IANA language subtag registry . 16 October 2005 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "Australia" .

Australian Bureau of Statistics . Retrieved 6 March 2025 .

^ a b Burridge, Kate (2020). "Chapter 11: History of Australian English". In Willoughby, Louisa (ed.).

Australian English Reimagined: Structure, Features and Developments . Routledge. pp. 178¬–181.

ISBN 978-0-367-02939-5 .

^ a b Moore, Bruce (2008).

Speaking our Language: the Story of Australian English . South Melbourne: Oxford University Press. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-19-556577-5 .

^ a b Burridge, Kate (2020). "Chapter 11: History of Australian English". In Willoughby, Louisa (ed.).

Australian English Reimagined: Structure, Features and Developments . Routledge. pp. 181, 183.

ISBN 978-0-367-02939-5 .

^ Cox, Felicity (2020). "Chapter 2: Phonetics and Phonology of Australian English". In Willoughby, Louisa (ed.).

Australian English Reimagined: Structure, Features and Developments . Routledge. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-367-02939-5 .

^ Blainey, Geoffrey (1993).

The Rush that Never Ended: a History of Australian Mining (4 ed.). Carlton, Vic.: Melbourne University Press.

ISBN 0-522-84557-6 .

^ Baker, Sidney J. (1945).

The Australian Language (1st ed.). Sydney: Angus and Robertson.

^ Bell, Philip; Bell, Roger (1998).

Americanization and Australia (1. publ. ed.). Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.

ISBN 0-86840-784-4 .

^ Trudgill, Peter and Jean Hannah. (2002).

International English: A Guide to the Varieties of Standard English , 4th ed. London: Arnold.

ISBN 0-340-80834-9 , p. 4.

^ Harrington, J.; Cox, F. & Evans, Z. (1997). "An acoustic phonetic study of broad, general, and cultivated Australian English vowels".

Australian Journal of Linguistics .

17 (2): 155– 84.

doi : 10.1080/07268609708599550 .

^ a b c Cox, Felicity; Fletcher, Janet (2017) [First published 2012], Australian English Pronunciation and Transcription (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-316-63926-9 ^ Mannell, Robert (14 August 2009).

"Australian English – Impressionistic Phonetic Studies" . Clas.mq.edu.au.

Archived from the original on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Cox & Palethorpe (2007) , p. 343.

^ Filppula, Markku; Klemola, Juhani; Sharma, Devyani (14 February 2017).

The Oxford Handbook of World Englishes . Oxford University Press. p. 412.

ISBN 978-0-19-067144-0 .

^ Wells, John C.

(1982), Accents of English , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 597 ^ Harrington, Cox & Evans (1997) ^ Mannell, Robert (14 August 2009).

"Robert Mannell, "Impressionistic Studies of Australian English Phonetics" " . Ling.mq.edu.au.

Archived from the original on 31 December 2008 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Scott, Kellie (5 January 2016).

"Divide over potato cake and scallop, bathers and togs mapped in 2015 Linguistics Roadshow" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 5 January 2016 .

^ a b c Pauline Bryant (1985): Regional variation in the Australian English lexicon, Australian Journal of Linguistics, 5:1, 55–66 ^ "regional accents | Australian Voices" . Clas.mq.edu.au . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ "Final but in Australian English conversation" .

Mulder, Jean & Thompson, Sandra & Penry Williams, Cara. (2009) in Peters, Pam, Collins, Peter and Smith, Adam. Comparative Studies in Australian and New Zealand English: Grammar and beyond, John Benjamins Publishing Company, 2009.

https://doi.org/10.1075/veaw.g39 ^ Bruce Moore (Australian Oxford Dictionary) and Felicity Cox (Macquarie University) [interviewed in]: Sounds of Aus (television documentary) 2007; director: David Swann; Writer: Lawrie Zion, Princess Pictures (broadcaster: ABC Television).

^ "Australia's unique and evolving sound" . Archived from the original on 27 September 2009 . Retrieved 22 January 2009 .

Edition 34, 2007 (23 August 2007) – The Macquarie Globe ^ Das, Sushi (29 January 2005).

"Struth! Someone's nicked me Strine" .

The Age .

^ Corderoy, Amy (26 January 2010).

"It's all English, but vowels ain't voils" .

Sydney Morning Herald .

^ Jamieson, Maya (12 September 2017).

"Australia's accent only now starting to adopt small changes" .

SBS News .

^ "australian english | Australian Voices" . Clas.mq.edu.au. 30 July 2010 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ "Reference at www.abc.net.au" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation .

[ dead link ] ^ "Six facts about the Australian accent" .

ABC Education . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 18 December 2017 . Retrieved 9 April 2023 .

^ The Speech of Australian Adolescents: A Study in Phonetics and Intonation. Sydney: Angus & Robertson . Mitchell, A. G., & Delbridge, A. (1965).

^ Guy, G.; Horvath, B.; Vonwiller, J.; Daisley, E.; Rogers, I. (1986). "An intonational change in progress in Australian English".

Language in Society .

15 : 23– 52.

doi : 10.1017/s0047404500011635 .

ISSN 0047-4045 .

S2CID 146425401 .

^ Stokel-Walker, Chris (11 August 2014).

"The unstoppable march of the upward inflection?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ "Frederick Ludowyk, 1998, "Aussie Words: The Dinkum Oil On Dinkum; Where Does It Come From?" ( 0zWords , Australian National Dictionary Centre)" . Archived from the original on 16 March 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2007 .

. Access date: 5 November 2007.

^ Ludowyk, Frederick (October 2004).

"Aussie Words: Of Billy, Bong, Bung, & 'Billybong' " (PDF) .

Ozwords .

11 (2).

Australian National Dictionary Centre : 7. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 February 2024 . Retrieved 13 February 2024 – via Australian National University .

Also here ^ "Canberra Facts and figures" . Archived from the original on 9 November 2012 . Retrieved 15 August 2012 .

^ Frei, Patricia.

"Discussion on the Meaning of 'Canberra' " .

Canberra History Web . Patricia Frei. Archived from the original on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 11 August 2013 .

^ Astle, David (12 March 2021).

"Why do Aussies shorten everything an itsy-bitsy-teeny-weeny bit?" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2022.

^ "History of Measurement in Australia" .

web page . Australian Government National Measurement Institute . Retrieved 14 February 2013 .

^ Wilks, Kevin (1992).

Metrication in Australia: A review of the effectiveness of policies and procedures in Australia's conversion to the metric system (PDF) . Canberra: Australian Government Publishing Service. p. 114.

ISBN 0-644-24860-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 5 August 2017 .

Measurements used by people in their private lives, in conversation or in estimation of sizes had not noticeably changed nor was such a change even attempted or thought necessary.

^ a b "The Macquarie Dictionary", Fourth Edition.  The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, 2005.

^ SCHLEEF, ERIK; TURTON, DANIELLE (19 September 2016).

"Sociophonetic variation of like in British dialects: effects of function, context and predictability" .

English Language and Linguistics .

22 (1): 35– 75.

doi : 10.1017/s136067431600023x .

ISSN 1360-6743 .

^ a b "The Macquarie Dictionary", Fourth Edition. The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, 2005. Note: Entries with Chiefly British usage note in the Macquarie Dictionary and reference to corresponding Australian entry.

^ a b The Macquarie Dictionary , Fourth Edition.  The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, 2005. Note: Entries with Chiefly US usage note in the Macquarie Dictionary and reference to corresponding Australian entry.

^ Pena, Yolanda Fernandez (5 May 2016). "What Motivates Verbal Agreement Variation with Collective Headed Subjects".

University of Vigo LVTC .

^ a b Collins, Peter (2012).

"Australian English: Its Evolution and Current State" .

International Journal of Language, Translation and Intercultural Communication .

1 : 75.

doi : 10.12681/ijltic.11 .

^ "Geographical names guidelines" .

Planning and property . Attorney-General's Department (Government of South Australia). August 2020 . Retrieved 8 February 2021 .

^ Siegel, Jeff (2010).

Second Dialect Acquisition . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-51687-7 .

^ Hewings, Matthew (1999).

Advanced Grammar in Use . p. 214.

^ Cetnarowska, Bozena (1993).

The Syntax, Semantics and Derivation of Bare Normalisations in English . Uniwersytet Śląski. p. 48.

ISBN 83-226-0535-8 .

^ "The Macquarie Dictionary", Fourth Edition. The Macquarie Library Pty Ltd, 2005 ^ "Collins English Dictionary", 13th Edition. HarperCollins, 2018 ^ Moore, Erin (2007).

Yeah-no: A Discourse Marker in Australian English (Honours). University of Melbourne.

^ "Spelling" .

Australian Government Style Manual . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

^ a b c d e "The Macquarie Dictionary", 8th Edition. Macquarie Dictionary Publishers, 2020.

^ "Macquarie Dictionary" .

www.macquariedictionary.com.au . Archived from the original on 23 November 2021 . Retrieved 23 November 2021 .

^ "Endangered Languages and Cultures » Blog Archive » Webster in Australia" . Paradisec.org.au. 30 January 2008. Archived from the original on 20 September 2017 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ "Spelling Reform 1 – And Nothing Else!" . Archived from the original on 30 July 2012.

^ Digital Transformation Agency (n.d.).

"Australian Government Style Manual" . Retrieved 25 October 2021 .

^ "Cultures" .

Cultural Atlas . Retrieved 30 July 2025 .

Works cited [ edit ] Cox, Felicity; Palethorpe, Sallyanne (2007), "Australian English", Journal of the International Phonetic Association , 37 (3): 341– 350, doi : 10.1017/S0025100307003192 , S2CID 232349884 Further reading [ edit ] Korhonen, Minna (2017).

Perspectives on the Americanisation of Australian English: A Sociolinguistic Study of Variation (PhD thesis).

University of Helsinki .

ISBN 978-951-51-3559-9 .

Mitchell, Alexander G. (1995).

The Story of Australian English . Sydney: Dictionary Research Centre.

External links [ edit ] Look up Appendix:Australian English vocabulary in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Aussie English, The Illustrated Dictionary of Australian English Australian National Dictionary Centre free newsletter from the Australian National Dictionary Centre, which includes articles on Australian English Australian Word Map at the ABC —documents regionalisms R. Mannell, F. Cox and J. Harrington (2009), An Introduction to Phonetics and Phonology Archived 20 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Macquarie University Aussie English for beginners —the origins, meanings and a quiz to test your knowledge at the National Museum of Australia.

Articles related to Australian English v t e Australia articles History Timeline Bibliography Prehistory Archaeology European exploration Territorial evolution 1788–1850 1851–1900 1901–1945 Since 1945 By topic Asian Australians Constitutional Diplomatic Economic Federation Immigration Indigenous Military Monarchy Peace Railway Geography Climate Climate change Continent Deserts Environment issues Earthquakes Flora Fauna Forests Geology Islands Mountains Regions Protected areas Rivers Waterfalls World Heritage Sites Subdivisions States and territories Capitals Cities Politics Asylum Constitution Courts Elections Donations Electoral system Parties Federal budget Foreign relations Human rights Intersex LGBTQ Transgender Intelligence and security Law Constitution Judiciary Enforcement Military Monarchy National debt Parliament Political ideology Anarchism Christian Conservatism Far-right Liberalism Nationalism Republicanism Socialism Public Service Women Government leaders Government ministers Shadow Cabinet Government Cabinet of Australia list Governor-General list Prime Minister list Economy Agriculture Dollar Energy Gross state product Home ownership Public housing Household income Manufacturing Media Mining Poverty Reserve Bank Stock exchange Superannuation Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Welfare system Society Abortion Aged care Censorship Citizenship Crime Education Euthanasia Healthcare Homelessness Human trafficking Immigration Irreligion Languages Life expectancy People Demographics Ethnic groups Indigenous Australians Prostitution Racism Religion Squatting Waste management Women Culture Architecture Art Arts Australian English Cinema Cuisine Dance Literature Music Public holidays Radio Sport Symbols Television Theatre Anglosphere Australian studies Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal v t e Languages of Australia English varieties Australian Western Australian South Australian Australian Aboriginal Torres Strait Major Indigenous languages Anindilyakwa Arrernte Burarra Kalaw Lagaw Ya Murrinh Patha Tiwi Walmajarri Warlpiri Warumungu Western Desert Luritja Pintupi Pitjantjatjara Yolŋu Matha Dhuwal Djambarrpuyngu Language families Bunuban Daly (5 families) Darwin Region ? (3 families/isolates) Garrwan Giimbiyu Iwaidjan Jarrakan Macro-Gunwinyguan ? (5-6 families/isolates) Marrku–Wurrugu ?

Mirndi Nyulnyulan Pama–Nyungan Tangkic Tasmanian (4 families?) Tiwi Worrorran Yangmanic (incl.

Wagiman )?

Pidgins , creoles and mixed languages Angloromani Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin Cocos Malay Gurindji Kriol Kriol Light Warlpiri Norfuk Port Jackson Pidgin English Queensland Kanaka English South Australian Pidgin English Torres Strait Creole Major immigrant languages Arabic Chinese Cantonese Mandarin Greek Hindi Italian Korean Maltese Nepali Punjabi Spanish Tagalog Urdu Vietnamese Major foreign languages Arabic Chinese French German Greek Indonesian Italian Japanese Spanish Sign languages Auslan Australian Aboriginal Indigenous Sign Language Australian Irish Sign Language Aboriginal Australians Indigenous Australians v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe Great Britain England North Cheshire Cumbria Barrow Lancashire Liverpool/Scouse Manchester Northumbria Pitmatic Sunderland Tyneside/Geordie Teesside Yorkshire Midlands East Midlands West Midlands Birmingham Black Country Stoke-on-Trent South East Anglia London & Thames Estuary Cockney Multicultural Received Pronunciation West Country Cornwall Dorset Scotland Glasgow Highlands Wales Abercraf Cardiff Gower Port Talbot Ireland Dublin South-West Ulster Channel Islands Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta Americas North America Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Lunenburg Newfoundland Multicultural Toronto Ottawa Valley Quebec Standard Canadian United States Midland New England Boston East Maine West New York City accent North Inland North North-Central Philadelphia Baltimore South accent Appalachia Chesapeake/Outer Banks New Orleans Older South Texas West California Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Social and ethno-cultural African-American Vernacular American Indian Cajun Chicano General American Good American Speech Miami Latino New York Latino Northeastern elite Pennsylvania Dutch Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Bequia Cayman Islands Bay Islands Jamaica Saba Samaná Trinidad and Tobago Bermuda Falkland Islands Oceania Australia variation accent Aboriginal South Torres Strait West Fiji New Zealand accent Palau Solomon Islands Africa Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa accent Cape Flats South Atlantic Uganda Zimbabwe Asia East Asia Hong Kong South Asia Bangladesh India regional and occupational Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Southeast Asia Brunei Cambodia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Antarctica Antarctica Related English language Basic Broad and general accents Commonwealth Comparison of American and British English E-Prime Engrish English as a lingua franca English-based creole languages Englishisation Globish Gogate Nerrière International Jewish English ( Yeshiva English ) Learning Linguistic purism in English List of English-based pidgins Non-native pronunciations of English Plain Standard v t e English-speaking world English speaking countries Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics .

v t e Dictionaries of English Old and Middle English An Anglo-Saxon Dictionary Dictionary of Old English Middle English Dictionary Historic Catholicon Anglicum (1483) The English Schoole-Master (1596) The New World of English Words (1658) A New English Dictionary (1702) An Universal Etymological English Dictionary (1721) Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) Webster's Dictionary (1828) Worcester's Dictionary Richardson's New Dictionary Imperial Dictionary (1847–1850) Century Dictionary (1889–1891) World Book Dictionary Dictionary of American English British English Chambers Collins Oxford OED ODE Compact Concise Shorter Penguin American English American Heritage American Regional Encarta New Oxford American Random House Webster's Webster's New World Webster's Third New International Canadian English Canadian Oxford Dictionary of Canadianisms Dictionary of Newfoundland English Gage Canadian Australian English Australian National Australian Oxford Macquarie Online Collaborative International Dictionary of English Urban Dictionary Wiktionary Wordnik Learners / ESL Cambridge Advanced Learner's Collins COBUILD Advanced Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English Macmillan English Dictionary for Advanced Learners Merriam-Webster's Advanced Learner's Oxford Advanced Learner's Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kwd7b
Cached time: 20250817182151
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.670 seconds
Real time usage: 1.976 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 22294/1000000
Revision size: 101253/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 563827/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 138794/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 271205/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.807/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 33068353/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1479.472      1 -total
 19.97%  295.440      3 Template:Reflist
 13.49%  199.603     74 Template:Flagicon
 11.34%  167.782      1 Template:Navboxes
 10.10%  149.386      1 Template:Infobox_language
  9.06%  134.108      1 Template:Infobox
  7.33%  108.387    139 Template:IPA
  5.84%   86.399      1 Template:Australia_topics
  5.73%   84.827      1 Template:Country_topics
  5.47%   80.991     21 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1897:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182151 and revision id 1306008093. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Australian_English&oldid=1306008093 " Categories : Australian English Languages attested from the 18th century Dialects of English Sociolinguistics Languages of the Cocos (Keeling) Islands Oceanian dialects of English Languages of Australia Hidden categories: Pages with plain IPA Language articles citing Ethnologue 19 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2023 CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from April 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from September 2021 Language articles with IETF language tag Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Glottolog code Articles with unnamed Glottolog code All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles containing Irish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2014 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 10:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Australian English 40 languages Add topic

