Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The five modes of Agrippa 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Agrippa the Skeptic 25 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Български Català Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano ქართული Magyar مصرى Nederlands Nedersaksies Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hellenistic Pyrrhonist philosopher, creator of Agrippa's Trilemma Agrippa Born 1st century CE Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Pyrrhonism Main interests Epistemology Notable ideas The five modes of Agrippa Agrippan trilemma Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Agrippa ( Greek : Ἀγρίππας ) was a Pyrrhonist philosopher who probably lived towards the end of the 1st century CE.

[ 1 ] He is regarded as the author of "The Five Tropes (or Modes, in Greek : τρόποι ) of Agrippa", which are purported to establish the necessity of suspending judgment ( epoché ). Agrippa's arguments form the basis of the Agrippan trilemma .

The five modes of Agrippa [ edit ] Sextus Empiricus described these "modes" or "tropes" in Outlines of Pyrrhonism , attributing them "to the more recent skeptics"; Diogenes Laërtius attributes them to Agrippa.

[ 2 ] The five modes of Agrippa (also known as the five tropes of Agrippa ) are: Dissent – The uncertainty demonstrated by the differences of opinions among philosophers and people in general.

Progress ad infinitum – All proof rests on matters themselves in need of proof, and so on to infinity, i.e., the regress argument .

Relation – All things are changed as their relations become changed, or, as we look upon them from different points of view.

Assumption – The truth asserted is based on an unsupported assumption.

Circularity – The truth asserted involves a circularity of proofs.

According to the mode deriving from dispute, we find that undecidable dissension about the matter proposed has come about both in ordinary life and among philosophers.  Because of this we are not able to choose or to rule out anything, and we end up with suspension of judgement . In the mode deriving from infinite regress, we say that what is brought forward as a source of conviction for the matter proposed itself needs another such source, which itself needs another, and so ad infinitum , so that we have no point from which to begin to establish anything, and suspension of judgement follows. In the mode deriving from relativity, as we said above, the existing object appears to be such-and-such relative to the subject judging and to the things observed together with it, but we suspend judgement on what it is like in its nature. We have the mode from hypothesis when the Dogmatists, being thrown back ad infinitum , begin from something which they do not establish but claim to assume simply and without proof in virtue of a concession. The reciprocal mode occurs when what ought to be confirmatory of the object under investigation needs to be made convincing by the object under investigation; then, being unable to take either in order to establish the other, we suspend judgement about both.

[ 3 ] The first and third tropes summarize the earlier Ten Modes of Aenesidemus .

[ 2 ] The three additional ones show a progress in the Pyrrhonist system, building upon the objections derived from the fallibility of sense and opinion to more abstract and metaphysical grounds.

According to Victor Brochard "the five tropes can be regarded as the most radical and most precise formulation of philosophical skepticism that has ever been given.  In a sense, they are still irresistible today." [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Aenesidemus Sextus Empiricus Theory of justification Munchhausen Trilemma Notes [ edit ] ^ Jowett, Benjamin (1867), "Agrippa (1)" , in Smith, William (ed.), Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , vol. 1, Boston: Little, Brown and Company , p. 77 ^ a b Diogenes Laërtius, ix.

^ Sextus Empiricus, Pyrrhōneioi hypotypōseis i., from Annas, J., Outlines of Scepticism Cambridge University Press . (2000).

^ Brochard, V., The Greek Skeptics .

Bibliography [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Agrippa ".

Sextus Empiricus , Outlines of Pyrrhonism Diogenes Laërtius , Lives of the Philosophers .

Victor Brochard , The Greek Skeptics L. E. Goodman, "Skepticism", Review of Metaphysics 36:819–848, 1983.

Jonathan Barnes , The Toils of Scepticism , Cambridge, 1990.

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agrippa_the_Skeptic&oldid=1252721658 " Categories : 1st-century Greek philosophers Roman-era Skeptic philosophers Ancient Greek epistemologists Pyrrhonism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from April 2021 Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 22 October 2024, at 17:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agrippa the Skeptic 25 languages Add topic

