Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shinto and Buddhism 2 Wabi-sabi 3 Miyabi 4 Shibui 5 Iki 6 Jo-ha-kyū 7 Yūgen 8 Geidō 9 Ensō 10 Aesthetics and Japan's cultural identities 11 Japanese aesthetics and technology 12 Gastronomy 13 Kawaii 14 See also 15 References 16 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Japanese aesthetics 21 languages العربية Беларуская Bikol Central Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Română Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of ancient and modern ideals Sōji-ji , of the Soto Zen school Japanese aesthetics comprise a set of ancient ideals that include wabi (transient and stark beauty), sabi (the beauty of natural patina and aging), and yūgen (profound grace and subtlety).

[ 1 ] These ideals, and others, underpin much of Japanese cultural and aesthetic norms on what is considered tasteful or beautiful . Thus, while seen as a philosophy in Western societies, the concept of aesthetics in Japan is seen as an integral part of daily life.

[ 2 ] Japanese aesthetics now encompass a variety of ideals; some of these are traditional while others are modern and sometimes influenced by other cultures.

[ 1 ] Shinto and Buddhism [ edit ] Shinto is considered to be at the fountain-head of Japanese culture.

[ 3 ] With its emphasis on the wholeness of nature and character in ethics, and its celebration of the landscape, it sets the tone for Japanese aesthetics. Until the thirteenth century, Shinto remained the main influence on Japanese aesthetics.

[ 4 ] In the Buddhist tradition, all things are considered as either evolving from or dissolving into nothingness.  This "nothingness" is not empty space. It is rather a space of potentiality.

[ 5 ] If the seas represent potential then each thing is like a wave arising from it and returning to it. There are no permanent waves. At no point is a wave complete, even at its peak. Nature is seen as a dynamic whole that is to be admired and appreciated. This appreciation of nature has been fundamental to many Japanese aesthetic ideals, "arts," and other cultural elements. In this respect, the notion of " art " (or its conceptual equivalent) is also quite different from Western traditions (see Japanese art ).

Wabi-sabi [ edit ] Main article: Wabi-sabi Hanami ("blossom viewing") parties at Himeji Castle Wabi and sabi refer to a mindful approach to everyday life. Over time their meanings overlapped and converged until they were unified into wabi-sabi , the aesthetic defined as the beauty of things "imperfect, impermanent, and incomplete".

[ 5 ] Things in bud, or things in decay, as it were, are more evocative of wabi-sabi than things in full bloom because they suggest the transience of things. As things come and go, they show signs of their coming or going, and these signs are considered to be beautiful. In this, beauty is an altered state of consciousness and can be seen in the mundane and simple. The signatures of nature can be so subtle that it takes a quiet mind and a cultivated eye to discern them.

[ 6 ] In Zen philosophy there are seven aesthetic principles for achieving Wabi-Sabi.

[ 7 ] Fukinsei (不均斉): asymmetry, irregularity; Kanso (簡素): simplicity; Koko (考古): basic, weathered; Shizen (自然): without pretense, natural as a human behaviour; Yūgen (幽玄): subtly profound grace, not obvious; Datsuzoku (脱俗): unbounded by convention, free; Seijaku (静寂): tranquility, silence.

Each of these things are found in nature but can suggest virtues of human character and appropriateness of behaviour. This, in turn suggests that virtue and civility can be instilled through an appreciation of, and practice in, the arts. Hence, aesthetic ideals have an ethical connotation and pervades much of the Japanese culture.

[ 8 ] Miyabi [ edit ] Main article: Miyabi The Temple of the Golden Pavilion ( Kinkaku-ji ) Miyabi (雅) is one of the oldest of the traditional Japanese aesthetic ideals, though perhaps not as prevalent as Iki or Wabi-sabi. In modern Japanese, the word is usually translated as "elegance," "refinement," or "courtliness" and sometimes referred to as "heart-breaker".

The aristocratic ideal of Miyabi demanded the elimination of anything that was absurd or vulgar and the "polishing of manners, diction, and feelings to eliminate all roughness and crudity so as to achieve the highest grace." It expressed that sensitivity to beauty which was the hallmark of the Heian era . Miyabi is often closely connected to the notion of Mono no aware , a bittersweet awareness of the transience of things, and thus it was thought that things in decline showed a great sense of miyabi.

Shibui [ edit ] Main article: Shibui An 18th century tea bowl , exhibiting the aesthetics of shibui Shibui (渋い) (adjective), shibumi (渋み) (noun), or shibusa (渋さ) (noun) are Japanese words which refer to a particular aesthetic or beauty of simple, subtle, and unobtrusive beauty. Originating in the Nanbokuchō period (1336–1392) as shibushi, the term originally referred to a sour or astringent taste, such as that of an unripe persimmon. Shibui maintains that literal meaning still, and remains the antonym of amai (甘い), meaning 'sweet'. Like other Japanese aesthetic terms, such as iki and wabi-sabi, shibui can apply to a wide variety of subjects, not just art or fashion.

Shibusa includes the following essential qualities: 1. Shibui objects appear to be simple overall but they include subtle details, such as textures, that balance simplicity with complexity.

2. This balance of simplicity and complexity ensures that one does not tire of a shibui object but constantly finds new meanings and enriched beauty that cause its aesthetic value to grow over the years.

3. Shibusa is not to be confused with wabi or sabi. Though many wabi or sabi objects are shibui, not all shibui objects are wabi or sabi. Wabi or sabi objects can be more severe and sometimes exaggerate intentional imperfections to such an extent that they can appear to be artificial. Shibui objects are not necessarily imperfect or asymmetrical, though they can include these qualities.

4. Shibusa walks a fine line between contrasting aesthetic concepts such as elegant and rough or spontaneous and restrained.

Iki [ edit ] Main article: Iki (aesthetics) Iki (いき, often written 粋) is a traditional aesthetic ideal in Japan. The basis of iki is thought to have formed among the urbane mercantile class (Chōnin) in Edo in the Tokugawa period (1603–1868). Iki is an expression of simplicity, sophistication, spontaneity, and originality. It is ephemeral, straightforward, measured, and unselfconscious. Iki is not overly refined, pretentious, complicated. Iki may signify a personal trait, or artificial phenomena exhibiting human will or consciousness. Iki is not used to describe natural phenomena, but may be expressed in human appreciation of natural beauty, or in the nature of human beings.  The phrase iki is generally used in Japanese culture to describe qualities that are aesthetically appealing and when applied to a person, what they do, or have, constitutes a high compliment.

Iki is not found in nature. While similar to wabi-sabi in that it disregards perfection, iki is a broad term that encompasses various characteristics related to refinement with flair. The tasteful manifestation of sensuality can be iki . Etymologically, iki has a root that means pure and unadulterated. However, it also carries a connotation of having an appetite for life.

[ 9 ] Jo-ha-kyū [ edit ] Main article: Jo-ha-kyū Jo-ha-kyū (序破急) is a concept of modulation and movement applied in a wide variety of traditional Japanese arts. Roughly translated to "beginning, break, rapid", it implies a tempo that begins slowly, accelerates, and then ends swiftly. This concept is applied to elements of the Japanese tea ceremony , to kendō , to the traditional theatre, to Gagaku , and to the traditional collaborative linked verse forms renga and renku (haikai no renga).

[ 10 ] Yūgen [ edit ] "Yugen" redirects here. For the ballet, see Yugen (ballet) .

The Dragon of Smoke Escaping from Mt Fuji , painting by Katsushika Hokusai Yūgen ( 幽玄 ) is an important concept in traditional Japanese aesthetics. The exact translation of the word depends on the context. In the Chinese philosophical texts the term was taken from, yūgen meant "dim", "deep" or "mysterious". In the criticism of Japanese waka poetry, it was used to describe the subtle profundity of things that are only vaguely suggested by the poems, and was also the name of a style of poetry (one of the ten orthodox styles delineated by Fujiwara no Teika in his treatises).

Yūgen suggests that which is beyond what can be said, but it is not an allusion to another world.

[ 11 ] It is about this world, this experience. According to Zeami Motokiyo , all of the following are portals to yūgen: "To watch the sun sink behind a flower-clad hill.

To wander on in a huge forest without thought of return.
To stand upon the shore and gaze after a boat that disappears behind distant islands.
To contemplate the flight of wild geese seen and lost among the clouds.

And, subtle shadows of bamboo on bamboo." Zeami was the originator of the dramatic art form Noh theatre and wrote the classic book on dramatic theory (Kadensho). He uses images of nature as a constant metaphor. For example, "snow in a silver bowl" represents "the Flower of Tranquility".

Geidō [ edit ] Right screen of the Pine Trees screens ( 松林図 屏風 , Shōrin-zu byōbu ) by Hasegawa Tōhaku , c.

1595 Geidō ( 芸道 ) refers to the various traditional Japanese arts disciplines: Noh ( 能 ) (theater), kadō ( 華道 ) ( Japanese flower arrangement ), shodō ( 書道 ) ( Japanese calligraphy ), Sadō ( 茶道 ) ( Japanese tea ceremony ), and yakimono ( 焼物 ) ( Japanese pottery ). All of these disciplines carry an ethical and aesthetic connotation and teach an appreciation of the process of creation.

[ 8 ] To introduce discipline into their training, Japanese warriors followed the example of the arts that systematized practice through prescribed forms called kata —think of the tea ceremony. Training in combat techniques incorporated the way of the arts (Geidō), practice in the arts themselves, and instilling aesthetic concepts (for example, yugen) and the philosophy of arts (geido ron). This led to combat techniques  becoming known as the martial arts (even today, David Lowry shows, in the 'Sword and Brush: the spirit of the martial arts', the affinity of the martial arts with the other arts). All of these arts are a form of tacit communication and we can, and do, respond to them by appreciation of this tacit dimension.

Ensō [ edit ] Main article: Ensō Ensō by Kanjuro Shibata XX Enso c.

2000 Ensō (円相) is a Japanese word meaning "circle". It symbolizes the Absolute, enlightenment, strength, elegance, the Universe, and the void; it also may be taken to symbolize the Japanese aesthetic itself.  Zen Buddhist calligraphists may "believe that the character of the artist is fully exposed in how she or he draws an ensō. Only a person who is mentally and spiritually complete can draw a true ensō. Some artists will practice drawing an ensō daily, as a kind of spiritual exercise." [ attribution needed ] [ 12 ] Aesthetics and Japan's cultural identities [ edit ] Because of its nature, Japanese aesthetics has a wider relevance than is usually accorded to aesthetics in the West. In her pathmaking book, [ 13 ] Eiko Ikegami reveals a complex history of social life in which aesthetic ideals become central to Japan's cultural identities. She shows how networks in the performing arts, the tea ceremony, and poetry shaped tacit cultural practices and how politeness and politics are inseparable. She contends that what in Western cultures are normally scattered, like art and politics, have been, and are, distinctly integrated in Japan.

After the introduction of Western notions in Japan, Wabi Sabi aesthetics ideals have been re-examined with Western values, by both Japanese and non-Japanese. Therefore, recent interpretations of the aesthetics ideals inevitably reflect Judeo-Christian perspectives and Western philosophy.

[ 14 ] Japanese aesthetics and technology [ edit ] As one contribution to the broad subject of Japanese aesthetics and technology, it has been suggested that carefully curated high speed camera photographs of fluid dynamics events are able to capture the beauty of this natural phenomenon in a characteristically Japanese manner.

[ 15 ] Gastronomy [ edit ] Konpeitō in various colors Many traditional Japanese aesthetic criteria are manifest in, and discussed as part of, diverse elements of Japanese cuisine ; [ 16 ] see kaiseki for a refined expression.

Kawaii [ edit ] Main article: Kawaii A modern phenomenon, since the 1970s cuteness or kawaii ( 可愛い ; "cute", "adorable", "loveable") in Japanese has become a prominent aesthetic of Japanese popular culture , entertainment , clothing , food , toys , personal appearance , behavior , and mannerisms.

[ 17 ] As a cultural phenomenon, cuteness is increasingly accepted in Japan as a part of Japanese culture and national identity. Tomoyuki Sugiyama, author of Cool Japan , believes that "cuteness" is rooted in Japan's harmony-loving culture, and Nobuyoshi Kurita, a sociology professor at Musashi University in Tokyo , has stated that cute is a "magic term" that encompasses everything that's acceptable and desirable in Japan.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Big in Japan Cuteness in Japanese culture Japanese sword Honkadori Ishin-denshin Japanese garden Ikebana Japanese music Mono no aware 5S (methodology) References [ edit ] ^ a b "Japanese Aesthetics (Stanford Encyclopedia of philosophy)" . Retrieved 2009-06-10 .

^ "Teaching Japanese Aesthetics" . Archived from the original on 2008-12-02 . Retrieved 2008-12-03 .

^ Herbert, Jean (1967).

Shinto; at the fountain-head of Japan . Stein and Day.

ASIN B0006BOJ8C .

^ Prusinski, L. (2012).

"Wabi Sabi, Mono no Aware, and Ma: Tracing Traditional Japanese Aesthetics through Japanese History" .

Studies on Asia . Series IV.

2 (1): 25– 49.

S2CID 190461627 .

^ a b Koren, Leonard (1994).

Wabi Sabi for artists, designers, poets and philosophers . Berkeley, CA: Stone Bridge Press.

ISBN 1-880656-12-4 .

^ "What Is Wabi-Sabi?" . Archived from the original on 2007-05-02 . Retrieved 2007-04-01 .

^ "The nature of garden art" . Archived from the original on 2008-08-07 . Retrieved 2008-12-06 .

^ a b Carter, Robert E. (2008).

Japanese arts and self-cultivation . New York, NY: SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-7254-5 .

^ "Taste of Japan" . Archived from the original on 2007-04-30 . Retrieved 2007-04-01 .

^ Zeami. "Teachings on Style and the Flower ( Fūshikaden )." from Rimer & Yamazaki.

On the Art of the Nō Drama . p20.

^ "Zeami and the Transition of the Concept of Yūgen" (PDF) . Retrieved 2008-12-08 .

^ Seo, Audrey Yoshiko; Addiss (1998). The Art of Twentieth-Century Zen. Stepen. Boston: Shambhala Publications.

ISBN 978-1-57062-358-5 ^ Ikegami, Eiko (2005).

Bonds of Civility: aesthetic networks and the political origins of Japanese culture . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-60115-0 .

^ "Japan - the society" . Retrieved 2008-12-07 .

^ Tosa, Naoko; Yunian Pang; Qin Yang; Ryohei Nakatsu (21 March 2019).

"Pursuit and Expression of Japanese Beauty Using Technology" .

Arts .

8 : 38.

doi : 10.3390/arts8010038 .

hdl : 2433/250219 .

^ Japanese Foodways, Past and Present , University of Illinois Press, 2010, By Eric C. Rath, Stephanie Assmann ^ Diana Lee, " Inside Look at Japanese Cute Culture Archived 2005-10-25 at the Wayback Machine " (September 1, 2005).

^ Quotes and paraphrases from: Yuri Kageyama (June 14, 2006).

"Cuteness a hot-selling commodity in Japan" .

Associated Press .

Further reading [ edit ] Murase, Miyeko (2000).

Bridge of dreams: the Mary Griggs Burke collection of Japanese art . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

ISBN 0-87099-941-9 .

v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Japanese social concepts and values Sociocultural values Aiki Amae Blood type personality theory Brother complex / Sister complex Bushido Celibacy syndrome Face Gekokujō Hansei Hara hachi bun me Honne and tatemae Ichi-go ichi-e Ikigai Ishin-denshin Isagiyosa Japanese political values Kaizen Kotodama Light skin in Japanese culture Mental states Fudōshin Mushin Shoshin Zanshin Miai Mottainai Nemawashi Omotenashi Shuhari Sontaku Tsundoku Ukiyo Wa Yamato-damashii Aesthetics Ensō Iki Jo-ha-kyū Kawaii Ma Miyabi Moe Mono no aware Shibui Wabi-sabi Yabo Yūgen Etiquette and social norms Aizuchi Bowing in Japan Dogeza Dining etiquette Honorific speech Japanese honorifics Manual keigo Gift-giving Gimu [ ja ] Giri Giri choco Ninjō Kamiza Sitting positions Agura Seiza Other positions Types of people Shinoukoushou Kazoku Shizoku Heimin Banchō Sukeban Bijin Bishōjo Bishōnen Burakumin Butsukari otoko Chikan Chūnibyō Denpa Ebune [ ja ] Freeter Herbivore men Hikikomori Idol Iemoto Ikemen Jouhatsu Kyōiku mama Monster parents NEET Otokonoko Net cafe refugee Parasite single Sensei Senpai and kōhai Yakuza ranks Yamato nadeshiko Subcultures Bōsōzoku Japanese street fashion Genderless Gyaru Gyaru-moji Ganguro Gyaruo Kogal Lolita Visual kei Netto-uyoku Omorashi Otaku Akiba-kei Figure moe zoku Fujoshi/Fudanshi Lolicon / Shotacon Reki-jo Wota Yaoi fandom Work culture Black company Business card etiquette Haken Ho-Ren-Sō Japanese blue collar workers Japanese business terms Karoshi Keiretsu Kyariaūman Labor unions in Japan Lifetime employment Management culture Nenko system Office lady Salaryman Shinise Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Zaibatsu NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐x5xql
Cached time: 20250814215259
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.591 seconds
Real time usage: 0.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3111/1000000
Revision size: 19250/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 127782/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2460/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75014/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.377/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15850995/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  608.289      1 -total
 39.79%  242.011      3 Template:Navbox
 25.46%  154.861      1 Template:Reflist
 17.98%  109.356      7 Template:Nihongo
 17.62%  107.170      1 Template:Japanese_social_terms
 15.11%   91.889      1 Template:Aesthetics
 13.96%   84.918      7 Template:Cite_web
 13.34%   81.128     98 Template:Transliteration
  9.74%   59.235      1 Template:Short_description
  5.99%   36.428      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3210520:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215259 and revision id 1294462523. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Japanese_aesthetics&oldid=1294462523 " Categories : Japanese aesthetics Japanese style of gardening Movements in aesthetics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from March 2016 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 21:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Japanese aesthetics 21 languages Add topic

