Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hypothesized formation 2 Detection in interstellar medium 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Cyanopolyyne 6 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organic compounds of the form HC≡C–C≡C–…–C≡N Chemical structure of cyanoacetylene , the simplest cyanopolyyne In organic chemistry , cyanopolyynes are a family of organic compounds with the chemical formula HC n N ( n = 3,5,7,…) and the structural formula H−[C≡C−] n C≡N ( n = 1,2,3,…). Structurally, they are polyynes with a cyano group ( −C≡N ) covalently bonded to one of the terminal acetylene units ( H−C≡C ).

A rarely seen group of molecules both due to the difficulty in production and the unstable nature of the paired groups, the cyanopolyynes have been observed as a major organic component in interstellar clouds .

[ 1 ] This is believed to be due to the hydrogen scarcity of some of these clouds. Interference with hydrogen is one of the reasons for the molecule's instability due to the energetically favorable dissociation back into hydrogen cyanide and acetylene.

[ 2 ] Cyanopolyynes were first discovered in interstellar molecular clouds in 1971 using millimeter wave and microwave telescopes .

[ 1 ] Since then many higher weight cyanopolyynes such as HC 7 N and HC 11 N have been discovered, although some of these identifications have been disputed. Other derivatives such as methylcyanoacetylene CH 3 C 3 N and ethylcyanoacetylene CH 3 CH 2 C 3 N have been observed as well.

[ 3 ] The simplest example is cyanoacetylene , H−C≡C−C≡N. Cyanoacetylene is more common on Earth and it is believed to be the initial reagent for most of the photocatalyzed formation of the interstellar cyanopolyynes. Cyanoacetylene is one of the molecules that was produced in the Miller–Urey experiment and is expected to be found in carbon-rich environments.

[ 4 ] Identification is made through comparison of experimental spectrum with spectrum gathered from the telescope. This is commonly done with measurement of the rotational constant , the energy of the rotational transitions, or a measurement of the dissociation energy. These spectra can either be generated ab initio from a computational chemistry program or, such as with the more stable cyanoacetylene , by direct measurement of the spectra in an experiment. Once the spectra are generated, the telescope can scan within certain frequencies for the desired molecules. Quantification can be accomplished as well to determine the density of the compounds in the cloud.

Hypothesized formation [ edit ] The formation of cyanopolyynes in interstellar clouds is time-dependent. The formation of cyanopolyyne was studied and the abundances calculated in the dark cloud TMC-1 . In the early days of the TMC-1, the governing reactions were ion–molecule reactions. During this time cyanoacetylene, HC 3 N , formed through a series of ion-neutral reactions, with the final chemical reaction being: C 3 H 2 + N  →  HC 3 N + H However, for time after 10,000 years the dominant reactions were neutral–neutral reactions and two reaction mechanisms for the formation of cyanopolyynes became possible.

HCN + C 2 H 2 →  HC 3 N C n H 2 + CN  →  HC n +1 + H for n = 4, 6, 8 The reaction mechanism that occurs in the present day depends on the environment of the cloud. For the first reaction mechanism to take place, the cloud must contain an abundance of C 2 H . The second reaction mechanism occurs if there is an abundance of C 2 H 2 .

C 2 H and C 2 H 2 exist in different conditions, so the formation of cyanopolyynes relies on high accessibility to either molecule. The calculations by Winstanley show that photoionization and dissociation reactions play a profound role in the abundances of cyanopolyynes after about 1 million years. However, the fractional abundances of cyanopolyyne are less affected by changes in radiation field intensity past time 1 million years because the prevailing neutral-neutral reactions surpass the effects of photoreactions.

[ 5 ] Detection in interstellar medium [ edit ] Cyanopolyynes are relatively common in interstellar clouds , where they were first detected in 1971. As with many other molecules the cyanopolyynes are detected with a spectrometer which records the quantum energy levels of the electrons within the atoms.

[ 6 ] This measurement is done with a source of light which passes through the desired molecule. The light interacts with the molecule and can either absorb the light or reflect it, as not all light behaves the same way. This separates the light into a spectrum with alterations due to the molecule in question. This spectrum is recorded by a computer which is able to determine which wavelengths of the spectrum have been altered in some way. With the wide range of light affected the wavelengths can be determined by looking for spikes in the spectrum. The detection process usually happens within the outer ranges of the electromagnetic spectrum , usually in infrared or radio waves .

[ 7 ] The spectrum is able to show the energy of the rotational state due to the wavelengths that are absorbed by the molecule; using these rotational transitions the energy level of each electron can be shown to determine the identity of the molecule. Rotational transitions can be determined by this equation: [ 8 ] V ( J ) = 2 B 0 J − − 4 D 0 J 3 {\displaystyle V(J)=2B_{0}J-4D_{0}J^{3}} where B 0 is the rotational distortion constant for the vibrational ground state D 0 is the centrifugal distortion constant for the vibrational ground state J is the total angular momentum quantum number This shows that the rotational distortion of an atom is related to the vibrational frequency of the molecule in question. With this ability to detect the cyanopolyynes these molecules have been recorded in several places around the galaxy. Such places include the atmosphere on Titan and the gas clouds that are within nebulae and the confines of dying stars.

[ 9 ] Species as large as HC 9 N were detected in Taurus Molecular Cloud 1 , where they are believed to be formed by reaction of atomic nitrogen with hydrocarbons .

[ 10 ] For a while, HC 11 N held the record as the largest molecule detected in interstellar space, but its identification was challenged.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Diacetylene , H−C≡C−C≡C−H References [ edit ] ^ a b Turner, B. E. (1971).

"Detection of interstellar cyanoacetylene" .

Astrophysical Journal .

163 (1): L35.

doi : 10.1086/180662 .

^ Balucani, N.; Asvany, O.; Huang, L. C. L.; Lee, Y. T.; Kaiser, R. I.; Osamura, Y.; Bettinger, H. F. (2000).

"Formation of nitriles in the interstellar medium via reactions of cyano radicals, CN( X 2 Σ + ), with unsaturated hydrocarbons" .

Astrophysical Journal .

545 (2): 892–906.

doi : 10.1086/317848 .

^ Broten, N. W.; Macleod, J. M.; Avery, L. W.; Irvine, W. M.; Hoglund, B.; Friberg, P.; Hjalmarson, A. (1984).

"The detection of interstellar methylcyanoacetylene" .

Astrophysical Journal .

276 (1): L25 – L29 .

doi : 10.1086/184181 .

PMID 11541958 .

^ McCollom, T. M. (2013). "Miller–Urey and Beyond: What Have We Learned About Prebiotic Organic Synthesis Reactions in the Past 60 Years?". In Jeanloz, R.

(ed.).

Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences . Vol. 41. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews. pp.

207– 229.

^ Winstanley, N.; Nejad, L. A. M. (1996). "Cyanopolyyne chemistry in TMC-1".

Astrophysics and Space Science .

240 (1): 13– 37.

doi : 10.1007/bf00640193 .

^ Van Dishoeck, E. F. (2004). "ISO spectroscopy of gas and dust: From molecular clouds to protoplanetary disks".

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

42 : 119– 167.

arXiv : astro-ph/0403061 .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.astro.42.053102.134010 .

^ Arnau, A.; Tunon, I.; Andres, J.; Silla, E. (1990). "Theoretical rotational constants of methylcyanopolyyne (MeC n N) species".

Chemical Physics Letters .

166 (1): 54– 56.

doi : 10.1016/0009-2614(90)87049-W .

^ Atkins, P. W.; de Paula, J. (2006). "Molecular Spectroscopy: Pure rotation spectra".

Physical Chemistry (8th ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

431– 469.

ISBN 0198700725 .

^ Chen, W.; Grabow, J. U.; Travers, M. J.; Munrow, M. R.; Novick, S. E.; McCarthy, M. C.; Thaddeus, P. (1998). "Microwave spectra of the methylcyanopolyynes CH 3 (C≡C) n CN, n = 2, 3, 4, 5".

Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy .

192 (1): 1– 11.

doi : 10.1006/jmsp.1998.7665 .

PMID 9770381 .

^ Freeman, A.; Millar, T. J. (1983). "Formation of complex molecules in TMC-1".

Nature .

301 (5899): 402– 404.

doi : 10.1038/301402a0 .

^ Travers, M. J.; McCarthy, M. C.; Kalmus, P.; Gottlieb, C. A.; Thaddeus, P. (1996).

"Laboratory Detection of the Linear Cyanopolyyne HC 11 N" .

Astrophysical Journal .

469 : L65 – L68 .

doi : 10.1086/310254 .

^ Travers, M. J.; McCarthy, M. C.; Kalmus, P.; Gottlieb, C. A.; Thaddeus, P. (1996).

"Laboratory Detection of the Cyanopolyyne HC 13 N" .

Astrophysical Journal Letters .

472 : L61.

doi : 10.1086/310359 .

v t e Molecules detected in outer space Molecules Diatomic Aluminium monochloride Aluminium monofluoride Aluminium(II) oxide Argonium Carbon cation Carbon monophosphide Carbon monosulfide Carbon monoxide Cyano radical Diatomic carbon Fluoromethylidynium Helium hydride ion Hydrogen chloride Hydrogen fluoride Hydrogen (molecular) Hydroxyl radical Imidogen Iron(II) oxide Magnesium monohydride Methylidyne radical Nitric oxide Nitrogen (molecular) Oxygen (molecular) Phosphorus monoxide Phosphorus mononitride Potassium chloride Silicon carbide Silicon monoxide Silicon monosulfide Sodium chloride Sodium iodide Sulfanyl Sulfur mononitride Sulfur monoxide Titanium(II) oxide Triatomic Aluminium(I) hydroxide Aluminium isocyanide Amino radical Carbon dioxide Carbonyl sulfide CCP radical Chloronium Diazenylium Dicarbon monoxide Disilicon carbide Ethynyl radical Formyl radical Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) Hydrogen isocyanide (HNC) Hydrogen sulfide Hydroperoxyl Iron cyanide Isoformyl Magnesium cyanide Magnesium isocyanide Methylene Methylidynephosphane N 2 H + Nitrous oxide Nitroxyl Ozone Potassium cyanide Sodium cyanide Sodium hydroxide Silicon carbonitride c-Silicon dicarbide SiNC Sulfur dioxide Thioformyl Thioxoethenylidene Titanium dioxide Tricarbon Trihydrogen cation Water Four atoms Acetylene Ammonia Cyanoethynyl Formaldehyde Fulminic acid HCCN Hydrogen peroxide Hydromagnesium isocyanide Isocyanic acid Isothiocyanic acid Ketenyl Methyl cation Methyl radical Methylene amidogen Propynylidyne Protonated carbon dioxide Protonated hydrogen cyanide Silicon tricarbide Thiocyanic acid Thioformaldehyde Tricarbon monosulfide Tricarbon monoxide Five atoms Ammonium ion Butadiynyl Carbodiimide Cyanamide Cyanoacetylene Cyanoformaldehyde Cyanomethyl Cyclopropenylidene Formic acid Isocyanoacetylene Ketene Methane Methoxy radical Methylenimine Propadienylidene Protonated formaldehyde Silane Silicon-carbide cluster Six atoms Acetonitrile Cyanobutadiynyl radical Cyclopropenone Diacetylene E-Cyanomethanimine Ethylene Formamide HC 4 N Ketenimine Methanethiol Methanol Methyl isocyanide Pentynylidyne Propynal Protonated cyanoacetylene Seven atoms Acetaldehyde Acrylonitrile Vinyl cyanide Cyanodiacetylene Ethylene oxide Glycolonitrile Hexatriynyl radical Methyl isocyanate Methylamine Propyne Vinyl alcohol Eight atoms Acetic acid Acrolein Aminoacetonitrile Cyanoallene Ethanimine Glycolaldehyde Hexapentaenylidene Methyl formate Methylcyanoacetylene Nine atoms Acetamide Cyanohexatriyne Dimethyl ether Ethanethiol Ethanol Methyldiacetylene N-Methylformamide Octatetraynyl radical Propene Propionitrile Ten atoms or more Acetone Benzene Benzonitrile Buckminsterfullerene (C 60 , C 60 + , fullerene, buckyball) Butyronitrile C 70 fullerene Cyanodecapentayne Ethyl formate Ethylene glycol Heptatrienyl radical Methyl acetate Methyl-cyano-diacetylene Methyltriacetylene Propionaldehyde Pyrimidine Deuterated molecules Ammonia Ammonium ion Formaldehyde Formyl radical Heavy water Hydrogen cyanide Hydrogen deuteride Hydrogen isocyanide N 2 D + Propyne Trihydrogen cation Unconfirmed Anthracene Dihydroxyacetone Glycine Graphene H 2 NCO + Hemolithin Linear C 5 Methoxyethane Naphthalene cation Phosphine Pyrene Silylidyne Related Abiogenesis Astrobiology Astrochemistry Atomic and molecular astrophysics Chemical formula Circumstellar dust Circumstellar envelope Cosmic dust Cosmic ray Cosmochemistry Diffuse interstellar band Earliest known life forms Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial liquid water Forbidden mechanism Homochirality Intergalactic dust Interplanetary medium Interstellar medium Iron–sulfur world theory Kerogen Molecules in stars Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Organic compound Outer space PAH world hypothesis Photodissociation region Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon (PAH) Pseudo-panspermia RNA world hypothesis Spectroscopy Tholin Category:Astrochemistry Outer space portal Astronomy portal Chemistry portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyanopolyyne&oldid=1297317421 " Categories : Nitriles Polyynes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 12:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyanopolyyne 6 languages Add topic

