Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Syntax and lexicon 2 Usage 3 Acquisition 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Object identifier 12 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Globally unambiguous persistent name In computing , object identifiers or OIDs are an identifier mechanism standardized by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) and ISO/IEC for naming any object, concept, or "thing" with a globally unambiguous persistent name.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Syntax and lexicon [ edit ] An OID corresponds to a node in the "OID tree" or hierarchy, which is formally defined using the ITU's OID standard, X.660 . The root of the tree contains the following three arcs : 0: ITU-T 1: ISO 2: joint-iso-itu-t Each node in the tree is represented by a series of integers separated by periods, corresponding to the path from the root through the series of ancestor nodes, to the node.  Thus, an OID denoting Intel Corporation appears as follows, 1.3.6.1.4.1.343 and corresponds to the following path through the OID tree: 1 ISO 1.3 identified-organization ( ISO/IEC 6523 ), 1.3.6 DoD , 1.3.6.1 internet, 1.3.6.1.4 private, 1.3.6.1.4.1 IANA enterprise numbers, 1.3.6.1.4.1.343 Intel Corporation A textual representation of the OID paths is also commonly seen; for example, iso.identified-organization.dod.internet.private.enterprise.intel Each node in the tree is controlled by an assigning authority, which may define child nodes under the node and delegate assigning authority for the child nodes.  Continuing with the example, the node numbers under root node  "1" are assigned by ISO; the nodes under "1.3.6" are assigned by the US Department of Defense; the nodes under "1.3.6.1.4.1" are assigned by IANA ; the nodes under "1.3.6.1.4.1.343" are assigned by Intel Corporation, and so forth.

Usage [ edit ] ISO/IEC 6523 "International Code Designator" uses OIDs with the prefix "1.3".

In computer security , OIDs serve to name almost every object type in X.509 certificates , such as components of Distinguished Names , CPSs , etc.

Within X.500 and LDAP schemas and protocols, OIDs uniquely name each attribute type and object class, and other elements of schema.

In Simple Network Management Protocol (SNMP), each node in a management information base (MIB) is identified by an OID.

IANA assigns Private Enterprise Numbers (PEN) to companies and other organizations under the 1.3.6.1.4.1 node. OIDs down-tree from these are among the most commonly seen; for example, within SNMP MIBs, as LDAP attributes, and as vendor suboptions in the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP).

In the United States , Health Level Seven (HL7), a standards-developing organization in the area of electronic health care data exchange, is the assigning authority at the 2.16.840.1.113883 (joint-iso-itu-t.country.us.organization.hl7) node.  HL7 maintains its own OID registry , and as of December 1, 2020 it contained almost 20,000 nodes, most of them under the HL7 root.

DICOM uses OIDs.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention uses OIDs to manage the many complex values sets or "vocabularies" used in the Public Health Information Network (PHIN) Vocabulary Access and Distribution System ( VADS ).

Acquisition [ edit ] There are multiple ways to acquire a OID. Both free and paid ones exist.

Free registration with [IANA] below 1.3.6.1.4.1 (ASN.1-Notation {iso(1) identified-organization(3) dod(6) internet(1) private(4) enterprise(1)} ).

Below of 2.25 (ASN.1-Notation {joint-iso-itu-t(2) uuid(25)} ) a self generated UUID can be used.

At national agencies. Like e.g. for the health sector BfArM in Germany [1] , BMSGPK in Austria [2] or de:Refdata in Switzerland [3] .

At any organization that already has an OID and decides to sub allocate them.

See also [ edit ] Digital object identifier Extended Validation Certificate International Geo Sample Number LSID Persistent Object Identifier Surrogate key Uniform Resource Name Universally Unique Identifier References [ edit ] ^ "Object Identifier Repository" .

^ "OID project" .

ITU . Retrieved 2025-04-17 .

External links [ edit ] ITU-T OID project main page Supplementary information on operation of a country Registration Authority, and on known country Registration Authorities Object Identifier Repository Archived 2021-03-03 at the Wayback Machine Global OID reference database Harald Tveit Alvestrand's Object Identifier Registry IANA Private Enterprise Numbers HL7 OID registry Obtaining an Object Identifier Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Object_identifier&oldid=1301381494 " Categories : Identifiers Network management ASN.1 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Object identifier 12 languages Add topic

