Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The regulation approach 2 Regimes of accumulation and modes of regulation 3 Translation and definition 4 History of modes of regulation 5 Crisis 6 Current development 7 Members of the Regulation School 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Regulation school 5 languages Deutsch فارسی Français 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of writers in political economy Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e The regulation school ( French : l'école de la régulation ) is a group of writers in political economy and economics whose origins can be traced to France in the early 1970s, where economic instability and stagflation were rampant in the French economy. The term régulation was coined by Frenchman Destanne de Bernis , who aimed to use the approach as a systems theory to bring Marxian economic analysis up to date.

[ 1 ] These writers are influenced by structural Marxism , the Annales School , institutionalism , Karl Polanyi 's substantivist approach , and theory of Charles Bettelheim , among others, and sought to present the emergence of new economic (and hence social) forms in terms of tensions within existing arrangements. Since they are interested in how historically specific systems of capital accumulation are "regularized" or stabilized, their approach is called the "regulation approach" or "regulation theory". Although this approach originated in Michel Aglietta 's monograph A Theory of Capitalist Regulation: The US Experience (Verso, 1976) and was popularized by other Parisians such as Robert Boyer, [ 1 ] its membership goes well beyond the so-called Parisian School, extending to the Grenoble School, the German School, the Amsterdam School, British radical geographers, the US Social Structure of Accumulation School, and the neo-Gramscian school, among others.

The regulation approach [ edit ] Robert Boyer describes the broad theory as "The study of the transformation of social relations, which creates new forms- both economic and non-economic- organized in structures and reproducing a determinate structure, the mode of reproduction".

[ 2 ] This theory or approach looks at capitalist economies as a function of social and institutional systems and not just as government's role in the regulation of the economy, although the latter is a major part of the approach.

Regimes of accumulation and modes of regulation [ edit ] Regulation theory discusses historical change of the political economy through two central concepts, "regime of accumulation or accumulation regime" (AR) and "mode of regulation" (MR). The concept of regime of accumulation allows theorists to analyze the way production, circulation, consumption, and distribution organize and expand capital in a way that stabilizes the economy over time. Alain Lipietz, in Towards a New Economic Order , describes the regime of accumulation of Fordism as composed of mass-producing, a proportionate share-out of value added, and a consequent stability in firm’s profitability, with the plant used at full capacity and full employment (p. 6).

An MR is a set of institutional laws, norms, forms of state, policy paradigms, and other practices that provide the context for the AR's operation. Typically, it is said that it comprises a money form, a competition form, a wage form, a state form, and an international regime, but it can encompass many more elements than these. Generally speaking, MRs support ARs by providing a conducive and supportive environment, in which the ARs are given guidelines that they should follow. In cases of tension between the two, a crisis may occur. Thus this approach parallels Marx's characterisation of historical change as driven by contradictions between the forces and the relations of production (see historical materialism ).

Translation and definition [ edit ] Bob Jessop summarises the difficulties of the term in Governing Capitalist Economies as follows: "The RA seeks to integrate analysis of political economy with analysis of civil society and or State to show how they interact to normalize the capital relation and govern the conflictual and crisis-mediated course of capital accumulation. In this sense, régulation might have been better and less mechanically translated as regularization or normalization" {Jessop, 2006, p.4}. Therefore, the term régulation does not necessarily translate well as "regulation". Regulation in the sense of government action does have a part in regulation theory.

History of modes of regulation [ edit ] Robert Boyer distinguished two main modes of regulation throughout the 19th and 20th centuries: The "mode of regulation of competition" (1850–1930). It consisted of a first mode of regulation, from 1850 to the beginning of the 20th century, that Boyer called "extensive mode of regulation", characterized by low productivity gains, important part of the output dedicated to equipments, and high competition. The second period is called "intensive mode of regulation without mass consumption", because it consists of high productivity gains (thanks to Taylorist methods) and the production of consumption commodities.

The "monopolist mode of regulation" (after 1930), characterized by high productivity and mass consumption. The Fordist system made possible a regular growth of economic output and an increase in income at the same time.

Crisis [ edit ] Regulationist economists distinguish between cyclical and structural crises. They study only structural crises, which are the crises of a mode of regulation.
From this distinction, they have formulated a typology of crises that accounts for various disarrangements in institutional configurations. According to its initial objective, which was to understand the rupture of the Fordist mode of regulation: Exogenic crises are due to an external event; they can be very perturbing but cannot endanger the mode of regulation, and even less the mode of accumulation. Neoclassical economists (or economists of the school of rational anticipations) consider that all crises are exogenic.

Endogenous crises are cyclical crises that are necessary and inevitable, for they make it possible to cancel imbalances accumulated during the phase of expansion without major deterioration of institutional forms. These crises are inseparable from the operation of capitalism.

The crisis of the mode of regulation : unable to avoid a downward spiral, institutional forms and the ways the state intervenes in the economy must be modified. The best example is the crisis of 1929, where the free play of market forces and competition did not lead to a renewed phase of expansion.

The crisis of the mode of accumulation means that it is impossible to continue long-term growth without major upheaval of institutional forms. The crisis of 1929 is the best example: the interwar period marks the passage from a mode of accumulation characterised by mass production without mass consumption to a mode incorporating both mass production and mass consumption.

Current development [ edit ] Since the 1980s, the Regulation school has developed research at other socio-economic levels: firms, markets and branches studies (food and agriculture, automotive, banking…); development and local regions ("regulation, sectors and territories" research workshop); developing countries or developed economies others than France and USA (South Korea, Chile, Belgium, Japan, Algeria, etc.): political economy of globalization (diversity of capitalisms, politics and firms...). By doing so, its methods now range from institutional macroeconomics to discourses analysis, with quantitative and qualitative methods.

Members of the Regulation School [ edit ] Michel Aglietta Alain Lipietz Robert Boyer [ 3 ] Bob Jessop Jamie Peck [ 4 ] André Orléan [ 5 ] Christoph Scherrer Daniel Drache Matt Vidal [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Cybernetics Notes [ edit ] ^ a b The Regulation School: A Critical Introduction (Columbia University Press, 1990) ^ The Regulation School: A Critical Introduction (Columbia University Press, 1990), p. 17 ^ "Site du CEPREMAP" .

^ "Jamie Peck - Canada Research Chair in Urban and Regional Political Economy" . Archived from the original on 2010-01-07 . Retrieved 2009-10-29 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-01-18 . Retrieved 2023-01-07 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Edgell, Stephen; Gottfried, Heidi; Granter, Edward (2015).

Fordism and the Golden Age of Atlantic Capitalism .

doi : 10.4135/9781473915206 .

ISBN 9781446280669 . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ Vidal, Matt (June 2013).

"Postfordism as a Dysfunctional Accumulation Regime" .

Work, Employment and Society .

27 (3): 451– 471.

doi : 10.1177/0950017013481876 .

S2CID 55223929 . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

^ "Incoherence and dysfunctionality in the institutional regulation of capitalism" . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

References [ edit ] Bob Jessop, Ngai-Ling Sum, Beyond The Regulation Approach: Putting Capitalist Economies In Their Place , Edward Elgar Publishing, 2006.

Boyer, Robert, Saillard, Yves (Ed.), (2002), Régulation Theory. The State of the Art, Routledge, London & New-York.

External links [ edit ] Revue de la Régulation/ Régulation Review. Capitalism, Institutions, Power Association Recherche & Régulation . Among others resources (working papers, research workshops, researchers networks, news..., note the 2015 international colloquium Research&Regulation "The theory of regulation in times of crisis" An overview of the Regulation School A scholarly blog on the Regulation School in Economic Thought An interview in which Alain Lipietz gives a brief introduction to Regulation Theory Article on Lipietz's approach to Regulation Theory A page containing some notes on the Regulation School's approach to Fordism, as presented by Ash Amin A selection of key works by Regulation School writers fundamental recent working papers by regulationist scientists Chapter 2 of this monograph explores the theoretical approach of the Regulation School Archived 2006-07-12 at the Wayback Machine A Critique of the Fordism of the Regulation School - from Wildcat v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qjrxs
Cached time: 20250815041818
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.464 seconds
Real time usage: 0.574 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1137/1000000
Revision size: 12002/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65861/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6822/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48065/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.331/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21315495/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  505.404      1 -total
 29.04%  146.761      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 28.55%  144.296      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.76%  125.150      1 Template:Reflist
 22.69%  114.697      1 Template:Langx
 17.59%   88.922      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.19%   66.683      1 Template:Short_description
 11.67%   58.976      2 Template:Hlist
  7.26%   36.696      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.23%   36.528      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4974142:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815041818 and revision id 1305967886. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regulation_school&oldid=1305967886 " Categories : Schools of economic thought Sociological theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regulation school 5 languages Add topic

