Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Founding 2 Membership 3 Symbols and traditions 4 Activities 5 Notable members 6 References Toggle the table of contents Sphinx Head 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Honor society at Cornell University, US Sphinx Head Sphinx Head Society emblem, 1891 Founded October 11, 1890 ; 134 years ago ( 1890-10-11 ) Cornell University Type Senior society Affiliation Independent Status Active Scope Local Chapters 1 Headquarters Ithaca , New York United States The Sphinx Head Society is the oldest senior honor society at Cornell University . Sphinx Head recognizes Cornell senior men and women who have demonstrated respectable strength of character on top of dedication to leadership and service at Cornell University.

[ 1 ] In 1929 The New York Times held that election into Sphinx Head and similar societies constituted "the highest non-scholastic honor within reach of undergraduates." [ 2 ] Founding [ edit ] Sphinx Head was founded on October 11, 1890, by a group of ten men from the senior class.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Society was founded to "create and maintain a stronger feeling" for Cornell University and to promote "a closer and stronger friendship among members of the Senior class." [ 3 ] The New York Times referred to Sphinx Head as "a secret senior society of the nature of Skull and Bones ", a senior honor society at Yale University of which Andrew Dickson White , Cornell University's co-founder and first president, was a member.

[ 5 ] White encouraged the formation of a secret society system on the Cornell campus.

[ 6 ] In 1926, the society built a clubhouse for itself designed to resemble an Egyptian tomb perched halfway down the cliff on the Fall Creek gorge. It sold the building in 1969, and it eventually became the home and office of astronomer Carl Sagan .

Membership [ edit ] Sphinx Head, Class of 1899 Each year, Sphinx Head taps fewer than forty men and women of the senior class for membership. Since the Society's founding, membership has been "reserved for the most respected" members of the senior class.

[ 7 ] The names of newly tapped Sphinx Heads were published in The New York Times through the 1930s, but are now published exclusively in The Cornell Daily Sun .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Sphinx Head awards honorary membership to Cornell administrators, faculty, staff, and alumni for their "significant personal and/or professional accomplishment, outstanding leadership, distinguished service to the university, and interest in and commitment to undergraduate student life and development." [ 1 ] Notable honorary members of Sphinx Head include Tata Sons Chairman Emeritus Ratan Tata , Atlantic Philanthropies founder Chuck Feeney , and the 12th President of Cornell University, David Skorton .

Symbols and traditions [ edit ] Historic Sphinx Head Tomb Sphinx Head has "retained an aura of mystery throughout its history on campus", holding some "closely guarded secrets and traditions." [ 11 ] Although membership in Sphinx Head is public, the proceedings of the Society remain private.

Activities [ edit ] Since founding the Society, Sphinx Head members have been responsible for starting many long-standing Cornell University traditions such as the annual Dragon Day celebration, the use of "The Big Red" to describe Cornell athletics, as well as Spring Fest, the precursor to the current Slope Day celebration.

[ 7 ] [ 12 ] Notable members [ edit ] Main article: List of Sphinx Head members Members of Sphinx Head have held many prominent positions within Cornell University serving as presidents, provosts, deans, directors of athletics, Cornell Council members, trustees, and chairpersons of the board of trustees. More than one-third of the presidents of the Cornell University Alumni Association have been members and twenty percent of the chairpersons of the Cornell University Board of Trustees have been affiliated with the Society.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Names of alumni can be found on the Cornell campus on Bartels Hall, Indimine Athletic Field, Samuel C. Johnson School of Business Management , Robert Kane Track, Jansen Noyes Community Center , Jerome H. Holland International Living Center , Robert Purcell Community Center , Kheel Center for Labor-Management Documentation & Archives , Willard Straight Hall and Upson Hall . Numerous members are also profiled in The 100 Most Notable Cornellians .

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b 10 faculty and staff members honored by Sphinx Head society , page 14, Cornell Chronicle , December 7, 2007 ^ 63 Juniors Elected to Cornell Societies , The New York Times , May 19, 1929, p. N3.

^ a b " History of Some of the Later Cornell Organizations ", Cornell Alumni News , December 18, 1901, p. 89.

^ " The Sphinx Head: A Senior Society Recently Formed " Cornell Daily Sun, January 13th, 1891, p. 3.

^ "Cornell University", The New York Times, May 10, 1891.

^ The Secret Life of A.D. White | The Cornell Daily Sun Archived 2011-04-30 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Willard Straight Hall ^ "Cornell Societies Elect", The New York Times , October 19, 1930.

^ "Cornell Societies Elect New Members", The New York Times , May 13, 1926.

^ "Cornell Societies Elect", The New York Times , October 14, 1938.

^ "Secret's Out", Cornell Alumni Magazine , May/June 2003, p. 36.

^ Cornell Alumni News , October, 1950 ^ Alumni Association: Larry Gubb, William Kleitz, Elbert Tuttle, Robert White, Walter Nield, Charles Werly, Richard Vanderwarker, Bruce Hackstaff, Joseph Driscoll ^ Chairman: Becker, Purcell, Noyes; Mieing holds honorary membership.

^ Altschuler, Glenn C.; Isaac Kramnick; R. Laurence Moore (2003).

The 100 Most Notable Cornellians .

Ithaca, N.Y.

: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0-8014-3958-2 .

v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sphinx_Head&oldid=1303907757 " Categories : Collegiate secret societies Honor societies 1890 establishments in New York (state) Student societies in the United States Student organizations established in 1890 Local fraternities and sororities Secret societies in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox fraternity with missing member badge Pages using infobox fraternity with missing members Pages using infobox fraternity with missing colors Pages using infobox fraternity with missing website This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 19:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sphinx Head 1 language Add topic

