Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Dramatic alterations 4 Production 5 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 5.1 Year-end lists 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents I.Q.

(film) 21 languages Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский کوردی Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1994 film by Fred Schepisi I.Q.

Theatrical release poster Directed by Fred Schepisi Screenplay by Andy Breckman Michael J. Leeson Story by Andy Breckman Produced by Fred Schepisi Carol Baum Neil A. Machlis (co-producer) Starring Tim Robbins Meg Ryan Walter Matthau Charles Durning Cinematography Ian Baker Edited by Jill Bilcock Music by Jerry Goldsmith Distributed by Paramount Pictures Release date December 25, 1994 ( 1994-12-25 ) Running time 96 minutes Country United States Languages English German Budget $25 million Box office $47 million [ 1 ] I.Q.

is a 1994 American romantic comedy film directed by Fred Schepisi and starring Tim Robbins , Meg Ryan and Walter Matthau . The original music score is composed by Jerry Goldsmith . The film, set in the mid-1950s, centers on a mechanic and a Princeton University doctoral candidate who fall in love thanks to the candidate's uncle, Albert Einstein .

Plot [ edit ] At 1950s Princeton University , mathematics doctoral candidate Catherine Boyd is engaged to hyper-critical James Moreland, a professor of experimental psychology. They stop at a nearby garage when their car breaks down, where mechanic Ed Walters, a science-fiction hobbyist, falls in love with Catherine at first sight .

Ed visits Catherine's address to return her forgotten watch, coming face to face with Albert Einstein , Catherine's uncle. Befriending Albert and his mischievous fellow scientists Nathan Liebknecht, Kurt Gödel , and Boris Podolsky , Ed confides in them about his feelings for Catherine.  At a faculty dinner, Catherine embarrasses James by suggesting a sensual Hawaiian honeymoon, and he reveals that he has accepted a position at Stanford University , where she will be resigned to life as a housewife.

The four scientists bring Albert's car to Ed's garage to transform into a convertible and, believing Ed is far better suited for Catherine than James, brainstorm how he can pique her interest. Ed jokingly asks to "borrow their brains", inspiring them to help him pose as a hidden genius. They convince Catherine that Ed has developed a brilliant concept for a cold fusion -powered spacecraft, secretly based on one of Albert's unpublished papers.

Catherine arranges for a nervous Ed to present his supposed findings at an Institute for Advanced Study symposium, where he makes it through by speaking directly to her. At the reception afterward, the scientists distract James and Albert feigns a heart attack to leave with Catherine and Ed, bringing them to a café. Catherine senses Ed's feelings for her, but Albert arranges for them to share a dance to a jukebox waltz, until Catherine remembers James is expecting her.

Bob and Frank, Ed's fellow mechanics, worry he is in too deep, and James challenges him in front of the press to a public intelligence test. With Catherine in the audience, an inspired Ed quickly solves the manual puzzles, but is subjected to fifty multiple-choice questions on advanced physics. The four scientists slyly prompt him with the answers, leading him to score an I.Q.

of 186.

The "proof" of Ed's genius is publicized in newspapers and cinema newsreels, much to Catherine's delight, but she notices an error in his supposed calculations, forcing Albert to cause her to doubt her own work to protect the ruse. The scientists free James' lab animals to keep him from Albert's sailing excursion, where Catherine realizes her own feelings for Ed, and they kiss.

Ed prepares to tell Catherine the truth, but is surprised by the arrival of President Eisenhower , who expects to see the supposed nuclear fusion engine that will overtake a rumored Russian project. Realizing the truth about Ed, Catherine is picked up by the presidential motorcade. Ed catches up on his motorcycle and Catherine confronts him in a field, leading the president to believe Ed is proposing to her. Catherine slaps Ed after he admits to lying to her, and Albert confirms that she has mathematically disproven his own theory.

Having unearthed Albert's original paper, James accuses both Ed and Albert of fraud, but Albert claims that everything was part of "Operation Red Cabbage", a top-secret scheme to prove the Russians were lying about their own nuclear advances. Rushed to the hospital for a real emergency, Albert urges Catherine not to let her brain overrule her heart. Ed apologizes to Catherine and departs, hoping she will someday realize she is extraordinary. A comet is due that night, and the scientists arrange for Catherine to find Ed at Stargazers' Field, where they reunite to watch the stars from Albert's convertible.

Cast [ edit ] Tim Robbins as Ed Walters Meg Ryan as Catherine Boyd Walter Matthau as Albert Einstein Lou Jacobi as Kurt Gödel Gene Saks as Boris Podolsky Joseph Maher as Nathan Liebknecht Stephen Fry as James Moreland Daniel von Bargen as Secret Service Agent Tony Shalhoub as Bob Rosetti Frank Whaley as Frank Charles Durning as Louis Bamberger Keene Curtis as Dwight D. Eisenhower Alice Playten as Gretchen Greg Germann as Bill Riley, Times reporter Dramatic alterations [ edit ] For dramatic reasons, I.Q.

fictionalizes the lives of certain real people. Albert Einstein did not have a niece by the name of Catherine Boyd. Kurt Gödel was famously shy and reclusive, [ 2 ] unlike his fictional counterpart in this film. The movie gives the impression that Einstein and his friends are all around the same age, when in fact, they were between 17 and 30 years younger than Einstein.

[ citation needed ] The real Louis Bamberger died in 1944, before the film's set period.

The characters in the film listen to Little Richard 's " Tutti-Frutti ", which was released in November 1955, although Albert Einstein died the previous April.

Production [ edit ] Director Fred Schepisi later said that although he liked the film, it was not what it could have been: The problem was there were two other producers, there was a studio and there was Tim Robbins and they were all contributing, and Tim Robbins was being difficult because he said in the '90s nobody would like a character who has a woman fall in love with him because of a lie. That's the whole premise of the film. And it's all right for him to know that and believe it, but he should spend the whole time trying to say, "Hey, I'm lying to you," and be constantly frustrated. Because of that attitude, he pulled the film this way, he pulled it that way while we were writing and it just felt messy. And nobody ever understood the value of those four scientists, and I like the cast that I had, but the other three scientists apart from Walter Matthau were originally going to be Peter Ustinov , Barry Humphries and John Cleese . I wanted them all the way through, but nobody understood how strong they would be. Nobody understood that with a garage and the scientists and this other guy, if you could just stay within that world, if you kept your two lovers together all the time under pressure and you do lots of silly things—there were a couple of wonderfully silly things when they were trying to prove his theory and they kept blowing things up—it had that whimsy about it that would have kept the lovers together and under tension. If they want subplots, they up the stakes and all this formulaic crap - and that's the problem.

[ 3 ] Reception [ edit ] I.Q.

opened in theaters on Christmas Day. It grossed $3,131,201 during its opening weekend, ranking eighth at the US box office.

[ 4 ] By the time that the film closed, it had grossed $26,381,221 in the United States and Canada.

[ 5 ] It grossed $47 million worldwide.

[ 1 ] The film received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes , I.Q.

holds a 47% rating, based on 30 reviews.

[ 6 ] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave the film 3½ stars out of 4, with glowing praise of Walter Matthau's performance. "Matthau as Einstein is a stroke of casting genius. He looks uncannily like the great mathematician. Whether he acts like him I am not in a position to say, but he certainly doesn't act like himself: He has left all his Matthauisms behind, and created this performance from scratch, and it's one of the year's genuine comic gems. He deserves an Oscar nomination." [ 7 ] Year-end lists [ edit ] 9th – David Elliott, The San Diego Union-Tribune [ 8 ] "The second 10" (not ranked) – Sean P. Means, The Salt Lake Tribune [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] List of films about mathematicians References [ edit ] ^ a b "Planet Hollywood".

Screen International . August 30, 1996. pp.

14– 15.

^ Davis, Martin (May 4, 2005).

"Gödel's universe" .

Nature .

435 (7038): 19– 20.

Bibcode : 2005Natur.435...19D .

doi : 10.1038/435019a .

^ "Interview with Fred Schepisi", Signis , 22 December 1998 Archived 14 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine access 20 November 2012 ^ "Dumb' Laughs = a Smart Payoff : Box office: Jim Carrey vehicle pulls a 'Gump,' taking in $16.2 million on an otherwise slow film-going weekend" .

The Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2010-12-31 .

^ "I.Q. (1994) - Box Office Mojo" .

Box Office Mojo . Retrieved 2010-05-24 .

^ I.Q. (1994) , retrieved 2025-01-07 ^ "I.Q. Movie review & film summary (1994) | Roger Ebert" .

^ Elliott, David (December 25, 1994). "On the big screen, color it a satisfying time".

The San Diego Union-Tribune (1, 2 ed.). p. E=8.

^ P. Means, Sean (January 1, 1995). " 'Pulp and Circumstance' After the Rise of Quentin Tarantino, Hollywood Would Never Be the Same".

The Salt Lake Tribune (Final ed.). p. E1.

External links [ edit ] I.Q.

at IMDb I.Q.

at Box Office Mojo I.Q.

at Rotten Tomatoes I.Q.

film script - Dialogue Transcript v t e Works directed by Fred Schepisi Films Libido (1973) The Devil's Playground (1976) The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith (1978) Barbarosa (1982) Iceman (1984) Plenty (1985) Roxanne (1987) Evil Angels (1988) The Russia House (1990) Mr. Baseball (1992) Six Degrees of Separation (1993) I.Q.

(1994) Fierce Creatures (1997) Last Orders (2001) It Runs in the Family (2003) The Eye of the Storm (2011) Words and Pictures (2013) Miniseries Empire Falls (2005) v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=I.Q._(film)&oldid=1276829540 " Categories : 1994 films 1994 romantic comedy films American romantic comedy films Films directed by Fred Schepisi Cultural depictions of Albert Einstein Films set in New Jersey Paramount Pictures films Films shot in New Jersey Films set in the 1950s Films scored by Jerry Goldsmith Films about Nobel laureates Films with screenplays by Andy Breckman Cultural depictions of Dwight D. Eisenhower 1990s English-language films 1990s American films English-language romantic comedy films Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Template film date with 1 release date All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Rotten Tomatoes ID same as Wikidata Rotten Tomatoes template using name parameter This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 00:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents I.Q.

(film) 21 languages Add topic

