Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Metaphysics and epistemology 4 Ethics 5 Political theory Toggle Political theory subsection 5.1 Integral Humanism 5.2 Global policy 6 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 6.1 Praise 6.2 Criticism 6.3 Veneration 7 Sayings 8 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 8.1 Significant works in English 8.2 Other works in English 8.3 Original works in French 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Jacques Maritain 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Catholic philosopher (1882–1973) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jacques Maritain OblSB Maritain in the 1930s Born ( 1882-11-18 ) 18 November 1882 Paris , France Died 28 April 1973 (1973-04-28) (aged 90) Toulouse , France Spouse Raïssa Maritain ​ ​ ( m.

1904; died 1960) ​ Education Alma mater University of Paris Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Existential Thomism Main interests Philosophy of religion political theory economics philosophy of science metaphysics Notable works Art and Scholasticism (1920) The Degrees of Knowledge (1932) The Person and the Common Good (1947) The Range of Reason (1952) Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Jacques Maritain ( French: [ʒak maʁitɛ̃] ; 18 November 1882 – 28 April 1973) was a French Catholic philosopher. Raised as a Protestant , he was agnostic before converting to Catholicism in 1906. An author of more than 60 books, he helped to revive Thomas Aquinas for modern times, and was influential in the development and drafting of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .

Pope Paul VI presented his "Message to Men of Thought and of Science" at the close of Vatican II to Maritain, his long-time friend and mentor. The same pope had seriously considered making him a lay cardinal , but Maritain rejected it.

[ 1 ] Maritain's interest and works spanned many aspects of philosophy, including aesthetics , political theory , philosophy of science , metaphysics , the nature of education, liturgy and ecclesiology .

Life [ edit ] Maritain was born in Paris, the son of Paul Maritain, who was a lawyer, and his wife Geneviève Favre, the daughter of philosopher and educator Julie Favre and statesman and lawyer Jules Favre . His niece was librarian and Resistance member Éveline Garnier , who he later made his principal legatee and introduced to her life partner Andrée Jacob .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Maritain was reared in a liberal Protestant milieu. He was sent to the Lycée Henri-IV . Later, he attended the Sorbonne , studying the natural sciences: chemistry, biology and physics. At the Sorbonne, he met Raïssa Oumançoff , a Russian Jewish émigré. They married in 1904, but they made a private vow to abstain from sex .

[ 5 ] A noted poet and mystic, Raïssa participated as his intellectual partner in his search for truth. Raïssa's sister, Vera Oumançoff, lived with Jacques and Raïssa for almost all their married life. At the Sorbonne, Jacques and Raïssa soon became disenchanted with scientism , which could not, in their view, address the larger existential issues of life. In 1901, in light of this disillusionment, they made a pact to commit suicide together if they could not discover some deeper meaning to life within a year. They were spared from following through on this because, at the urging of Charles Péguy , they attended the lectures of Henri Bergson at the Collège de France . Bergson's critique of scientism dissolved their intellectual despair and instilled in them "the sense of the absolute." Then, through the influence of Léon Bloy , they converted to the Catholic faith in 1906.

[ 6 ] In the fall of 1907, the Maritains moved to Heidelberg , where Jacques studied biology under Hans Driesch . Hans Driesch's theory of neo-vitalism attracted Jacques because of its affinity with Henri Bergson. During this time, Raïssa fell ill, and during her convalescence, their spiritual advisor, a Dominican friar named Humbert Clérissac, introduced her to the writings of Thomas Aquinas. She read them with enthusiasm and, in turn, exhorted her husband to examine the saint's writings. In Thomas, Maritain found a number of insights and ideas that he had believed all along. He wrote: Thenceforth, in affirming to myself, without chicanery or diminution, the authentic value of the reality of our human instruments of knowledge, I was already a Thomist without knowing it ... When several months later I came to the Summa Theologiae , I would construct no impediment to its luminous flood.

From the Angelic Doctor (the honorary title of Aquinas), he was led to "The Philosopher", as Aquinas called Aristotle . Still later, to further his intellectual development, he read the neo-Thomists . Beginning in 1912, Maritain taught at the Collège Stanislas . He later moved to the Institut Catholique de Paris . For the 1916–1917 academic year, he taught at the Petit Séminaire de Versailles .  In 1930 Maritain and Étienne Gilson received honorary doctorates in philosophy from the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum .

[ 7 ] In 1933, Maritain gave his first lectures in North America in Toronto at the Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies . He also taught at Columbia University ; at the Committee on Social Thought, University of Chicago ; at the University of Notre Dame , and at Princeton University . From 1945 to 1948, he was the French ambassador to the Holy See. Afterwards, Maritain returned to Princeton University. In 1952, he gave the inaugural A. W. Mellon Lectures in the Fine Arts . Four years later, he achieved the "Elysian status" (as he put it) of a professor emeritus. Raïssa Maritain died in 1960. After her death, Jacques published her journal under the title "Raïssa's Journal." For several years Maritain was an honorary chairman of the Congress for Cultural Freedom , appearing as a keynote speaker at its 1960 conference in Berlin.

[ 8 ] From 1961, Maritain lived with the Little Brothers of Jesus in Toulouse, France. He had an influence on the order since its foundation in 1933 and became a Little Brother in 1970.

[ 9 ] Maritain was also an oblate for the Order of Saint Benedict .

[ 10 ] In a 1938 interview published by the Commonweal magazine, they asked if he was a freemason. Maritain replied: That question offends me, for I should have a horror of belonging to Freemasonry. So much the worse for well-intentioned people whose anxiety and need for explanations would have been satisfied by believing me to be one.

[ 11 ] Jacques and Raïssa Maritain are buried in the cemetery of Kolbsheim , a little French village in Alsace where he had spent many summers at the estate of his friends, Antoinette and Alexander Grunelius.

[ 12 ] Tomb of Raïssa and Jacques Maritain Work [ edit ] The foundation of Maritain's thought is Aristotle, Aquinas, and the Thomistic commentators, especially John of St. Thomas . He is eclectic in his use of these sources. Maritain's philosophy is based on evidence accrued by the senses and acquired by an understanding of first principles. Maritain defended philosophy as a science against those who would degrade it, and promoted philosophy as the "queen of sciences". In 1910, Jacques Maritain completed his first contribution to modern philosophy, a 28-page article titled, "Reason and Modern Science" published in Revue de Philosophie (June issue). In it, he warned that science was becoming a divinity, its methodology usurping the role of reason and philosophy, supplanting the humanities.

[ 13 ] In 1917, a committee of French bishops commissioned Jacques to write a series of textbooks to be used in Catholic colleges and seminaries. He wrote and completed only one of these projects, titled Elements de Philosophie (Introduction of Philosophy) in 1920. It has been a standard text ever since in many Catholic seminaries. He wrote in his introduction: If the philosophy of Aristotle, as revived and enriched by Thomas Aquinas and his school, may rightly be called the Christian philosophy , both because the church is never weary of putting it forward as the only true philosophy and because it harmonizes perfectly with the truths of faith, nevertheless it is proposed here for the reader's acceptance not because it is Christian, but because it is demonstrably true. This agreement between a philosophic system founded by a pagan and the dogmas of revelation is no doubt an external sign, an extra-philosophic guarantee of its truth; but from its own rational evidence, it derives its authority as a philosophy.

During the Second World War, Jacques Maritain protested the policies of the Vichy government while teaching at the Pontifical Institute for Medieval Studies in Canada. "Moving to New York, Maritain became deeply involved in rescue activities, seeking to bring persecuted and threatened academics, many of them Jews, to America. He was instrumental in founding the École Libre des Hautes Études , a kind of university in exile that was, at the same time, the centre of Gaullist resistance in the United States". After the war, in a papal audience on 16 July 1946, he tried unsuccessfully to have Pope Pius XII officially denounce antisemitism .

[ 14 ] Many of his American papers are held by the University of Notre Dame , which established The Jacques Maritain Center in 1957. The Cercle d'Etudes Jacques & Raïssa Maritain is an association founded by the philosopher himself in 1962 in Kolbsheim (near Strasbourg , France), where the couple is also buried. The purpose of these centres is to encourage study and research of Maritain's thoughts and expand upon them. It is also absorbed in translating and editing his writings.

Metaphysics and epistemology [ edit ] Maritain's philosophy is based on the view that metaphysics is prior to epistemology . Being is first apprehended implicitly in sense experience , and is known in two ways. First, being is known reflexively by abstraction from sense experience. One experiences a particular being, e.g. a cup, a dog, etc. and through reflection ("bending back") on the judgement, e.g. "this is a dog", one recognizes that the object in question is an existent. Second, in light of attaining being reflexively through apprehension of sense experience, one may arrive at what Maritain calls "an Intuition of Being". For Maritain this is the point of departure for metaphysics; without the intuition of being one cannot be a metaphysician at all. The intuition of being involves rising to the apprehension of ens secundum quod est ens (being insofar as it is a being). In Existence and the Existent , he explains: "It is being, attained or perceived at the summit of an abstractive intellection, of an eidetic or intensive visualization which owes its purity and power of illumination only to the fact that the intellect, one day, was stirred to its depths and trans-illuminated by the impact of the act of existing apprehended in things, and because it was quickened to the point of receiving this act, or hearkening to it, within itself, in the intelligible and super-intelligible integrity of the tone particular to it." (p. 20) In view of this priority given to metaphysics, Maritain advocates an epistemology he calls "Critical Realism". Maritain's epistemology is not "critical" in Kant's sense, which held that one could only know anything after undertaking a thorough critique of one's cognitive abilities. Rather, it is critical in the sense that it is not a naive or non-philosophical realism, but one that is defended by way of reason. Against Kant's critical project, Maritain argues that epistemology is reflexive; you can only defend a theory of knowledge in light of knowledge you have already attained. Consequently, the critical question is not the question of modern philosophy – how do we pass from what is perceived to what is? Rather, "Since the mind, from the very start, reveals itself as warranted in its certitude by things and measured by an esse [the Latin verb 'to be', Aquinas' preferred term for 'existence'],  independent of itself, how are we to judge if, how, on what conditions, and to what extent it is so both in principle and in the various moments of knowledge?" In contrast, idealism inevitably ends up in contradiction, since it does not recognize the universal scope of the first principles of identity, contradiction, and finality. These become merely laws of thought or language, but not of being, which opens the way to contradictions being instantiated in reality. Maritain's metaphysics ascends from this account of being to a critique of the philosophical aspects of modern science, through analogy to an account of the existence and nature of God as it is known philosophically and through mystical experience.

Ethics [ edit ] Maritain was a strong defender of a natural law ethics. He viewed ethical norms as being rooted in human nature . For Maritain, the natural law is known primarily, not through philosophical argument and demonstration, but rather through "Connaturality". Connatural knowledge is a kind of knowledge by acquaintance. We know the natural law through our direct acquaintance with it in our human experience. Of central importance, is Maritain's argument that natural rights are rooted in the natural law. This was key to his involvement in the drafting of the UN's Universal Declaration of Human Rights .

Another important aspect of his ethics was his insistence upon the need for moral philosophy to be conducted in a theological context. While a Christian could engage in speculative thought about nature or metaphysics in a purely rational manner and develop an adequate philosophy of nature of metaphysics, this is not possible with ethics. Moral philosophy must address the actual state of the human person, and this is a person in a state of grace. Thus, "moral philosophy adequately considered" must take into account properly theological truths. It would be impossible, for instance, to develop an adequate moral philosophy without giving consideration to proper theological facts such as original sin and the supernatural end of the human person in beatitude. Any moral philosophy that does not take into account these realities that are only known through faith would be fundamentally incomplete.

[ 15 ] Political theory [ edit ] Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Maritain corresponded with, and was a friend of, [ 16 ] the American radical community organizer Saul Alinsky , [ 17 ] as well as French Prime Minister Robert Schuman .

[ 18 ] In the study The Radical Vision of Saul Alinsky , author P. David Finks noted that "For years Jacques Maritain had spoken approvingly to Montini of the democratic community organizations built by Saul Alinsky". Accordingly, in 1958 Maritain arranged for a series of meetings between Alinsky and Archbishop Montini in Milan. Before the meetings, Maritain had written to Alinsky: "the new cardinal was reading Saul’s books and would contact him soon".

[ 19 ] Integral Humanism [ edit ] Maritain advocated what he called "Integral Humanism" (or "Integral Christian Humanism").

[ 20 ] He argued that secular forms of humanism were inevitably anti-human in that they refused to recognize the whole person. Once the spiritual dimension of human nature is rejected, we no longer have an integral, but merely partial humanism, one which rejects a fundamental aspect of the human person. Accordingly, in Integral Humanism he explores the prospects for a new Christendom , rooted in his philosophical pluralism, in order to find ways Christianity could inform political discourse and policy in a pluralistic age. In this account he develops a theory of cooperation, to show how people of different intellectual positions can nevertheless cooperate to achieve common practical aims. Maritain's political theory was extremely influential and was a primary source behind the Christian Democratic movement .

[ citation needed ] Global policy [ edit ] Along with Albert Einstein , Maritain was one of the sponsors of the Peoples' World Convention (PWC), also known as Peoples' World Constituent Assembly (PWCA), which took place in 1950–51 at Palais Electoral, Geneva , Switzerland.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Legacy [ edit ] Praise [ edit ] Citing the Integral humanism of Jacques Maritain's L'humanisme intégral , Pope Paul VI declared in Populorum progressio that the "ultimate goal is a full-bodied humanism".

[ 23 ] Senator John F. Kennedy (later President of the United States ), once quoted Maritain in a 1955 address to Assumption College .

[ 24 ] In an interview from 2016, Pope Francis praised Maritain among a small list of French liberal thinkers.

[ 25 ] American president Joe Biden has cited Maritain as immensely influential in his thinking.

[ 26 ] Criticism [ edit ] Major criticisms of Maritain have included: Spanish Dominican theologian Santiago Ramírez argued that Maritain's moral philosophy, adequately considered, could not be distinguished in any meaningful way from moral theology as such.

[ 27 ] Tracey Rowland, a theologian at the University of Notre Dame (Australia), has argued that the lack of a fully developed philosophy of culture in Maritain and others (notably Rahner ) was responsible for an inadequate notion of culture in the documents of Vatican II and thereby for much of the misapplication of the conciliar texts in the life of the church following the council.

[ 28 ] Maritain's political theory has been criticized for a democratic pluralism that appeals to something very similar to the later liberal philosopher John Rawls ' conception of an overlapping consensus of reasonable views. It is argued that such a view illegitimately presupposes the necessity of pluralistic conceptions of the human good.

[ 29 ] Catholic philosopher and historian Thomas Molnar , who praised Maritain as "a man of charity", also wrote that Maritain's work contained "baffling paradoxes". Molnar said that while Maritain's philosophy was "Orthodox and Thomist", he nonetheless unfortunately had "occasional excursions into strange semi-spiritual lands." [ 30 ] Catholic political theorist Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn wrote that "Maritain knew a lot about theology, he was a philosopher, and he knew something about biology, but he knew next to nothing about politics and economics." [ 31 ] Catholic philosopher Alice von Hildebrand referred to Maritain as "treasonous" and criticized his negative views on Engelbert Dollfuss , whom Maritain had spoken of positively in the past, but later became critical of.

[ 32 ] Veneration [ edit ] A cause for beatification of him and his wife Raïssa was being planned in 2011.

[ 33 ] Since then, there have been no advancements in the case.

Sayings [ edit ] "Vae mihi si non Thomistizavero" [Woe to me if I do not Thomisticize].

[ 34 ] "Je n'adore que Dieu" [I adore only God].

"The artist pours out his creative spirit into a work; the philosopher measures his knowing spirit by the real." "I do not know if Saul Alinsky knows God. But I assure you that God knows Saul Alinsky." "We do not need a truth to serve us, we need a truth that we can serve" Writings [ edit ] Significant works in English [ edit ] Introduction to Philosophy , Christian Classics, Inc., Westminster, Md., 1st. 1930, 1991 The Degrees of Knowledge , orig. 1932 Integral Humanism , orig. 1936 An Introduction to Logic (1937) A Preface To Metaphysics (1939) (1939) Education at the Crossroads , engl. 1942 Redeeming the Time 1943 The Person and the Common Good , fr. 1947 Art and Scholasticism with other essays , Sheed and Ward, London, 1947 Existence and the Existent , (fr. 1947) trans. by Lewis Galantiere and Gerald B. Phelan, Image Books division of Doubleday & Co., Inc., Garden City, N.Y., 1948, Image book, 1956.

ISBN 978-0-8371-8078-6 Philosophy of Nature (1951) The Range of Reason , engl. 1952 Approaches to God , engl. 1954 Creative Intuition in Art and Poetry , engl. 1953 Man and The State , (orig.) University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Ill., 1951 A Preface to Metaphysics , engl. 1962 God and the Permission of Evil , trans. Joseph W. Evans, The Bruce Publishing Company, Milwaukee, Wisc., 1966 (orig. 1963) Moral Philosophy , 1964 The Peasant of the Garonne, An Old Layman Questions Himself about the Present Time , trans. Michael Cuddihy and Elizabeth Hughes, Holt, Rinehart and Winston, N.Y., 1968; orig. 1966 The Education of Man, The Educational Philosophy of Jacques Maritain.

, ed. D./I. Gallagher, Notre Dame/Ind. 1967 Other works in English [ edit ] Religion and Culture (1931) The Things that are Not Caesar's (1931) Theonas; Conversations of a Sage (1933) Freedom in the Modern World (1935) True Humanism (1938) (Integral Humanism, 1968) A Christian Looks at the Jewish Question (1939) The Twilight of Civilization (1939) Scholasticism and Politics , New York (1940) Science and Wisdom (1940) Religion and the Modern World (1941) France, My Country Through the Disaster (1941) The Living Thoughts of St. Paul (1941) France, My Country, Through the Disaster (1941) Ransoming the Time (1941) Christian Humanism (1942) Saint Thomas and the problem of evil , Milwaukee (1942) Essays in Thomism , New York (1942) The Rights of Man and Natural Law (1943) Prayer and Intelligence (1943) Give John a Sword (1944) The Dream of Descartes (1944) Christianity and Democracy (1944) Messages 1941–1944 , New York 1945 A Faith to Live by (1947) The Person and the Common Good (1947) Art & Faith (with Jean Cocteau 1951) The Pluralist Principle in Democracy (1952) Creative Intuition in Art and History (1953) An Essay on Christian Philosophy (1955) The Situation of Poetry with Raïssa Maritain, 1955) Bergsonian Philosophy (1955) Reflections on America (1958) St. Thomas Aquinas (1958) The Degrees of Knowledge (1959) The Sin of the Angel: An Essay on a Re-interpretation of some Thomistic Positions (1959) Liturgy and Contemplation (1960) The Responsibility of the Artist (1960) On the Use of Philosophy (1961) God and the Permission of Evil (1966) Challenges and Renewals , ed. J.W. Evans/L.R. Ward, Notre Dame/Ind. (1966) On the Grace and Humanity of Jesus (1969) On the Church of Christ: The Person of the Church and her Personnel (1973) Notebooks (1984) Natural Law: reflections on theory and practice (ed. with Introductions and notes, by William Sweet), St. Augustine's Press [distributed by University of Chicago Press] (2001; Second printing, corrected, 2003) Original works in French [ edit ] La philosophie bergsonienne , 1914 (1948) Eléments de philosophie , 2 volumes, Paris 1920/23 Art et scolastique , 1920 Théonas ou les entretiens d’un sage et de deux philosophes sur diverses matières inégalement actuelles , Paris, Nouvelle librairie nationale, 1921 Antimoderne , Paris, Édition de la Revue des Jeunes, 1922 Réflexions sur l’intelligence et sur sa vie propre , Paris, Nouvelle librairie nationale, 1924 Trois réformateurs : Luther , Descartes , Rousseau , avec six portraits , Paris [Plon], 1925 ( English version ) Réponse à Jean Cocteau , 1926 Une opinion sur Charles Maurras et le devoir des catholiques , Paris [Plon], 1926 Primauté du spirituel , 1927 Pourquoi Rome a parlé (coll.), Paris, Spes, 1927 Quelques pages sur Léon Bloy , Paris 1927 Clairvoyance de Rome (coll.), Paris, Spes, 1929 Le docteur angélique , Paris, Paul Hartmann, 1929 Religion et culture , Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1930 (1946) Le thomisme et la civilisation , 1932 Distinguer pour unir ou Les degrés du savoir , Paris 1932 Le songe de Descartes, Suivi de quelques essais , Paris 1932 De la philosophie chrétienne , Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1933 Du régime temporel et de la liberté , Paris, DDB, 1933 Sept leçons sur l'être et les premiers principes de la raison spéculative , Paris 1934 Frontières de la poésie et autres essais , Paris 1935 La philosophie de la nature, Essai critique sur ses frontières et son objet , Paris 1935 (1948) Lettre sur l’indépendance , Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1935.

Science et sagesse , Paris 1935 Humanisme intégral. Problèmes temporels et spirituels d'une nouvelle chrétienté ; zunächst spanisch 1935), Paris (Fernand Aubier), 1936 (1947) Les Juifs parmi les nations , Paris, Cerf, 1938 Situation de la Poesie , 1938 Questions de conscience : essais et allocutions , Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1938 La personne humaine et la societé , Paris 1939 Le crépuscule de la civilisation , Paris, Éd. Les Nouvelles Lettres, 1939 Quattre essais sur l'ésprit dans sa condition charnelle , Paris 1939 (1956) De la justice politique, Notes sur le présente guerre , Paris 1940 A travers le désastre , New York 1941 (1946) Conféssion de foi , New York 1941 La pensée de St.Paul , New York 1941 (Paris 1947) Les Droits de l'Homme et la Loi naturelle , New York 1942 (Paris 1947) Christianisme et démocratie , New York 1943 (Paris 1945) Principes d'une politique humaniste , New York 1944 (Paris 1945); De Bergson à Thomas d'Aquin, Essais de Métaphysique et de Morale , New York 1944 (Paris 1947) A travers la victoire , Paris 1945; Pour la justice , Articles et discours 1940–1945, New York 1945; Le sort de l'homme , Neuchâtel 1945; Court traité de l'existence et de l'existant , Paris 1947; La personne et le bien commun , Paris 1947; Raison et raisons, Essais détachés , Paris 1948 La signification de l'athéisme contemporain , Paris 1949 Neuf leçons sur les notions premières de la philosophie morale , Paris 1951 Approaches de Dieu , Paris 1953.

L'Homme et l'Etat (engl.: Man and State, 1951) Paris, PUF, 1953 Pour une philosophie de l'éducation , Paris 1959 Le philosophe dans la Cité , Paris 1960 La philosophie morale , Vol. I: Examen historique et critique des grands systèmes, Paris 1960 Dieu et la permission du mal , 1963 Carnet de notes , Paris, DDB, 1965 L'intuition créatrice dans l'art et dans la poésie , Paris, Desclée de Brouwer, 1966 (engl. 1953) Le paysan de la Garonne. Un vieux laïc s’interroge à propos du temps présent , Paris, DDB, 1966 De la grâce et de l'humanité de Jésus , 1967 De l'Église du Christ. La personne de l'église et son personnel , Paris 1970 Approaches sans entraves , posthum 1973 La loi naturelle ou loi non écrite , texte inédit, établi par Georges Brazzola. Fribourg, Suisse: Éditions universitaires, 1986. [Lectures on Natural Law. Tr. William Sweet. In The Collected Works of Jacques Maritain, Vol. VI, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, (forthcoming)] Oeuvres complètes de Jacques et Raïssa Maritain , 16 Bde., 1982–1999 See also [ edit ] Personalism Notes [ edit ] ^ Donald DeMarco.

"The Christian Personalism of Jacques Maritain" .

EWTN . Archived from the original on 5 December 2000.

^ texte, Cercle d'études Jacques et Raïssa Maritain Auteur du (1990).

"Cahiers Jacques Maritain" .

Gallica . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ "A Paris, les voies de la Résistance" .

Le Monde.fr (in French). 19 September 2019 . Retrieved 26 March 2023 .

^ "Marie-Jo Bonnet raconte les résistantes oubliées" . February 2013.

^ Johnston, George Sim (4 October 2018).

"Friendship & devotion" .

catholiceducation.org . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ Hanna 1996 , p. 39 ^ Piero Viotto, Grandi amicizie: i Maritain e i loro contemporanei , 38, https://books.google.com/books?id=aonOg8KLOdIC&pg=PA38 Accessed 28 February 2016. Jean Leclercq, Di grazia in grazia: memorie , 60.

https://books.google.com/books?id=jxKnMfTj81AC&pg=PA60 Accessed 28 February 2016 ^ "What was the Congress for Cultural Freedom?" .

www.newcriterion.com . January 1990.

^ Picón, María Laura (2009).

" "Jacques Maritain y los Pequeños Hermanos de Jesús" " .

Studium Filosofía y Teología (in Spanish). T.12, Fasc. 24: 403– 414.

ISSN 0329-8930 .

^ Scalia, Elizabeth (20 January 2016).

"She's a Tertiary? He's an Oblate? What Is That About?" .

Aleteia.org .

^ "An Interview with Jacques Maritain | Commonweal Magazine" .

www.commonwealmagazine.org . 3 February 1939 . Retrieved 21 November 2019 .

^ The most comprehensive biography of the Maritains is: Jean-Luc Barre, "Jacques And Raissa Maritain: Beggars For Heaven", University of Notre Dame Press.

^ Hanna 1996 , p. 40 ^ Richard Francis Crane (2011).

"Heart-Rending Ambivalence: Jacques Maritain and the Complexity of Postwar Catholic Philosemitism" .

Studies in Christian-Jewish Relations .

6 : 8– 9.

^ Maritain, An Essay on Christian Philosophy, (NY: Philosophical Library, 1955), pp. 38 ff.

^ "Wolfe, C.J. "Lessons from the Friendship of Jacques Maritain with Saul Alinsky" he Catholic Social Science Review 16 (2011): 229–240" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 April 2014.

^ Doering, Bernard E. (1987).

"Jacques Maritain and His Two Authentic Revolutionaries" (PDF) . In Kennedy, Leonard A (ed.).

Thomistic Papers . Vol. 3. Houston, Tex.: Center for Thomistic Studies . pp.

91– 116.

ISBN 0-268-01865-0 .

OCLC 17307550 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Fimister, Alan Paul (2008).

Robert Schuman: Neo-Scholastic Humanism and the Reunification of Europe . Peter Lang. p. 131.

ISBN 978-90-5201-439-5 .

OCLC 244339575 .

^ Ferrara, Christopher A.

"Saul Alinsky and 'Saint' Pope Paul VI: Genesis of the Conciliar Surrender to the World" .

The Remnant Newspaper . Retrieved 21 November 2019 .

^ Sweet, William (2019).

"Jacques Maritain" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Einstein, Albert; Nathan, Otto; Norden, Heinz (1968).

Einstein on peace . Internet Archive. New York, Schocken Books. pp. 539, 670, 676.

^ "[Carta] 1950 oct. 12, Genève, [Suiza] [a] Gabriela Mistral, Santiago, Chile [manuscrito] Gerry Kraus" .

BND: Archivo del Escritor . Retrieved 19 October 2023 .

^ "Populorum Progressio (March 26, 1967) | Paul VI" .

^ Kennedy, John F. (3 June 1955).

Remarks of Senator John F. Kennedy, Commencement Address Assumption College, Worcester, Massachusetts, June 3, 1955 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ "INTERVIEW Pope Francis" .

La Croix (in French). 17 May 2016.

ISSN 0242-6056 . Retrieved 21 November 2019 .

^ Cairns, Madoc (3 May 2023).

"The Red Christian" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ Denis J. M. Bradley . Aquinas on the Twofold Human Good: Reason and Human Happiness in Aquinas's Moral Science. Washington: The Catholic University of America Press, 1997.

^ Tracey Rowland, "Culture and the Thomist Tradition: After Vatican II" (Routledge Radical Orthodoxy) ^ Thaddeus J. Kozinski, The Political Problem of Religious Pluralism: And Why Philosophers Can't Solve It, (Lexington Books, 2013) ^ Molnar, Thomas (1998).

Jacques Maritain: Protean Figure of the Century .

^ Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik von (2 May 1980). "Economics in the Catholic World".

National Review . p. 536.

^ Messner, Johannes (2004).

Dollfuss: An Austrian Patriot . IHS Press. p. 10.

^ Beatification process for Jacques and Raissa Maritain could begin on YouTube (8 February 2011) ^ Maritain, Jacques (1946).

St. Thomas Aquinas: Angel of the Schools . J. F. Scanlan (trans.). London: Sheed & Ward. p. viii.

References [ edit ] G. B. Phelan, Jacques Maritain , NY, 1937.

J.W. Evans in Catholic Encyclopaedia Vol XVI Supplement 1967–1974.

Michael R. Marrus, "The Ambassador & The Pope; Pius XII, Jacques Maritain & the Jews", Commonweal , 22 October 2004 H. Bars, Maritain en notre temps , Paris, 1959.

D. and I. Gallagher, The Achievement of Jacques and Raïssa Maritain: A Bibliography, 1906–1961 , NY, 1962.

J. W. Evans, ed., Jacques Maritain: The Man and His Achievement , NY, 1963.

C. A. Fecher, The Philosophy of Jacques Maritain , Westminster, MD, 1963.

Jude P. Dougherty, Jacques Maritain: An Intellectual Profile , Catholic University of America Press, 2003 Ralph McInerny, The Very Rich Hours of Jacques Maritain: A Spiritual Life , University of Notre Dame Press, 2003 Hanna, Martha (1996).

The Mobilization of Intellect: French Scholars and Writers During the Great War . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0674577558 .

Further reading [ edit ] The Social and Political Philosophy of Jacques Maritain (1955) W. Herberg (ed.), Four Existentialist Theologians (1958) The Philosophy of Jacques Maritain (1953) Jacques Maritain, Antimodern or Ultramodern?: An Historical Analysis of His Critics, His Thought, and His Life (1974) External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Jacques Maritain at Wikiquote Études maritainiennes-Maritain Studies Maritain Center, Kolbsheim (in French) Cercle d'Etudes J. & R. Maritain at Kolbsheim (France).

Jacques Maritain Center at the University of Notre Dame .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : Jacques Maritain by William Sweet.

International Jacques Maritain Institute.

[1] Archived 16 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine of the primary and secondary literatures on Jacques Maritain.

Jacques Maritain, Man and the State (1951) Jacques Maritain Speaks Out Against Anti-Semitism Over WNYC in 1938 v t e Jacques Maritain Books Art and Scholasticism (1920) The Degrees of Knowledge (1932) The Person and the Common Good (1947) The Range of Reason (1952) Miscellaneous Raïssa Maritain (wife) v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Catholic Church Christianity Feminism France Philosophy Politics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jacques_Maritain&oldid=1304765811 " Categories : 1882 births 1973 deaths 20th-century French male writers 20th-century French non-fiction writers 20th-century French philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics Ambassadors of France to the Holy See Anti-Masonry in France Benedictine oblates Catholic feminists Catholic philosophers Christian existentialists Christian humanists Christian radicals Committee on Social Thought Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Corresponding Fellows of the Medieval Academy of America Critics of atheism Critics of Marxism Ecofeminists Existentialists French anti-communists French economics writers French environmentalists French epistemologists French feminists French male non-fiction writers French medievalists French metaphysicians French nationalists French philosophers of education French political philosophers French Roman Catholic writers Lycée Henri-IV alumni Male feminists Political theologians Thomists University of Paris alumni Virtue ethicists Writers from Paris Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles with hCards Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jacques Maritain 41 languages Add topic

