Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Geology 3 People 4 Political development 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Scandinavian Peninsula 85 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Ποντιακά Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 63°00′N 14°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 63.000°N 14.000°E ﻿ / 63.000; 14.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land mass in Northern Europe This article is about the peninsula. For the cultural, historical and linguistic region, see Scandinavia .

Scandinavian Peninsula Scandinavian Peninsula in winter 2003 Geography Location Northern Europe Coordinates 63°00′N 14°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 63.000°N 14.000°E ﻿ / 63.000; 14.000 Adjacent to Arctic Sea , Atlantic Ocean Area 750,000 km 2 (290,000 sq mi) Highest elevation 2,469 m (8100 ft) Highest point Galdhøpiggen Administration Norway Mainland Sweden Mainland Finland Parts of Lapland Part of a series on Scandinavia Countries Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden History History by country Åland Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Greenland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Chronological history Prehistory Stone Age Bronze Age Iron Age Migration Period Viking Age Norsemen Christianization Kalmar Union Sweden Denmark–Norway Sweden–Norway Denmark–Iceland Nordic Council Geography Mountains Peninsula Baltic Sea North Sea Economy Nordic model Finland Sweden Related Languages Scandinavism Nordic countries Monetary Union Defence Union Scandinavian Airlines Denmark Faroe Islands Finland Iceland Norway Sweden v t e The Scandinavian Peninsula [ 1 ] is located in Northern Europe , and roughly comprises the mainlands of Sweden , Norway and the northwestern area of Finland .

The name of the peninsula is derived from the term Scandinavia , the cultural region of Denmark , Norway and Sweden. That cultural name is in turn derived from the name of Scania , the region at the southern extremity of the peninsula which was for centuries a part of Denmark, which was the ancestral home of the Danes , and is now part of Sweden.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The Scandinavian Peninsula is the largest of the peninsulas of Europe , with a greater area than the Balkan , Iberian and Italian peninsulas. During the Ice Ages , the sea level of the Atlantic Ocean dropped so much that the Baltic Sea , the Gulf of Bothnia and the Gulf of Finland disappeared, and the countries now surrounding them, including Germany, Poland, the other Baltic countries and Scandinavia, were directly joined by land.

Geography [ edit ] Scandinavian Peninsula in relation to the larger Fennoscandia The largest peninsula in Europe, the Scandinavian Peninsula is approximately 1,850 kilometres (1,150 mi) long with a width varying approximately from 370 to 805 km (230 to 500 mi). The Scandinavian mountain range generally defines the border between Norway and Sweden.

Its highest elevation was Glittertinden in Norway at 2,470 m (8,104 ft) above sea level, but since the glacier at its summit partially melted, [ 5 ] the highest elevation is at 2,469 m (8,100 ft) at Galdhøpiggen , also in Norway. These mountains also have the largest glacier on the mainland of Europe, Jostedalsbreen .

About one quarter of the Scandinavian Peninsula lies north of the Arctic Circle , its northernmost point being at Cape Nordkyn , Norway .

The climate across Scandinavia varies from tundra ( Köppen : ET) and subarctic (Dfc) in the north, with cool marine west coast climate (Cfc) in northwestern coastal areas reaching just north of Lofoten , to humid continental (Dfb) in the central portion and marine west coast (Cfb) in the south and southwest.

[ 6 ] The region is rich in timber, iron and copper with the best farmland in southern Sweden. Large petroleum and natural-gas deposits have been found off Norway's coast in the North Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.

Much of the population of the Scandinavian Peninsula is naturally concentrated in its southern part, which is also its agricultural region. The largest cities of the peninsula are Stockholm , Sweden; Oslo , Norway; Gothenburg , Sweden; Malmö , Sweden and Bergen , Norway, in that order.

Geology [ edit ] The Scandinavian Peninsula occupies part of the Baltic Shield , a stable and large crust segment formed of very old, crystalline metamorphic rocks . Most of the soil covering this substrate was scraped by glaciers during the Ice Ages of antiquity, especially in northern Scandinavia, where the Baltic Shield is closest to the surface of the land.

[ citation needed ] As a consequence of this scouring, the elevation of the land, and the cool-to-cold climate , a relatively small percentage of its land is arable .

[ 7 ] The glaciation during the Ice Ages also deepened many of the river valleys, which were invaded by the sea when the ice melted, creating the noteworthy fjords of Norway. In the southern part of the peninsula, the glaciers deposited vast numbers of terminal moraines , configuring a very chaotic landscape.

[ 8 ] These terminal moraines covered all of what is now Denmark.

Although the Baltic Shield is mostly geologically stable and hence resistant to the influences of other neighbouring tectonic formations, the weight of nearly four kilometres of ice during the Ice Ages caused all of the Scandinavian terrain to sink. When the ice sheet disappeared, the shield rose again, a tendency that continues to this day at a rate of about one metre per century.

[ 8 ] Conversely, the southern part has tended to sink to compensate, causing flooding of the Low Countries and Denmark.

The crystalline substrate of the land and absence of soil in many places have exposed mineral deposits of metal ores , such as those of iron , copper , nickel , zinc , silver and gold . The very most valuable of these have been the deposits of iron ore in northwestern Sweden. In the 19th century these deposits prompted the building of a railway from northwestern Sweden to the Norwegian seaport of Narvik so that the iron ore could be exported by ship to places like southern Sweden, Germany, Great Britain and Belgium for smelting into iron and steel. This railway is in a region of Norway and Sweden that otherwise does not have any railways because of the very rugged terrain, mountains and fjords of that part of Scandinavia.

People [ edit ] The first recorded human presence in the southern area of the peninsula and Denmark dates from 12,000 years ago.

[ 9 ] As the ice sheets from the glaciation retreated, the climate allowed a tundra biome that attracted reindeer hunters. The climate warmed up gradually, favouring the growth of evergreen trees first and then deciduous forest which brought animals like aurochs . Groups of hunter-fisher-gatherers started to inhabit the area from the Mesolithic (8200 BC), up to the advent of agriculture in the Neolithic (3200 BC).

The northern and central part of the peninsula is partially inhabited by the Sami , who began to arrive several thousand years after the Scandinavian Peninsula had already been inhabited in the south. In the earliest recorded periods they occupied the arctic and subarctic regions as well as the central part of the peninsula as far south as Dalarna , Sweden. They speak the Sami language , a non- Indo-European language of the Uralic family which is related to Finnish and Estonian . The first inhabitants of the peninsula were the Norwegians [ when?

] on the west coast of Norway, the Danes in what is now southern and western Sweden and southeastern Norway, the Svear in the region around Mälaren as well as a large portion of the present day eastern seacoast of Sweden and the Geats in Västergötland and Östergötland . These peoples spoke closely related dialects of an Indo-European language, Old Norse . Although political boundaries have shifted, descendants of these peoples still are the dominant populations in the peninsula in the early 21st century.

[ 10 ] Political development [ edit ] The Union between Sweden and Norway political borders in 1888 Main article: Union between Sweden and Norway Although the Nordic countries look back on more than 1,000 years of history as distinct political entities, the international boundaries came late and emerged gradually. It was not until the middle of the 17th century that Sweden had a secure outlet on the Kattegat and control of the south Baltic coast. The Swedish and Norwegian boundaries were finally agreed and marked out in 1751. The Finnish-Norwegian border on the peninsula was established after extensive negotiation in 1809, and the common Norwegian-Russian districts were not partitioned until 1826. Even then the borders were still fluid, with Finland gaining access to the Barents Sea in 1920, but ceding this territory to the Soviet Union in 1944.

[ 11 ] Denmark, Sweden and the Russian Empire dominated the political relationships on the Scandinavian Peninsula for centuries, with Iceland , Finland and Norway only gaining their full independence during the 20th century. The Kingdom of Norway –  long held in personal union by Denmark –  fell to Sweden after the Napoleonic Wars and only attained full independence in 1905. Having been an autonomous grand duchy within the Russian Empire since 1809, Finland declared independence during the Soviet revolution of Russia in 1917. Iceland declared its independence from Denmark in 1944, while Denmark was under the occupation of Nazi Germany . Iceland was encouraged to do this by the British and American armed forces that were defending Iceland from Nazi invasion.

The Wehrmacht invaded Norway in 1940 and the German Army occupied all of Norway until May 1945. With the acquiescence of the Kingdom of Sweden , German troops moved from northern Norway, across northern Sweden, into Finland, which had become an ally of Nazi Germany. Then, in the spring of 1941, the German Army and the Finnish Army invaded the Soviet Union together. The Republic of Finland had a grievance against the Soviet Union because the Red Army had invaded southeastern Finland in the Winter War (1939–40) and had taken a large area of territory away from Finland.

Sweden remained a neutral country during the First World War , the Korean War and the Cold War .

In 1945, Norway, Denmark and Iceland were founding members of the United Nations . Sweden joined the U.N. soon after. Finland joined during the 1950s. The first Secretary General of the United Nations , Trygve Lie , was a Norwegian citizen. The second Secretary General of the United Nations, Dag Hammarskjöld , was a Swedish citizen. Thus the people of the Scandinavian Peninsula had a strong influence in international affairs during the 20th century.

In 1949, Norway, Denmark and Iceland became founding members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation for their defence against East Germany, the Soviet Union and all other potential invaders. Finland later joined NATO in 2023, and Sweden in 2024, in response to the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Sweden and Finland joined the European Union in 1995. Norway, however, remains outside the Union.

See also [ edit ] Fennoscandia Baltoscandia References [ edit ] ^ ( Swedish : Skandinaviska halvön ; Norwegian : Den skandinaviske halvøy ( Bokmål ) or Den skandinaviske halvøya ( Nynorsk ); Finnish : Skandinavian niemimaa ) ^ Helle, Knut (2003). "Introduction".

The Cambridge History of Scandinavia . Ed. E. I. Kouri et al. Cambridge University Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-521-47299-7 . p. XXII. "The name Scandinavia was used by classical authors in the first centuries of the Christian era to identify Skåne and the mainland further north which they believed to be an island." ^ Olwig, Kenneth R. "Introduction: The Nature of Cultural Heritage, and the Culture of Natural Heritage—Northern Perspectives on a Contested Patrimony".

International Journal of Heritage Studies , Vol. 11, No. 1, March 2005, p. 3: The very name 'Scandinavia' is of cultural origin, since it derives from the Scanians or Scandians (the Latinized spelling of "Skåninger"), a people who long ago lent their name to all of Scandinavia, perhaps because they lived centrally, at the southern tip of the peninsula." ^ Østergård, Uffe (1997). "The Geopolitics of Nordic Identity – From Composite States to Nation States".

The Cultural Construction of Norden . Øystein Sørensen and Bo Stråth (eds.), Oslo: Scandinavian University Press 1997, 25–71.

^ "Norwegian Summit Elevation Debate" . 6 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2021 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Glossary of American climate terminology in terms of Köppens classification" . Archived from the original on 15 January 2016 . Retrieved 28 April 2010 .

^ Hobbs, Joseph J. and Salter, Christopher L.

Essentials Of World Regional Geography , p. 108.Thomson Brooks/Cole.2005.

ISBN 0-534-46600-1 ^ a b Ostergren, Robert C., Rice, John G.

The Europeans . Guilford Press. 2004.

ISBN 0-89862-272-7 ^ Tilley, Christopher Y.

Ethnography of the Neolithic: Early Prehistoric Societies in Southern Scandinavia , p. 9, Cambridge University Press. 2003.

ISBN 0-521-56821-8 ^ Sawyer, Bridget and Peter (1993).

Medieval Scandinavia: from conversion to Reformation, circa 800–1500 . University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 0-8166-1738-4 .

^ Sømme, Axel, ed. (1961).

The Geography of Norden . Oslo: Den Norske nasjonalkommittee for geographi.

^ NATO.

"Member countries" .

NATO .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Pohjanpalo, Kati; Rolander, Niclas; Laikola, Leo (26 February 2024).

"How Russia Pushed Finland and Sweden to Join NATO" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved 15 July 2024 .

v t e Regions of Europe North Arctic Arctic Circle Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Fennoscandia Baltoscandia Jutland Gotland Sápmi Ingria West Nordic Baltic Baltic Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Iceland Faroe Islands British Isles English Channel Channel Islands Livonia Curonian Spit Nemunas Delta Cap of the North East Danubian countries Prussia Galicia Volhynia Wallachia Transylvania Moldavia Bukovina Bessarabia Livonia Ruthenia Carpathian Ruthenia Donbas Sloboda Ukraine Sambia Peninsula Amber Coast Curonian Spit Izium Trail Lithuania Minor Nemunas Delta Baltic Baltic Sea Vyborg Bay Karelia East Karelia Karelian Isthmus Lokhaniemi Southeastern Balkans Crimea Caucasus Greater Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Kabardia European Russia Arctic Arctic Circle Taman Peninsula Southern Russia Kola Peninsula East European Plain Ryn Desert Cap of the North Central North European Plain Baltic Baltic Sea Alpine states Alpide belt Rhineland Eastphalia Westphalia Prussia Lusatia Bohemia Moravia Silesia Czech Silesia Pomerania Pomerelia Kashubia Bukovina Istria Transdanubia Polesia Germania Germania Slavica West Benelux Low Countries Northwest British Isles English Channel Channel Islands Cotentin Peninsula Doggerland Upper Rhine Plain Upper Rhine Gaul Gascony Normandy Brittany Septimania Batavia Gulf of Lion Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Meseta Central Pyrenees Alpide belt South Italy Po Valley ( Padania ) Italian Peninsula Tuscan Archipelago Insular Italy Aegadian Islands Occitania Iberia Al-Andalus Baetic System Meseta Central Gibraltar Arc Southeastern Epirus Rumelia Balkans Aegean Sea Aegean Islands Attica Boeotia Opuntian Locris Phocis Megaris Peloponnese Chalkidiki Aetolia Gulf of Chania Istria Mediterranean Alpide belt Related Germanic Romance Celtic Slavic countries European Plain Eurasian Steppe Pontic–Caspian steppe Wild Fields Pannonian Basin Great Hungarian Plain Little Hungarian Plain Eastern Slovak Lowland Macaronesia Regions of Europe v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐s5swz
Cached time: 20250817044200
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.762 seconds
Real time usage: 0.978 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4247/1000000
Revision size: 15575/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 182859/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5439/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69568/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.495/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24083910/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  811.917      1 -total
 29.15%  236.680      1 Template:Reflist
 17.65%  143.303      1 Template:Scandinavia
 17.64%  143.184      1 Template:Infobox_peninsulas
 15.65%  127.072     14 Template:Navbox
 15.47%  125.599      1 Template:Infobox
 12.35%  100.273      3 Template:Langx
  8.63%   70.106      1 Template:Short_description
  8.55%   69.386      4 Template:ISBN
  6.02%   48.872      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:26972:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044200 and revision id 1298511069. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scandinavian_Peninsula&oldid=1298511069 " Categories : Peninsulas of Europe Geography of Sweden Geography of Norway Geography of Finland Scandinavia Fennoscandia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2022 This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scandinavian Peninsula 85 languages Add topic

