Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Henri Louis Habert de Montmor 7 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Latina مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Montmor Academy ) Portrait of Henri Louis Habert de Montmor by Nicolas de Plattemontagne , 1659 Henri Louis Habert de Montmort ( c.

1600, Paris – 21 January 1679, Paris ) was a French scholar and man of letters.

Biography [ edit ] Cousin to Philippe Habert and Germain Habert , he became conseiller du roi aged 25, then in 1632 rose to become maître des requêtes , a post he gained thanks to the fortune of his father, treasurer extraordinary for war and treasurer of savings.

He married Henriette-Marie de Buade, sister of Louis de Buade de Frontenac , future governor of New France . He attended on Marie de Gournay and wrote Latin epigrams. In 1634, he was elected an inaugural member of the Académie française , pronouncing its fifth discourse but soon becoming a dissenting member as well as its last inaugural member to die.

A supporter of Descartes , Habert wrote a poem on Cartesian physics entitled De rerum naturae and collected scientific instruments. He was a friend of Mersenne , who dedicated his Harmonie Universelle to Montmor, and a great friend of Pierre Gassendi , who dedicated to him his Life of Tycho Brahe . Gassendi also left him an astronomical telescope he had been left by Galileo . Three years after Gassendi's death, Habert edited his complete works in 6 volumes, writing its Latin preface.

Besides Gassendi, he gathered a salon of savants and philosophers which included, among others: Pierre Daniel Huet , Jean Chapelain , Adrien Auzout , Girard Desargues , Samuel Sorbière , Claude Clerselier , Jacques Rohault , Guy Patin , Frénicle de Bessy , Pierre Petit , Melchisédech Thévenot , Roberval and Huygens .

They were all passionate about scientific experiments and formed in 1657 the "Académie Montmort", which was based in his house.

[ 1 ] It ceased to exist in 1664 as a result of petty squabbles, but  one of the members, Adrien Auzout ,  indicated in a letter of dedication to Louis XIV in 1664 that there was a need for a public observatory, and that there was a group ready to begin its work if it received royal sponsorship. A proposed constitution was circulated to former Academy members but numerous modifications were made before the Académie des sciences was finally created in 1666.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Guirlande de Julie References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Harcourt (1934).

Scientific organization in seventeenth century France . Baltimore: The Williams and Wilkins Company. p. 74.

ISBN 9780846209744 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Académie de Montmort = Academy of Montmort publisher=U of Waterloo Library" . Archived from the original on 6 October 2013 . Retrieved 8 Nov 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Biography on the Galileo Project (in French) Habert de Montmor family (in French) Biography on the Académie française site v t e Académie française seat 35 Henri Louis Habert de Montmor (1634) Louis de Lavau (1679) François Lefebvre de Caumartin (1694) François-Augustin de Paradis de Moncrif (1733) Jean-Armand de Bessuéjouls Roquelaure (1771) Georges Cuvier (1818) André Marie Jean Jacques Dupin (1832) Alfred-Auguste Cuvillier-Fleury (1866) Jules Arsène Arnaud Claretie (1888) Joseph Joffre (1918) Maxime Weygand (1931) Louis Leprince-Ringuet (1966) Yves Pouliquen (2001) Antoine Compagnon (2022) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henri_Louis_Habert_de_Montmor&oldid=1298153027 " Categories : 1600s births 1679 deaths 17th-century French scientists Members of the Académie Française 17th-century French male writers 17th-century French scholars Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 20:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henri Louis Habert de Montmor 7 languages Add topic

