Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Early domestic and agricultural use 1.2 Castle cisterns 2 Present-day use 3 Bathing 4 Toilet cisterns 5 One Million Cisterns Program 6 Notable examples 7 Gallery 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cistern 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Sicilianu සිංහල Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Volapük 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Waterproof receptacle for holding liquids, usually water This article is about water storage tanks. For other uses, see Cistern (disambiguation) .

Portuguese cistern (Mazagan), El Jadida , Morocco (1514) The difference between a cistern and a well is in the source of the water: A cistern collects fresh water where a well draws from groundwater .

A cistern (from Middle English cisterne ; from Latin cisterna , from cista ' box ' ; from Ancient Greek κίστη ( kístē ) ' basket ' [ 1 ] ) is a waterproof receptacle for holding liquids, usually water. Cisterns are often built to catch and store rainwater .

[ 2 ] To prevent leakage, the interior of the cistern is often lined with hydraulic plaster.

[ 3 ] Cisterns are distinguished from wells by their waterproof linings. Modern cisterns range in capacity from a few liters to thousands of cubic meters, effectively forming covered reservoirs .

[ 4 ] Origins [ edit ] Early domestic and agricultural use [ edit ] A modern-day cistern, located in San Francisco, California, for emergency firefighting purposes.

The street-level view of the aforementioned cistern.

Ancient Buddhist rock-hewn cistern at Pavurallakonda in India Waterproof lime plaster cisterns in the floors of houses are features of Neolithic village sites of the Levant at, for instance, Ramad and Lebwe, [ 5 ] and by the late fourth millennium BC, as at Jawa in northeastern Lebanon, cisterns are essential elements of emerging water management techniques in dry-land farming communities.

[ 6 ] Early examples of ancient cisterns, found in Israel , include a significant discovery at Tel Hazor , where a large cistern was carved into bedrock beneath a palace dating to the Late Bronze Age . Similar systems were uncovered at Ta'anakh . In the Iron Age , underground water systems were constructed in royal centers and settlements throughout ancient Israel , marking some of the earliest instances of engineering activity in urban planning .

[ 7 ] The Ancient Roman impluvium , a standard feature of the domus house, generally had a cistern underneath. The impluvium and associated structures collected, filtered, cooled, and stored the water, and also cooled and ventilated the house.

Castle cisterns [ edit ] One of the Cisterns of La Malga , Carthage , 1930 In the Middle Ages, cisterns were often constructed in hill castles in Europe, especially where wells could not be dug deeply enough. There were two types: the tank cistern and the filter cistern. Such a filter cistern was built at the Riegersburg in Austrian Styria , where a cistern was hewn out of the lava rock. Rain water passed through a sand filter and collected in the cistern. The filter cleaned the rain water and enriched it with minerals.

[ citation needed ] Present-day use [ edit ] Concrete cistern Cisterns are commonly prevalent in areas where water is scarce, either because it is rare or has been depleted due to heavy use. Historically, the water was used for many purposes including cooking, irrigation , and washing.

[ 8 ] Present-day cisterns are often used only for irrigation due to concerns over water quality. Cisterns today can also be outfitted with filters or other water purification methods when the water is intended for consumption. It is not uncommon for a cistern to be open in some manner in order to catch rain or to include more elaborate rainwater harvesting systems. It is important in these cases to have a system that does not leave the water open to algae or to mosquitoes , which are attracted to the water and then potentially carry disease to nearby humans.

[ 9 ] One particularly unique modern utilization of cisterns is found in San Francisco , which has historically been subject to devastating fires . As a precautionary measure, in 1850, funds were allocated to construct over 100 cisterns across the city to be utilized in case of fire.

[ 10 ] The city's firefighting network, the Auxiliary Water Supply System (AWSS) maintains a network of 177 independent underground water cisterns, with sizes varying from 75,000 US gallons (280,000 L) to over 200,000 US gallons (760,000 L) depending on location with a total storage capacity of over 11 million U.S. gallons (42 million liters) of water.

[ 11 ] These cisterns are easily spotted at street level with manholes labeled CISTERN S.F.F.D surrounded by red brick circles or rectangles. The cisterns are completely separate from the rest of the city's water supply, ensuring that in the event of an earthquake, additional backup is available regardless of the condition of the city's mainline water system.

[ 12 ] Some cisterns sit on the top of houses or on the ground higher than the house, and supply the running water needs for the house. They are often supplied by wells with electric pumps , or are filled manually or by truck delivery, rather than by rainwater collection. Very common throughout Brazil, for example, they were traditionally made of concrete walls (much like the houses themselves), with a similar concrete top (about 5cm/2 inches thick), with a piece that can be removed for water filling and then reinserted to keep out debris and insects. Modern cisterns are manufactured out of plastic (in Brazil with a characteristic bright blue color, round, in capacities of about 10,000 and 50,000 liters (2641 and 13,208 gallons)). These cisterns differ from water tanks in the sense that they are not entirely enclosed and sealed with one form, rather they have a lid made of the same material as the cistern, which is removable by the user.

[ citation needed ] To keep a clean water supply, the cistern must be kept clean. It is important to inspect them regularly, keep them well enclosed, and to occasionally empty and clean them with a proper dilution of chlorine and to rinse them well. Well water must be inspected for contaminants coming from the ground source. City water has up to 1ppm (parts per million) chlorine added to the water to keep it clean. If there is any question about the water supply at any point (source to tap), then the cistern water should not be used for drinking or cooking. If it is of acceptable quality and consistency, then it can be used for (1) toilets , and housecleaning; (2) showers and handwashing; (3) washing dishes, with proper sanitation methods, [ 13 ] and for the highest quality, (4) cooking and drinking. Water of non-acceptable quality for the aforementioned uses may still be used for irrigation. If it is free of particulates but not low enough in bacteria , then boiling may also be an effective method to prepare the water for drinking.

[ citation needed ] Bermuda's white-stepped roofs for collecting rainwater channeled into cisterns Many greenhouses rely on a cistern to help meet their water needs, particularly in the United States. Some countries or regions, such as Flanders , Bermuda and the U.S. Virgin Islands, have strict laws requiring that rainwater harvesting systems be built alongside any new construction, and cisterns can be used in these cases. In Bermuda, for example, its familiar white-stepped roofs seen on houses are part of the rainwater collection system, where water is channeled by roof gutters to below-ground cisterns.

[ 14 ] Other countries, such as Japan, Germany, and Spain, also offer financial incentives or tax credit for installing cisterns.

[ 15 ] Cisterns may also be used to store water for firefighting in areas where there is an inadequate water supply . The city of San Francisco , notably, maintains fire cisterns under its streets in case the primary water supply is disrupted. In many flat areas, the use of cisterns is encouraged to absorb excess rainwater which otherwise can overload sewage or drainage systems by heavy rains (certainly in urban areas where a lot of ground is surfaced and doesn't let the ground absorb water).

[ citation needed ] Bathing [ edit ] In some southeast Asian countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia showers are traditionally taken by pouring water over one's body with a dipper (this practice comes from before piped water was common). Many bathrooms even in modern houses are constructed with a small cistern to hold water for bathing by this method.

[ citation needed ] Toilet cisterns [ edit ] A traditional gravity toilet tank concluding the flush cycle.

1. float, 2. fill valve, 3. lift arm, 4. tank fill tube, 5. bowl fill tube, 6. flush valve flapper, 7. overflow tube, 8. flush handle, 9. chain, 10. fill line, 11. fill valve shaft, 12. flush tube Basilica Cistern , Istanbul, 138 x 65 meter, 80,000 m 3 ; Justinian I A rain barrel is a form of small cistern The modern toilet utilises a cistern to reserve and hold the correct amount of water required to flush the toilet bowl. In earlier toilets, the cistern was located high above the toilet bowl and connected to it by a long pipe. It was necessary to pull a hanging chain connected to a release valve located inside the cistern in order to flush the toilet. Modern toilets may be close coupled , with the cistern mounted directly on the toilet bowl and no intermediate pipe. In this arrangement, the flush mechanism (lever or push button) is usually mounted on the cistern. Concealed cistern toilets, where the cistern is built into the wall behind the toilet, are also available. A flushing trough is a type of cistern used to serve more than one WC pan at one time. These cisterns are becoming less common, however. The cistern was the genesis of the modern bidet .

[ citation needed ] At the beginning of the flush cycle, as the water level in the toilet cistern tank drops, the flush valve flapper falls back to the bottom, stopping the main flow to the flush tube. Because the tank water level has yet to reach the fill line, water continues to flow from the tank and bowl fill tubes. When the water again reaches the fill line, the float will release the fill valve shaft and water flow will stop.

One Million Cisterns Program [ edit ] In Northeastern Brazil , the One Million Cisterns Program ( Programa 1 Milhão de Cisternas or P1MC ) has assisted local people with water management. The Brazilian government adopted this new policy of rainwater harvesting in 2013.

[ 16 ] The Semi-Arid Articulation (ASA) has been providing managerial and technological support to establish cement-layered containers, called cisterns, to harvest and store rainwater for small farm-holders in 34 territories of nine states where ASA operates ( Minas Gerais , Bahia , Sergipe , Alagoas , Pernambuco , Paraíba , Rio Grande do Norte , Ceará and Piauí ).

[ 17 ] The rainwater falling on the rooftops is directed through pipelines or gutters and stored in the cistern.

[ 18 ] The cistern is covered with a lid to avoid evaporation. Each cistern has a capacity of 16,000 liters. Water collected in it during 3–4 months of the rainy season can sustain the requirement for drinking, cooking, and other basic sanitation purposes for rest of the dry periods. By 2016, 1.2 million rainwater harvesting cisterns were implemented for human consumption alone.

[ 19 ] After positive results of P1MC, the government introduced another program named "One Land, Two Water Program" (Uma Terra, Duas Águas, P1 + 2), which provides a farmer with another slab cistern to support agricultural production.

[ 20 ] Notable examples [ edit ] Basilica Cistern in Istanbul , Turkey Aljibe of the Palacio de las Veletas [ es ] in Cáceres , Spain Portuguese cistern (Mazagan) in El Jadida , Morocco Cistern in Silves, Portugal Matera , southern Italy Asa of Judah built a cistern. The prophet Jeremiah was later thrown in it after prophesying the Babylonian invasion Cistern in Genesis 37:20, 22 Gallery [ edit ] Staircase leading to the lower levels of the underground cistern of Mycenae , Argolis, 13th cent. B.C.

Remains of a Nabataean cistern north of Makhtesh Ramon , southern Israel Cistern known as Tekir ambarı in Silifke , Mersin Province , Turkey Aljibe of the Palacio de las Veletas [ es ] , Cáceres , Spain Cistern in the Peniche Fortress , Peniche , Portugal Sign indicating a cistern in Japan Plastic cistern See also [ edit ] History of water supply and sanitation Ancient water conservation techniques List of Roman cisterns References [ edit ] ^ "cistern".

Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary (9th ed.). 1990.

^ "Cisterns" .

National Geographic Society .

^ Reich, Ronny; Katzenstein, Hannah (1992). "Glossary of Archaeological Terms". In Kempinski, Aharon; Reich, Ronny (eds.).

The Architecture of Ancient Israel . Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society. p. 312.

ISBN 978-965-221-013-5 .

^ "Cistern Design" (PDF) .

North Carolina Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ Robert, Miller (1980). "Water use in Syria and Palestine from the Neolithic to the Bronze Age".

World Archaeology .

11 (3): 331– 341.

doi : 10.1080/00438243.1980.9979771 .

JSTOR 124254 .

^ Roberts, N. (1977). "Water conservation in ancient Arabia".

Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies .

7 : 134– 46.

JSTOR 41223308 .

^ Shiloh, Yigal (1992). "Underground Water Systems in the Land of Israel in the Iron Age". In Kempinski, Aharon; Reich, Ronny (eds.).

The Architecture of Ancient Israel . Jerusalem: Israel Exploration Society. p. 275.

ISBN 978-965-221-013-5 .

^ Mays, Larry; Antoniou, George; Angelakis, Andreas (2013).

"History of Water Cisterns: Legacies and Lessons" .

Water .

5 (4): 1916– 1940.

Bibcode : 2013Water...5.1916M .

doi : 10.3390/w5041916 .

hdl : 2286/R.I.43114 .

^ al-Kibsi, Huda (2007-09-29).

"Yemen takes another look at cisterns" .

Yemen Observer . Archived from the original on 2012-02-08 . Retrieved 2020-05-11 .

^ "CISTERNS - FoundSF" .

www.foundsf.org . Retrieved 2024-08-08 .

^ King, Jason (2017-12-06).

"San Francisco's Hidden Water Tanks" .

Hidden Hydrology . Retrieved 2024-08-08 .

^ "The golden legacy of San Francisco's little hydrant that could" .

FireRescue1 . 2021-05-30 . Retrieved 2024-08-08 .

^ "Naturnaher Umgang mit Regenwasser" (PDF) .

Bayerisches Landesamt für Umwelt LfU (in German) . Retrieved 2020-04-12 .

^ Low, Harry (23 December 2016).

"Why houses in Bermuda have white stepped roofs" .

BBC News . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ Scheidewig.

"Geld sparen durch Zisternennutzung" .

Garten-Zisternen (in German) . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ Lindoso, D.P.; Eiró, F.; Bursztyn, M.; Rodrigues-Filho, S.; Nasuti, S. (2018).

"Harvesting water for living with drought: Insights from the Brazilian human coexistence with semi-aridity approach towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals" .

Sustainability .

10 (3): 622.

Bibcode : 2018Sust...10..622L .

doi : 10.3390/su10030622 .

hdl : 2066/183903 .

^ Pragana, Verônica (2017-12-29).

"Acesso à água para produção é ampliado para mais de 6,8 mil famílias do Semiárido" .

IRPAA - Instituto Regional da Pequena Agropecuária Apropriada .

^ Lindoso, D.P.; Eiró, F.; Bursztyn, M.; Rodrigues-Filho, S.; Nasuti, S. (2018).

"Harvesting water for living with drought: Insights from the Brazilian human coexistence with semi-aridity approach towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals" .

Sustainability .

10 (3): 622.

Bibcode : 2018Sust...10..622L .

doi : 10.3390/su10030622 .

hdl : 2066/183903 .

^ "Programa Cisternas democratiza acesso à água no Semiárido" .

Government of Brazil . 2016.

^ Lindoso, D.P.; Eiró, F.; Bursztyn, M.; Rodrigues-Filho, S.; Nasuti, S. (2018).

"Harvesting water for living with drought: Insights from the Brazilian human coexistence with semi-aridity approach towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals" .

Sustainability .

10 (3): 622.

Bibcode : 2018Sust...10..622L .

doi : 10.3390/su10030622 .

hdl : 2066/183903 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Cisterns at Wikimedia Commons Old House Web - Historic Water Conservation.

v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cistern&oldid=1292063100 " Categories : Reservoirs Water supply infrastructure Water conservation Archaeological features Plumbing Castle architecture Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cistern 45 languages Add topic

