Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Processes of motion 2 Terminus movement and mass balance 3 Landscape and geology 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Glacial motion 5 languages বাংলা Esperanto فارسی Italiano Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geological phenomenon This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Glacial motion" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Termini of the glaciers in the Bhutan - Himalaya . Glacial lakes have been rapidly forming on the surface of the debris-covered glaciers in this region during the last few decades. USGS researchers have found a strong correlation between increasing temperatures and glacial retreat in this region.

Glacial motion is the motion of glaciers , which can be likened to rivers of ice. It has played an important role in sculpting many landscapes. Most lakes in the world occupy basins scoured out by glaciers. Glacial motion can be fast (up to 30 metres per day (98 ft/d), observed on Jakobshavn Isbræ in Greenland ) [ 1 ] or slow (0.5 metres per year (20 in/year) on small glaciers or in the center of ice sheets), but is typically around 25 centimetres per day (9.8 in/d).

[ 2 ] Processes of motion [ edit ] Glacier motion occurs from four processes, all driven by gravity: basal sliding , glacial quakes generating fractional movements of large sections of ice, bed deformation , and internal deformation.

In the case of basal sliding , the entire glacier slides over its bed. This type of motion is enhanced if the bed is soft sediment, if the glacier bed is thawed and if meltwater is prevalent.

Bed deformation is thus usually limited to areas of sliding. Seasonal melt ponding and penetrating under glaciers shows seasonal acceleration and deceleration of ice flows affecting whole icesheets.

[ 3 ] Some glaciers experience glacial quakes —glaciers "as large as Manhattan and as tall as the Empire State Building , can move 10 meters in less than a minute, a jolt that is sufficient to generate moderate seismic waves." [ 4 ] There has been an increasing pattern of these ice quakes - "Quakes ranged from six to 15 per year from 1993 to 2002, then jumped to 20 in 2003, 23 in 2004, and 32 in the first 10 months of 2005." [ 5 ] A glacier that is frozen up to its bed does not experience basal sliding.

Internal deformation occurs when the weight of the ice causes the deformation of ice crystals. This takes place most readily near the glacier bed, where pressures are highest.  There are glaciers that primarily move via sliding, glacial quakes , and others that move almost entirely through deformation.

Terminus movement and mass balance [ edit ] If a glacier's terminus moves forward faster than it melts, the net result is advance.

Glacier retreat occurs when more material ablates from the terminus than is replenished by flow into that region.

Glaciologists consider that trends in mass balance for glaciers are more fundamental than the advance or retreat of the termini of individual glaciers. In the years since 1960, there has been a striking decline in the overall volume of glaciers worldwide. This decline is correlated with global warming .

[ 6 ] As a glacier thins, due to the loss of mass it will slow down and crevassing will decrease.

Landscape and geology [ edit ] Studying glacial motion and the landforms that result requires tools from many different disciplines: physical geography , climatology , and geology are among the areas sometime grouped together and called earth science .

During the Pleistocene (the last ice age ), huge sheets of ice called continental glaciers advanced over much of the earth. The movement of these continental glaciers created many now-familiar glacial landforms . As the glaciers were expanded, due to their accumulating weight of snow and ice, they crushed and redistributed surface rocks, creating erosional landforms such as striations , cirques , and hanging valleys . Later, when the glaciers retreated leaving behind their freight of crushed rock and sand, depositional landforms were created, such as moraines , eskers , drumlins , and kames . The stone walls found in New England (northeastern United States ) contain many glacial erratics , rocks that were dragged by a glacier many miles from their bedrock origin.

At some point, if an Alpine glacier becomes too thin it will stop moving.  This will result in the end of any basal erosion. The stream issuing from the glacier will then become clearer as glacial flour diminishes. Lakes and ponds can also be caused by glacial movement.

Kettle lakes form when a retreating glacier leaves behind an underground chunk of ice. Moraine-dammed lakes occur when a stream (or snow runoff) is dammed by glacial till .

See also [ edit ] Cryoseism Glacial earthquake Glacial lake outburst flood References [ edit ] ^ "Table of fastest glacier speeds at" . Antarcticglaciers.org. 18 November 2014 . Retrieved 2018-08-16 .

^ "Glacier properties Hunter College CUNY lectures" . Archived from the original on 2014-02-22 . Retrieved 2014-02-06 .

^ Surface Melt-Induced Acceleration of Greenland Ice-Sheet Flow Originally published in Science Express on 6 June 2002, Science 12 July 2002: Vol. 297. no. 5579, pp. 218 - 222.

^ Harvard News Office (2006-04-06).

"Global warming yields 'glacial earthquakes' in polar areas" . News.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on 2013-09-27 . Retrieved 2013-09-24 .

^ Glacial earthquakes rock Greenland ice sheet 12:36 24 March 2006, NewScientist.com news service ^ "Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis" . Grida.no. Archived from the original on 2014-09-01 . Retrieved 2013-09-24 .

External links [ edit ] How glaciers form and flow Trends in glacier mass balance Archived 2012-01-02 at the Wayback Machine Animation of glacial advance Advance and retreat of Columbia Glacier in Prince William Sound Physical geography of glacial landforms Links to more glacier resources online Archived 2005-03-08 at the Wayback Machine v t e Glaciers Types Aufeis Cirque Glacieret Ice cap Ice field Ice sheet Ice shelf Ice stream Ledoyom Outlet glacier Piedmont glacier Rock glacier Valley glacier Anatomy Ablation zone Accumulation zone Bergschrund Blue ice Crevasse Dirt cone Firn Glacier cave Glacier head Ice divide Glacier tongue Icefall Lateral moraine Medial moraine Moraine Moulin Penitente Randkluft Sérac Terminus Processes Ablation Accumulation Basal sliding Calving Creep Motion Outburst flood Overdeepening Periglaciation Plucking Retreat Starvation Surge Measurements Ice core Mass balance Volcanic relations Jökulhlaup Subglacial eruption Subglacial volcano Tuya Landforms Erosional Arête Cirque Cirque stairway Crag and tail Finger lake Fjord Glacial horn Glacial lake Glacial striae Hanging valley Nunatak P-form Ribbon lake Roche moutonnée Suncup Tarn Trough lake Trough valley Tunnel valley U-valley Valley step Zungenbecken Depositional Drumlin Erratic block Moraine Moraine-dammed lake Pulju moraine Rogen moraine Sevetti moraine Terminal moraine Till plain Veiki moraine Glaciofluvial Alpentor Diluvium Esker Giant current ripples Kame Kame delta Kettle hole Outwash fan Sandur Urstromtal Related Glaciers on Mars Glaciology Category List Template:Periglacial environment Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Glacial_motion&oldid=1278192536 " Category : Glaciology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2013 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 1 March 2025, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Glacial motion 5 languages Add topic

