Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Evolution of the idea 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Skunkworks project 5 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of research and development project For other uses, see Skunkworks (disambiguation) .

Look up skunkworks in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

A skunkworks project is a project developed by a relatively small and loosely structured group of people, generally within a larger organization such as a corporation , who research and develop a project, often with a very large degree of autonomy, primarily for the sake of radical innovation .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term originated with Lockheed 's World War II Skunk Works project.

Definition [ edit ] The Lockheed Martin Skunk Works hangar in Palmdale, California Everett Rogers defined skunkworks as an "enriched environment that is intended to help a small group of individuals design a new idea by escaping routine organizational procedures." [ 3 ] The term originated during World War II when the P-80 Shooting Star was designed by Lockheed’s Advanced Development Projects Division in Burbank, California, under similar circumstances. A closely guarded incubator was set up in a circus tent next to a plastics factory in Burbank. The strong smells that wafted into the tent made the Lockheed R&D workers think of the foul-smelling  “Skonk Works” factory in Al Capp’s Li'l Abner comic strip.

[ 2 ] The "organizing genius" Clarence "Kelly" Johnson was the first team leader of Skunk Works and designer of the P-80, U-2 , SR-71 and many more. Skunk Works was run using "Kelly's 14 Rules": The Skunk Works manager must be delegated practically complete control of his program in all aspects. He should report to a division president or higher.

Strong but small project offices must be provided both by the military and industry.

The number of people having any connection with the project must be restricted in an almost vicious manner. Use a small number of good people (10% to 25% compared to the so-called normal systems).

A very simple drawing and drawing release system with great flexibility for making changes must be provided.

There must be a minimum number of reports required, but important work must be recorded thoroughly.

There must be a monthly cost review covering not only what has been spent and committed but also projected costs to the conclusion of the program. Don't have the books 90 days late, and don't surprise the customer with sudden overruns.

The contractor must be delegated and must assume more than normal responsibility to get good vendor bids for subcontract on the project. Commercial bid procedures are very often better than military ones.

The inspection system as currently used by the Skunk Works, which has been approved by both the Air Force and Navy, meets the intent of existing military requirements and should be used on new projects. Push more basic inspection responsibility back to subcontractors and vendors. Don't duplicate so much inspection.

The contractor must be delegated the authority to test his final product in flight. He can and must test it in the initial stages. If he doesn't, he rapidly loses his competency to design other vehicles.

The specifications applying to the hardware must be agreed to well in advance of contracting. The Skunk Works practice of having a specification section stating clearly which important military specification items will not knowingly be complied with and reasons therefore is highly recommended.

Funding a program must be timely so that the contractor doesn't have to keep running to the bank to support government projects.

There must be mutual trust between the military project organization and the contractor with very close cooperation and liaison on a day-to-day basis. This cuts down misunderstanding and correspondence to an absolute minimum.

Access by outsiders to the project and its personnel must be strictly controlled by appropriate security measures.

Because only a few people will be used in engineering and most other areas, ways must be provided to reward good performance by pay not based on the number of personnel supervised.

Since its origination with Skunk Works , the term was generalized to apply to similar high-priority R&D projects at other large organizations which feature a small elite team removed from the normal working environment and given freedom from management constraints.

[ 2 ] The term typically refers to technology projects developed in semi-secrecy, such as Google X Lab .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Other famous skunkworks were Microsoft Research, special teams at Boeing, and the lab of about 50 people established by Steve Jobs to develop the Macintosh computer , located behind the Good Earth Restaurant in Cupertino.

[ 3 ] Evolution of the idea [ edit ] The Economist notes that the expectations for the products developed by skunkworks have changed in the 21st century from "something that makes their competitors say 'Wow'" to "something that makes their competitors' customers say 'Wow'". Rather than sequestering skunkworks, the companies now tend to promote communication between them and marketing, design, and accounting departments.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Bootlegging (business) Hacker (programmer subculture) References [ edit ] ^ "Skunk works" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition . reference.com . Retrieved October 12, 2009 .

^ a b c d "Idea: Skunkworks" .

The Economist . August 25, 2008 . Retrieved 2013-03-19 .

^ a b Rogers E. (2003) Diffusion of Innovations , 5th ed., p. 109.

^ Stone, Brad (22 May 2013).

"Inside Google's Secret Lab" .

BusinessWeek . Archived from the original on May 23, 2013 . Retrieved 13 February 2014 .

^ Daft, Richard (2013).

Management . Cengage Learning. p. 361.

ISBN 9781285068657 .

v t e Al Capp 's Li'l Abner Characters and elements Dogpatch Joe Btfsplk Fearless Fosdick Lower Slobbovia Sadie Hawkins Day Salomey Shmoo Adaptations and spin-offs Dogpatch USA 1940 film 1959 film The Flintstone Comedy Show Fred and Barney Meet the Shmoo Kickapoo Joy Juice Shelly Manne album Musical Sadie Hawkins dance Skunkworks project The New Shmoo Related articles Li'l Abner: The Complete Dailies & Color Sundays (reprint book collection) Abbie an' Slats Elliot Caplin Comic Strip Classics double-whammy Frank Frazetta Long Sam Bob Lubbers -nik Shmoo plot Toby Press Basil Wolverton v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Skunkworks_project&oldid=1303802175 " Categories : Innovation Innovation economics Research and development Technological races 1940s neologisms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Skunkworks project 5 languages Add topic

