Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Naturalistic account of inductive inference 3 Knowledge as a natural kind 4 Against conceptual analysis 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Books 5.2 Articles 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Hilary Kornblith 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Hilary Kornblith" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hilary Kornblith is an American philosopher. He is a professor of philosophy at the University of Massachusetts Amherst and one of contemporary epistemology 's most prominent proponents of naturalized epistemology .

Biography [ edit ] Kornblith received his B.A. from State University of New York at Buffalo in 1975 and his PhD from Cornell University in 1980, where he studied under Sydney Shoemaker and Richard Boyd . Before coming to University of Massachusetts in 2003, Kornblith taught at the University of Vermont, where he also chaired the department from 1991 to 1997. His research interests include epistemology , metaphysics and the philosophy of mind . Apart from naturalized epistemology, his most recent work includes the role of intuitions in philosophical theorizing, the conflicts between internalism and externalism in epistemology, and the mental states of non-human animals.

Naturalistic account of inductive inference [ edit ] In his 1993 book Inductive Inference and Its Natural Ground (MIT Press, 1993) Kornblith argues that inductive knowledge is possible by virtue of a fit between our innate psychological capacities and the causal structure of the world. Following Boyd, Kornblith takes the causal structure in question to be a structure of natural kinds , i.e., of homeostatically clustered properties. Such natural kinds provide a natural ground for inductive inference by virtue of the fact that our innate inferential tendencies (as revealed by empirical psychology) are structured in a way that assumes a world of natural kinds, and, thereby, tend to provide us with accurate beliefs about the world in an environment populated by such natural kinds.

Knowledge as a natural kind [ edit ] Kornblith is perhaps most well known for his defense of the view that knowledge is a natural kind. This claim is defended in his book Knowledge and its Place in Nature (Oxford University Press, 2002) where Kornblith argues that knowledge, as it is being studied in cognitive ethology , is a sufficiently robust and inductively valuable category to qualify as a natural kind. Consequently, he claims, the proper method for epistemology is empirical, contrary to what has been assumed by most epistemologists, who traditionally have proceeded by way of conceptual analysis and the probing of intuitions rather than by way of empirical investigation.

Against conceptual analysis [ edit ] Kornblith's case for knowledge as a natural kind provides the basis for his critique of philosophy as conceptual analysis. According to Kornblith, the proper object of philosophical analysis is not concepts, but the phenomena picked out by those concepts. At the same time, Kornblith's work in semantics indicates that his claims about conceptual analysis can, in fact, be motivated independently of his view on knowledge as a natural kind. In particular, he has argued that semantic externalism provides the correct semantics not only for natural kinds but also for artifactual kinds — a claim that, if true, would lend plausibility to the idea that empirical investigation provides a promising philosophical method, quite independently of whether or not a majority of the objects of philosophical inquiry turn out to be natural kinds.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Inductive Inference and its Natural Ground , MIT Press, 1993.

Naturalizing Epistemology , (Ed.), MIT Press, 1985. 2nd Edition, 1994.

Epistemology: Internalism and Externalism , (Ed.), Blackwell Publishers Inc., 2001.

Knowledge and its Place in Nature , Oxford University Press, 2002.

On Reflection , Oxford University Press, 2012.

A Naturalistic Epistemology: Selected Papers , Oxford University Press, 2014.

Second Thoughts and the Epistemological Enterprise , Cambridge University Press, 2019.

Scientific Epistemology, Oxford University Press, 2022.

[ 1 ] Articles [ edit ] "Belief in the Face of Controversy," in T. Warfield and R. Feldman, eds., Disagreement , Oxford University Press, forthcoming.

"What Reflective Endorsement Cannot Do," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 2010, 80 (1), 1-19.

"A Reliabilist Solution to the Problem of Promiscuous Bootstrapping," Analysis , 2009, 69 (2).

"The Naturalistic Project in Epistemology: Where Do We Go from Here?," in C. Mi and R. Chen, (Eds.), Naturalized Epistemology and Philosophy of Science , Rodopi (Amsterdam), 2007, 39-59.

"Naturalism and Intuitions," Grazer Philosophische Studien , 2007, 72, 27-49.

"How to Refer to Artifacts," in E. Margolis and S. Laurence, (Eds.), Creations of the Mind: Essays on Artifacts and their Representation , Oxford University Press, 2007, 138-149.

"The Metaphysical Status of Knowledge," Philosophical Issues , 2007, 17 (1), 145–164.

"Appeals to Intuition and the Ambitions of Epistemology," in S. Hetherington, (Ed.), Epistemology Futures , Oxford University Press, 2006, 10-25.

"The Role of Intuition in Philosophical Inquiry," in M. DePaul and W. Ramsey, (Eds.), Rethinking Intuition , Rowman and Littlefield, 1998, 129-141.

"Referring to Artifacts," Philosophical Review , LXXXIX, 1980, 109-114.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Kornblith, Hilary; Kornblith, Hilary (2022-02-02).

Scientific Epistemology: An Introduction . Oxford, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-760956-9 .

External links [ edit ] Hilary Kornblith's Home Page Complete List of Publications v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii PhilPeople People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hilary_Kornblith&oldid=1278142470 " Categories : Living people 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers University at Buffalo alumni University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty American epistemologists Cornell University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from September 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 18:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hilary Kornblith 1 language Add topic

