Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Proof of the validity of Ijma Toggle Proof of the validity of Ijma subsection 1.1 In the Quran 1.2 In the Hadith (Sayings of the Prophet) 2 Usage Toggle Usage subsection 2.1 Sunni view 2.2 Shia view 2.3 Mu'tazilite view 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ijma 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français ГӀалгӀай 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arabic term for consensus in Islamic jurisprudence Part of a series on Principles of Islamic jurisprudence ( Usul al-Fiqh ) Fiqh Ijazah Ijma Ijtihad Ikhtilaf Istihlal Istihsan Istishab Madhhab Madrasah Maslaha Qiyas Taqlid Taqwa Urf Ahkam Fard Mustahabb Halal Mubah Makruh Haram Baligh Batil Bid'ah Fahisha Fasiq Fitna Fasad Ghibah Gunah Haya Hirabah Islah Istighfar Istishhad Jihad Qasd Sunnah Tafsir Taghut Taqiyya Tawbah Tazkiah Thawab Wasat Legal vocations and titles Caliph Shaykh al-Islām Sayyid Sharif Hadrat Ulama Faqeeh Allamah Mohyeddin Mufti Grand Mufti Hujjat al-Islam Mujtahid Ayatollah Seghatoleslam Marja' Hafiz Hujja Hakim Imam Mullah Mahdi Mawlawi Khatib Khawaja Mawlānā Mawla Mufassir Murshid Pir Wali Akhund Muhaddith Mujaddid Qadi Sheikh Marabout Ulu'l-amr Ustad Mu'azzin Murid Mujahideen Ghazi Shaheed Martyrdom in Islam Hajji Ansar Salaf Sahabah Tabi'un Tabi' al-Tabi'in Da'i al-Mutlaq al-Dawla v t e Ijma ( Arabic : إجماع , romanized : ijmāʿ , lit.

'consensus', IPA: [ʔid͡ʒ.maːʕ] ) is an Arabic term referring to the consensus or agreement of the Islamic community on a point of Islamic law .

Sunni Muslims regard it as one of the secondary sources of Sharia law , after the Qur'an , and the Sunnah .
Exactly what group should represent the Muslim community in reaching the consensus is not agreed on by the various schools of Islamic jurisprudence.

[ 1 ] Some believe it should be the Sahaba (the first generation of Muslims) only; others the consensus of the Salaf (the first three generations of Muslims); or the consensus of Islamic lawyers , [ 2 ] : 472 the jurists and scholars of the Muslim world, i.e. scholarly consensus; or the consensus of all the Muslim world, both scholars and lay people.  The opposite of Ijma (i.e., lack of consensus on a point of Islamic law) is called ikhtilaf .

Proof of the validity of Ijma [ edit ] In the Quran [ edit ] Imam Al-Shafi'i was once approached by an old man who asked for proof of Ijma from the Quran.

Imam Al-Shafi'i went home and recited the whole Quran three times. On the third recitation, he found a verse in Sura An-Nisa ( 4:115 ) "And whoever defies the Messenger after guidance has become clear to them and follows a path other than that of the believers, We will let them pursue what they have chosen, then burn them in Hell—what an evil end!" which mentions the word 'Sabeelil Mu'mineen' (the way of those of faith).

Imam Al-Shafi'i told the old man  this verse was a proof for Ijma from the Quran and he was satisfied.  
Another proof of Ijma from the Quran is in Surah Luqman ( 31:15 ) in which Allah mentions "and follow the way of those who turn to Me in devotion" Another proof of Ijma in the Quran is in Sura an-Nisa ( 4:83 ) in which Allah mentions "And when they hear news of security or fear, they publicize it. Had they referred it to the Messenger or their authorities, those with sound judgment among them would have validated it. Had it not been for Allah’s grace and mercy, you would have followed Satan—except for a few." Some scholars have the opinion that Surah Al Fatihah verse 1:6 and 1:7 which Muslims read at least 17 times a day (in their 5 daily Salah ) is also an indirect support of Ijma.

In the Hadith (Sayings of the Prophet) [ edit ] The hadith of Muhammad which states that "Allah will ensure my ummah will never collude en-masse upon error" [ 3 ] have been mentioned in the books of Tirmidhi , Ibn Majah , Musnah Ahmad , and Darimi . This is often quoted as the primary proof of Ijma from the Hadith from the Sunni View.

Similar hadiths are often cited as a proof for the validity of Ijma as well.

Usage [ edit ] Sunni view [ edit ] Sunni scholars argued that the nature of human society was such that a community could not mistakenly agree that a statement had been made, and further that the consensus of the ummah about its inability to agree upon an error in itself certified the authenticity of this hadith.

[ 4 ] Sunni Muslims and Scholars regard ijmā' as one of the secondary sources of Sharia law , just after the divine revelation of the Qur'an , and the prophetic practice known as Sunnah . Thus so a position of Majority should always be taken into consideration, when a matter cannot be concluded from the Qur'an or Hadith.

There are differing views over who is considered a part of this consensus, whether "the consensus is needed only among the scholars of a particular school, or legists, or legists of an early era, or the Companions, or scholars in general, or the entire Muslim community." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Malik ibn Anas held the view that the religiously binding consensus was only the consensus of Muhammad's companions and the direct successors of those companions in the city of Medina .

[ 11 ] According to Iraqi academic Majid Khadduri , Al-Shafi'i held the view that religiously binding consensus had to include all of the Muslim community in every part of the world, both the religiously learned and the layman.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Thus, if even one individual out of millions would hold a differing view, then consensus would not have been reached. In an attempt to define consensus in a form which was more likely to ever occur, Al-Ghazali expanding on al-Shafi'i's definition to define consensus as including all of the Muslim community in regard to religious principles and restricting the meaning to only the religiously learned in regard to finer details.

[ 14 ] Abu Hanifa , Ahmad ibn Hanbal and Dawud al-Zahiri , on the other hand, considered this consensus to only include the companions of Muhammad, excluding all generations which followed them, in Medina and elsewhere.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Views within Sunni Islam branched off even further in later generations, with Abu Bakr Al Jassas, a hanafi scholar, defining even a simple majority view as constituting consensus and Ibn Taymiyyah restricting consensus to the view of the religiously learned only.

[ 16 ] Muhammad ibn Jarir al-Tabari 's position was not entirely clear, as modern scholarship has attributed to him both the view that consensus means a simple majority, [ 16 ] and that it means only the consensus of the companions of Muhammad.

[ 17 ] According to Ahmad Hasan, the majority view is split between two possibilities: that religiously binding consensus is the consensus of the entire Muslim community, or that religiously binding consensus is just the consensus of the religiously learned.

[ 18 ] The names of two kinds of consensus are: ijma al-ummah - a whole community consensus.

ijma al-aimmah - a consensus by religious authorities.

[ 19 ] Shia view [ edit ] Initially, for Shia the authority of the Imams rendered the consensus as irrelevant. With the development of sectarian communities of Imami Shīa Islam , the question of  guidance and interpretation between different ulama became an issue, however the importance of ijmā never reached the level and certainty it had in Sunni Islam . Later, since Safavid and with the establishment of Usuli school at the turn the 19th century the authority of living mujtahid is accepted, however it dies with him. For Shia, the status of ijmā is ambiguous.

[ 20 ] Mu'tazilite view [ edit ] The Mu'tazilite sect does not consider consensus to be a valid source of law, primarily due to their rationalist criticism of the first generation of Muslims, whom the Mu'tazila viewed as possessing defective personalities and intellects.

[ 21 ] Shi'ite theologians Al-Shaykh Al-Mufid and Sharif al-Murtaza held the Mu'tazilite theologian Nazzam 's book Kitab al-Nakth , in which his student Al-Jahiz reports that he denied the validity of consensus for this reason, in high esteem.

[ 22 ] Modern scholarship has suggested that this interest was motivated by the desire of Shi'ite theologians to impugn the character of the first three leaders of the Rashidun Caliphate , Abu Bakr , Umar and Uthman .

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Part of a series on Islamism Fundamentals Islam History Culture Economics Politics Secularism Ideologies Salafi movement Salafi jihadism International propagation By region Deobandi movement Deobandi jihadism Qutbism Khomeinism Shia Islamism Islamic fundamentalism Islamic nationalism Concepts Apostasy in Islam Takfir Islamic governance Caliphate Islamic democracy Islamic feminism Islamic liberalism Islamic socialism Islamic extremism Islamic state Islamic republic Spread of Islam ( of knowledge ) Jihad Islamic terrorism Jihadism Pan-Islamism Political Islam aspects Post-Islamism Sharia Shura Two-nation theory Ummah Influences Anti-communism Anti-imperialism Anti-Zionism Decolonization Islamic Golden Age Islamic revival Movements Scholastic Barelvi Dawat-e-Islami Deobandi Nurcu Salafism Madkhalism Ahl-i Hadith Sahwa movement Wahhabism International propagation by country/region Political Salafist Front Salafist Call Movement of Society for Peace Hamas Party of Democratic Action Jamaat-e-Islami Millî Görüş Muslim Brotherhood List of Islamic political parties Militant Militant Islamism based in MENA region South Asia Southeast Asia Sub-Saharan Africa Key texts The Caliphate or the Grand Imamate ( Rashīd Rīďha 1922 ) Reconstruction of Religious Thought in Islam ( Iqbal 1930s ) Principles of State and Government ( Asad 1961 ) Ma'alim fi al-Tariq ("Milestones") ( Qutb 1965 ) Islamic Government: Governance of the Jurist ("Velayat-e faqih") ( Khomeini 1970 ) Heads of state Ahmed al-Sharaa Recep Tayyip Erdoğan Ruhollah Khomeini Mohamed Morsi Muammar Gaddafi Alija Izetbegović Ismail Haniyeh Zia ul-Haq Ali Khamenei Omar al-Bashir Mohammed Omar House of Saud House of Thani Hibatullah Akhundzada Sadiq al-Mahdi Key ideologues Abu Hamza al-Masri Rabee al-Madkhali Muhammad Abduh Jamāl al-Dīn al-Afghānī Qazi Hussain Ahmad Muhammad Nasiruddin al-Albani Muhammad Asad Hassan al-Banna Rached Ghannouchi Safwat Hegazi Muhammad Iqbal Ali Khamenei Ruhollah Khomeini Necip Fazıl Kısakürek Abul A'la Maududi Abul Hasan Nadwi Taqi al-Din al-Nabhani Yusuf al-Qaradawi Sayyid Qutb Tariq Ramadan Ata Abu Rashta Rashid Rida Navvab Safavi Ali Shariati Haji Shariatullah Hassan Al-Turabi Ahmed Yassin Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab Criticism Liberal and reform movements within Islam in Europe in North America Khaled Abu al-Fadl Farag Foda Abdelwahab Meddeb Maryam Namazie Maajid Nawaaz Sam Harris Olivier Roy Bassam Tibi Muhammad Sa'id al-Ashmawi Gilles Kepel Shiraz Maher Magnus Ranstorp Related topics Islam and modernity Modernism Islam and other religions Islamophobia Islam portal Politics portal v t e Islamic democracy Deliberative democracy Precedent Qiyas Ijtihad Ikhtilaf Ulema Usul al-fiqh Ashab al-Ijma' References [ edit ] ^ "Ijma" .

Britannica . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi (26 March 2016).

The Laws of Islam (PDF) . Enlight Press.

ISBN 978-0994240989 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2019 . Retrieved 23 December 2017 .

^ Narrated by al-Tirmidhi (4:2167) , ibn Majah (2:1303), Abu Dawood, and others with slightly different wordings.

^ Brown, Jonathan A.C.

(2014).

Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy .

Oneworld Publications . p.

56 .

ISBN 978-1780744209 . Retrieved 4 June 2018 .

^ Forte, David F. (1978).

"Islamic Law; the impact of Joseph Schacht" (PDF) .

Los Angeles International and Comparative Law Review .

1 : 7 . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ See F. Ziadeh, Lawyers and the rule of law, and liberalism in modern Egypt 146-47 (1968) supra note 4, at 118 ^ see generally: K. Faruki, ISLAMIC JURISPRUDENCE 68 (1962) ^ D. Mullah & M. Hidadjatullah, Principles of Mahomedan Law xxii (16th ed. 1968) ^ Aqil Ahmad, A Text Book of Mohammadan Law 15 (4th rev. ed. 1966), supra note 22, at 17 ^ Aziz Ahmad, Islamic Law in Theory and Practice 2 (1956), Supra note 20, at 43 ^ Muhammad Muslehuddin, "Philosophy of Islamic Law and Orientalists," Kazi Publications, 1985, p. 146 ^ Majid Khadduri , Introduction to Al-Shafi'i 's al-Risala , pg.33 ^ Mansoor Moaddel, Islamic Modernism, Nationalism, and Fundamentalism: Episode and Discourse , pg. 32.

Chicago : University of Chicago Press , 2005.

^ Majid Khadduri , Introduction to Al-Shafi'i 's al-Risala , pg.38-39 ^ Muhammad Muslehuddin, "Philosophy of Islamic Law and Orientalists," Kazi Publications, 1985, p. 81 ^ a b c Dr. Mohammad Omar Farooq, "The Doctrine of Ijma: Is there a consensus?," June 2006 ^ Devin J. Stewart , "Muhammad b. Jarir al-Tabari's al-Bayan 'an Usul al-Ahkam and the Genre of Usul al-Fiqh in Ninth Century Baghdad," pg. 339. Taken from Abbasid Studies: Occasional Papers of the School of Abbasid Studies, Cambridge, 6–10 January 2002 . Edited by James Montgomery.

Leuven : Peeters Publishers and the Department of Oriental Studies, 2004.

^ Ahmad Hasan, "The Doctrine of Ijma': A Study of the Juridical Principle of Consensus," New Delhi, India: Kitab Bhaban, 2003, pg.81 ^ Corinna Standke (30 August 2008).

Sharia - The Islamic Law . GRIN Verlag. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 978-3-640-14967-4 . Retrieved 9 June 2012 .

^ Sami Zubaida (8 July 2005).

Law And Power In The Islamic World . I.B.Tauris. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-85043-934-9 . Retrieved 9 June 2012 .

^ a b Devin Stewart, "Muhammad b. Dawud al-Zahiri's Manual of Jurisprudence." Taken from Studies in Islamic Law and Society Volume 15: Studies in Islamic Legal Theory. Edited by Bernard G. Weiss . Pg. 107.

Leiden : 2002.

Brill Publishers .

^ Josef van Ess, Das Kitab al-nakt des Nazzam und seine Rezeption im Kitab al-Futya des Gahiz. Gottingen: Vandenhoeck & Reprecht, 1971.

External links [ edit ] The Doctrine of Ijma': Is there a consensus?

by Dr. Mohammad Omar Farooq v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases National Germany Latvia Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hq25j
Cached time: 20250816163138
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.446 seconds
Real time usage: 0.581 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1742/1000000
Revision size: 12365/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 86703/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1353/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61781/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.280/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14627447/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  461.834      1 -total
 25.74%  118.853      1 Template:Reflist
 17.04%   78.683      1 Template:Langx
 15.21%   70.259      1 Template:Usul_al-fiqh
 15.05%   69.501      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.62%   67.541      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.83%   59.234      1 Template:Short_description
  9.52%   43.957      1 Template:Islamic_philosophy
  9.00%   41.558      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.53%   30.158      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:165910:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816163138 and revision id 1290398480. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ijma&oldid=1290398480 " Categories : Arabic words and phrases in Sharia Islamic jurisprudence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Pages with Arabic IPA This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 15:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ijma 43 languages Add topic

