Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 An 'end' 2 Life stances and intrinsic value 3 Quantity Toggle Quantity subsection 3.1 Intrinsic aliquidism 3.1.1 Intrinsic multism 3.1.2 Unspecified aliquidism 3.2 Total intrinsic value 4 Concrete and abstract Toggle Concrete and abstract subsection 4.1 Concrete 4.2 Continuum 5 Types of intrinsic value Toggle Types of intrinsic value subsection 5.1 Absolute and relative 5.2 Positive and negative 6 Similar concepts 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Intrinsic value (ethics) 12 languages العربية Català Eesti Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Polski Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethical or philosophic value that an object has "in itself" or "for its own sake" For intrinsic value of animals, see Intrinsic value (animal ethics) .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e In ethics , intrinsic value is a property of anything that is valuable on its own. Intrinsic value is in contrast to instrumental value (also known as extrinsic value), which is a property of anything that derives its value from a relation to another intrinsically valuable thing.

[ 1 ] Intrinsic value is always something that an object has "in itself" or "for its own sake", and is an intrinsic property . An object with intrinsic value may be regarded as an end , or in Kantian terminology , as an end-in-itself .

[ 2 ] The term "intrinsic value" is used in axiology , a branch of philosophy that studies value (including both ethics and aesthetics ). All major normative ethical theories identify something as being intrinsically valuable. For instance, for a virtue ethicist , eudaimonia (human flourishing, sometimes translated as "happiness") has intrinsic value, whereas things that bring you happiness (such as having a family) may be merely instrumentally valuable. Similarly, consequentialists may identify pleasure, the lack of pain, and/or the fulfillment of one's preferences as having intrinsic value, making actions that produce them merely instrumentally valuable. On the other hand, proponents of deontological ethics argue that morally right actions (those that respect moral duty to others) are always intrinsically valuable, regardless of their consequences.

Other names for intrinsic value are terminal value , essential value , principle value , or ultimate importance .

[ 3 ] An 'end' [ edit ] In philosophy and ethics, an end , or telos , is the ultimate goal in a series of steps. For example, according to Aristotle the end of everything we do is happiness. It is contrasted to a means , which is something that helps you achieve that goal. For example, money or power may be said to be a means to the end of happiness. Nevertheless, some objects may be ends and means at the same time.

End is roughly similar, and often used as a synonym, for the following concepts: Purpose or aim : in its most general sense the anticipated result that guides action .

Goal or objective consists of a projected state of affairs a person or a system plans or intends to achieve or bring about.

Life stances and intrinsic value [ edit ] Further information: Life stance § Values and purposes This table attempts to summarize the main intrinsic value of different life stances and other views, although there may be great diversity within them: Life stance and other views Main intrinsic value Moral nihilism None Humanism human flourishing Environmentalism life flourishing Feminism gender equality Multiculturalism flourishing of cultural values beyond one's own Hedonism pleasure Eudaemonism human flourishing Utilitarianism utility (classically and usually, happiness or pleasure and absence of pain) Rational deontologism virtue or duty Rational eudaemonism, or tempered Deontologism both virtue and happiness combined [ 4 ] Situational ethics love Christianity Imago Dei Judaism Tikkun olam Buddhism Enlightenment and Nirvana Quantity [ edit ] There may be zero, one, or several things with intrinsic value.

[ 5 ] Intrinsic nihilism , or simply nihilism (from Latin nihil , 'nothing') holds that there are zero quantities with intrinsic value.

Intrinsic aliquidism [ edit ] Further information: Ethic value equality Intrinsic aliquidism, or simply aliquidism (from Latin aliquid , 'something') holds that there is one or more. This may be of several quantities, ranging from one single to all possible.

[ 6 ] Intrinsic monism (from Greek monos , 'single') holds that there is one thing with intrinsic value. This view may hold only life stances that accept this object as intrinsically valuable.

Intrinsic multism (from Latin multus , 'many') holds that there are many things with intrinsic value. In other words, this view may hold the instrinsic values of several life stances as intrinsically valuable.

Intrinsic panism (from Greek pan , 'everything') holds that everything has an intrinsic value.

Among followers of aliquidistic life stances regarding more than one thing as having intrinsic value, these may be regarded as equally intrinsically valuable or unequally so. However, in practice, they may in any case be unequally valued because of their instrumental values resulting in unequal whole values .

Intrinsic multism [ edit ] This view may hold the intrinsic values of several life stances as intrinsically valuable. Note the difference between this and regarding several intrinsic values as more or less instrumentally valuable , since intrinsic monistic views also may hold other intrinsic values than their own chosen one as valuable, but then only to the degree other intrinsic values contribute indirectly to their own chosen intrinsic value.

The most simple form of intrinsic multism is intrinsic bi-ism (from Latin two ), which holds two objects as having intrinsic value, such as happiness and virtue .

Humanism is an example of a life stance that accepts that several things have intrinsic value.

[ 5 ] Multism may not necessarily include the feature of intrinsic values to have a negative side—e.g., the feature of utilitarianism to accept both pain and pleasure as of intrinsic value, since they may be viewed as different sides of the same coin.

Unspecified aliquidism [ edit ] Main article: Ietsism Ietsism ( Dutch : ietsisme , 'somethingism') is a term used for a range of beliefs held by people who, on the one hand, inwardly suspect—or indeed believe—that there is “more between Heaven and Earth” than we know about, but on the other hand do not accept or subscribe to the established belief system , dogma or view of the nature of God offered by any particular religion.

In this sense, it may roughly be regarded as aliquidism, without further specification. For instance, most life stances include the acceptance of "there is something, some meaning of life, something that is an end-in-itself or something more to existence, and it is", assuming various objects or "truths", while ietsism, on the other hand, accepts "there is something", without further assumption to it.

Total intrinsic value [ edit ] The total intrinsic value of an object is the product of its average intrinsic value, average value intensity , and value duration . It may be either an absolute or relative value . The total intrinsic value and total instrumental value together make the total whole value of an object.

Concrete and abstract [ edit ] The object with intrinsic value, the end , may be both a concrete object or an abstract object .

Concrete [ edit ] In the case where concrete objects are accepted as ends , they may be either single particulars or generalized to all particulars of one or more universals . However, the majority of life stances choose all particulars of universals as end s. For instance, Humanism does not assume individual humans as ends but rather all humans of humanity .

Continuum [ edit ] When generalizing multiple particulars of a single universal it may not be certain whether the end is actually the individual particulars or the rather abstract universal. In such cases, a life stance may rather be a continuum between having a concrete and abstract end .

This may render life stances of being both intrinsic multistic and intrinsic monistic at the same time. Such a quantity contradiction , however, may be of only minor practic significance, since splitting an end into many ends decreases the whole value but increases the value intensity .

Types of intrinsic value [ edit ] Absolute and relative [ edit ] There may be a distinction between absolute and relative ethic value regarding intrinsic value.

Relative intrinsic value is subjective, depending on individual and cultural views and/or the individual choice of life stance.

Absolute intrinsic value , on the other hand, is philosophically absolute and independent of individual and cultural views, as well as independent on whether it discovered or not what object has it.

There is an ongoing discussion on whether an absolute intrinsic value exists at all, for instance in pragmatism . In pragmatism, John Dewey 's [ 7 ] empirical approach did not accept intrinsic value as an inherent or enduring property of things. He saw it as an illusory product of our continuous ethic valuing activity as purposive beings. When held across only some contexts, Dewey held that goods are only intrinsic relative to a situation. In other words, he only believed in relative intrinsic value, but not any absolute intrinsic value. He held that across all contexts, goodness is best understood as instrumental value, with no contrasting intrinsic goodness. In other words, Dewey claimed that anything can only be of intrinsic value if it is a contributory good.

Positive and negative [ edit ] There may be both positive and negative value regarding intrinsic value, wherein something of positive intrinsic value is pursued or maximized, while something of negative intrinsic value is avoided or minimized. For instance, in utilitarianism , pleasure has positive intrinsic value and suffering has negative intrinsic value.

Similar concepts [ edit ] Intrinsic value is mainly used in ethics, but the concept is also used in philosophy, with terms that essentially may refer to the same concept.

As "ultimate importance" it is what a sentient being relates to in order to constitute a life stance .

It is synonymous with the meaning of life , as this may be expressed as what is meaningful or valuable [ 8 ] in life. However, meaning of life is more vague, with other uses as well.

Summum bonum is basically its equivalent in medieval philosophy .

The relative intrinsic value is roughly synonymous with the ethic ideal .

Inherent value may be regarded as a first grade instrumental value when personal experience is the intrinsic value.

See also [ edit ] Animal ethics Autotelic Extrinsic value (ethics) Intrinsic value (finance) Ophelimity Value system Value theory References [ edit ] ^ Environmental Values Archived 2017-03-06 at the Wayback Machine , based on Singer, Peter "The Environmental Challenge", Ian Marsh, edit., Melbourne, Australia: Longman Cheshire, 1991, 0-582-87125-5. pp. 12 ^ Ivo de Gennaro, Value: Sources and Readings on a Key Concept of the Globalized World , BRILL, 2012, p. 138.

^ See also Robert S. Hartman 's use of the term regarding the science of value .

^ The Catholic Encyclopedia 6 . Universal Knowledge Foundation. 1913. p. 640.

^ a b Haught, James A.

"Meaning and Nothingness: A personal journey" .

Free Inquiry .

22 (1).

Council for Secular Humanism . Archived from the original on 2008-05-03 . Retrieved 2008-04-09 .

^ “Metaphysical Nihilism or Aliquidism? Against an Empty World,” presented at the Kentucky Philosophical Association , Transylvania University . Lexington, KY. 28 October 2006.

^ Theory of Valuation by John Dewey ^ Puolimatka, Tapio; Airaksinen, Timo (2002).

"Education and the Meaning of Life" (PDF) .

Philosophy of Education .

University of Helsinki . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26 . Retrieved 2007-07-26 .

External links [ edit ] Zimmerman, Michael J.

"Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Value" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Discussion of different types of values v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐dwj2h
Cached time: 20250818144646
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.523 seconds
Real time usage: 0.652 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1638/1000000
Revision size: 13895/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 59062/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2558/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 40528/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.355/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16574348/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  545.555      1 -total
 21.91%  119.504      2 Template:Lang
 21.71%  118.423      1 Template:Reflist
 19.23%  104.907      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 16.02%   87.382      1 Template:Cite_journal
 14.29%   77.944      1 Template:Short_description
 11.85%   64.648      1 Template:Ethics
 11.40%   62.194      1 Template:Navbox
  7.10%   38.744      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.69%   31.020     22 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3464610:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818144646 and revision id 1255900361. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intrinsic_value_(ethics)&oldid=1255900361 " Categories : Concepts in ethics Axiological theories Value (ethics) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 7 November 2024, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intrinsic value (ethics) 12 languages Add topic

