Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Pastoral strategy 3 Mariology of Canisius 4 Veneration 5 Legacy 6 Works 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Canisius 35 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Boarisch Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Multilingual Wikisource Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch Jesuit Catholic priest (1521–1597) Not to be confused with Peter Kániš , 15th-century Taborite theologian.

Saint Peter Canisius SJ Doctor of the Church 2nd Apostle of Germany [ 1 ] Born 8 May 1521 Nijmegen , Duchy of Guelders , Habsburg Netherlands Died 21 December 1597 (1597-12-21) (aged 76) Fribourg , Switzerland Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 1864, Rome by Pope Pius IX Canonized 21 May 1925, Rome by Pope Pius XI Major shrine College of St. Michael Fribourg, Switzerland Feast 21 December; 27 April (General Roman Calendar, 1926–1969; current SJ calendar) Patronage Catholic press, Germany Signature Part of a series on the Counter-Reformation Faith, or The Church Triumphant (1665) by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Catholic Reformation and Revival Councils and documents Council of Trent Exsurge Domine Decet Romanum Pontificem Confutatio Augustana Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Roman Catechism Nova ordinantia eclessiastica Defensio Tridentinæ fidei Regnans in Excelsis Ascendente Domino Immensa aeterni Dei Unigenitus Politics Diet of Worms Catholic League Augsburg Interim European wars of religion Dalecarlian rebellions German Peasants' War Wars of Kappel Tyrone's Rebellion Olav Engelbrektsson 's rebellion Pilgrimage of Grace Bigod's rebellion Dacke War Schmalkaldic War Prayer Book Rebellion French Wars of Religion Strasbourg Bishops' War Thirty Years' War Bohemian Revolt Rohan Wars Jacobite rising of 1689 Spirituality Confraternities Devotionalism French school of spirituality Gregorian chant Ignatian spirituality Interior life Mariology Popular piety Rosary Sacred Heart Spanish mysticism Tridentine Mass Transubstantiation Works of mercy Art Schools Mannerism Polyphony Baroque Flemish Baroque Spanish Golden Age Artists Federico Barocci Gian Lorenzo Bernini Caravaggio Annibale Carracci Ludovico Carracci Anthony van Dyck Domenico Fontana Artemisia Gentileschi Luca Giordano El Greco Jacobus de Kerle Giovanni Lanfranco Orlando di Lasso Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina Mattia Preti Andrea Pozzo Scipione Pulzone Guido Reni Jusepe de Ribera Peter Paul Rubens Vincenzo Ruffo Tintoretto Titian Georges de La Tour Juan de Valdés Leal Francisco de Zurbarán People People Teresa of Ávila Thomas More Clergy Robert Bellarmine Charles Borromeo Joseph Calasanz Peter Canisius Erasmus Ignatius of Loyola Johann Eckk John Fisher John of the Cross Lawrence of Brindisi Péter Pázmány Philip Neri Matteo Ricci Cardinal Richelieu Francis de Sales Francisco Suárez Francis Xavier Monarchs Charles V Ferdinand II Leopold I Louis XIV Mary I Maximilian I Catherine de' Medici Philip II Sigismund I Sigismund III William V Popes Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Pius III Paul III Julius III Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Inquisition Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith Excommunicable offences Index Librorum Prohibitorum Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition Philosophy and education Collegium Germanicum et Hungaricum Pontifical Gregorian University Second scholasticism School of Salamanca Molinism Religious orders Augustinian Recollects Barnabites Capuchins Discalced Augustinians Discalced Carmelites Jesuits Oratorians Piarists Theatines Ursulines Related topics Catholic literary revival History of Germany Holy Roman Empire Nationalism in the Middle Ages Nation-building Proto-Protestantism Reformation Renaissance Catholic Church portal v t e Part of a series on the Society of Jesus History Regimini militantis Congregatio de Auxiliis Suppression Ratio Studiorum Hierarchy General Congregation Superior General Spirituality Spiritual Exercises Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Training Magis Works Educational institutions List of sites Jesuit Refugee Service Bollandists Notable Jesuits Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Peter Faber Pedro Arrupe John Berchmans Francisco Suárez Robert Bellarmine Peter Canisius Edmund Campion Pierre-Jean De Smet Augustin Barruel Aloysius Gonzaga Frederick Copleston Karl Rahner Pope Francis Jesuit saints Jesuit theologians Jesuit philosophers v t e Peter Canisius SJ ( Dutch : Pieter Kanis ; 8 May 1521 – 21 December 1597) was a Dutch Jesuit priest known for his strong support for the Catholic faith during the Protestant Reformation in Germany , Austria , Bohemia , Moravia , Switzerland and the British Isles . The restoration of the Catholic Church in Germany is largely attributed to the work there of the Jesuits, which Canisius led. He is venerated in the Catholic Church as a saint and as a Doctor of the Church .

Life [ edit ] He was born in 1521 in Nijmegen in the Duchy of Guelders , which, until 1549, was part of the Habsburg Netherlands within the Holy Roman Empire and is now the Netherlands . His father was a wealthy burgermeister , Jacob Kanis. His mother, Ægidia van Houweningen, died shortly after Peter's birth. He was sent to study at the University of Cologne , where he earned a master's degree in 1540, at the age of 19.

[ 2 ] While there, he met Peter Faber , one of the founders of the Society of Jesus . Through him, Canisius became the first Dutchman to join the newly founded Society of Jesus in 1543. Canisius finished his studies in theology and then was ordained in 1546.

[ 3 ] Through his preaching and writings, Peter Canisius became one of the most influential Catholics of his time. He supervised the founding and maintenance of the first German-speaking Jesuit colleges, often with little resources at hand. At the same time he preached in the city and vicinity, and debated and taught in the university.

[ 2 ] Canisius exerted a strong influence on the Emperor Ferdinand I . The king's eldest son (later Maximilian II ) appointed Phauser, a married priest, to the office of court preacher. Canisius warned Ferdinand I, verbally and in writing, and opposed Phauser in public disputations. Maximilian was obliged to dismiss Phauser and, on this account, the rest of his life he harboured a grudge against Canisius.

[ 2 ] In 1547 he attended several sessions of the Council of Trent .

[ 4 ] Canisius was an influential teacher and preacher, especially through his "German Catechism ", a book which defined the basic principles of Catholicism in the German language and made them more accessible to readers in German-speaking countries. He was offered the post of Bishop of Vienna in 1554, but declined in order to continue his traveling and teachings. He did, however, serve as administrator of the Diocese of Vienna for one year, until a new bishop was appointed for it.

He moved to Germany, where he was one of the main Catholic theologians at the Colloquy of Worms in 1557, and later served as the main preacher in the Cathedral of Augsburg from 1559 to 1568, where he strongly witnessed to his faith on three or four occasions each week. Canisius was renowned as a popular preacher.

[ 4 ] In 1562 he founded what was to become the University of Innsbruck .

[ 5 ] In Christ The King – Lord of History by Anne W. Carroll, it states: Protestantism had made much headway in Germany because many intellectuals had adopted it, making Catholicism appear to be the religion of the ignorant. By his debates, his writing and his teachings, Peter showed that Catholicism was thoroughly rational, that the Protestant arguments were not convincing.

By his efforts, Peter won Bavaria (southern Germany) and the Rhineland (central Germany) back to the Catholic Church. He also won converts in Austria , Hungary , Bohemia and Poland . Poland had become largely Protestant, but thanks to the efforts of Peter and other Jesuits, it returned to the Church and is still Catholic today despite Communist persecution.

By the time he left Germany, the Society of Jesus in Germany had evolved from a small band of priests into a powerful tool of the Counter-Reformation . Canisius spent the last twenty years of his life in Fribourg , where he founded the Jesuit Collège Saint-Michel , which trained generations of young men for careers and future university studies.

[ 6 ] During this period, Canisius's work "was translated into almost every language of Europe"; [ 7 ] for example, his Summa Doctrinae Christianae (1554) was translated into Scots by Adam King and published in 1588.

[ 8 ] In 1591, at the age of 70, Canisius suffered a stroke which left him partially paralyzed, but he continued to preach and write with the aid of a secretary until his death in Fribourg.

[ 9 ] He was initially buried at the Church of St. Nicholas . His remains were later transferred to the church of the Jesuit College , which he had founded and where he had spent the last year of his life, and interred in front of the main altar of the church; the room he occupied during those last months is now a chapel open for the veneration of the faithful.

[ 10 ] Pastoral strategy [ edit ] Canisius lived during the height of the Protestant Reformation and dedicated much of his work to the clarification of the Catholic faith in light of the emergence of the new Protestant doctrines. His lasting contribution is his three catechisms , which he published in Latin and German and which became widespread and popular in Catholic regions.

[ 4 ] In his fight with German Protestantism , he requested much more flexibility from Rome, arguing: If you treat them right, the Germans will give you everything. Many err in matters of faith, but without arrogance. They err the German way, mostly honest, a bit simple-minded, but very open for everything Lutheran. An honest explanation of the faith would be much more effective than a polemical attack against reformers.

[ 11 ] He rejected attacks against John Calvin and Philip Melanchthon : "With words like these, we don't cure patients, we make them incurable." [ 12 ] Mariology of Canisius [ edit ] Main article: Mariology of the saints Canisius taught that, while there are many roads leading to Jesus Christ, for him the veneration of the Blessed Virgin Mary was the best.

[ 13 ] His sermons and letters document a clear preoccupation with Marian veneration .

[ 13 ] Under the heading "prayer" he explains the Hail Mary prayer as the basis for Catholic Marian piety.

[ 14 ] Less known are his Marian books, in which he published prayers and contemplative texts. To the Hail Mary he added the sentence, Holy Mary, Mother of God, pray for us sinners , which was not at that time commonly recited after the Angelic Salutation.

[ 15 ] Eleven years later it was included in the Catechism of the Council of Trent of 1566.

Canisius published an applied Mariology for preachers, in which Mary is described in tender and warm words.

[ 16 ] He actively promoted the sodalities of our Lady and the rosary associations.

Theologically, Canisius defended Catholic Mariology in his 1577 book, De Maria Virgine Incomparabili et Dei Genitrice Sacrosancta Libri Quinque . The book was ordered by Pope Pius V to present a factual presentation of the Catholic Marian teachings in the Bible, the early Christians, the Church Fathers and contemporary theology. Canisius explains and documents Church teachings through the ages regarding the person and character of Mary, her virtues and youth.

[ 17 ] He traces historical documents about the perpetual virginity of Mary, and her freedom from sin.

[ 18 ] He explains the dogma of "Mother of God" with numerous quotations from the fathers after the Council of Ephesus . He shows that Church teaching has not changed.

[ 19 ] He answers the sola scriptura arguments of Protestants by analyzing the biblical basis for Mariology.

[ 20 ] Book five explains the Catholic view of the assumption as living faith for centuries, supported by most prominent Church writers.

From today's perspective, Canisius clearly erred in some of his sources, but, because of his factual analysis of original sources, it is considered as representing one of the best theological achievements in the 16th century.

[ 21 ] Veneration [ edit ] Statue of St Peter Canisius in Fribourg Canisius was beatified by Pope Pius IX in 1864, and later canonized and declared a Doctor of the Church on 21 May 1925 by Pope Pius XI .

[ 22 ] His feast day was included in the General Roman Calendar in 1926, for celebration on 27 April. In the liturgical reform of 1969, it was moved to 21 December, the anniversary of his death, the normal day for celebrating a saint's entry into heaven (although it is still kept by the Society of Jesus on 27 April).

Legacy [ edit ] Relics associated with St Peter Canisius In recognition there of Canisius' early work in the establishment of Jesuit education, there are multiple educational institutions named for him. Among them is the Canisius College for seminarians in Vienna , Austria, the first institution named for him, as well as Canisius College, a Jesuit secondary school in his hometown of Nijmegen and the alma mater of Peter Hans Kolvenbach , a recent Superior General of the Society of Jesus . Another Canisius University , a university, and Canisius High School , a secondary school, are located in Buffalo, New York .

[ 23 ] Furthermore, a Jesuit-run Canisius Kolleg can be found in Berlin, Germany. There are also two secondary schools named after Canisius, Kolese Kanisius ( Collegium Canisianum or Canisius College ), in Jakarta, Indonesia , and Canisianum Roman Catholic HS in the Omusati Region of Namibia, Africa.

[ 24 ] In addition, there is a primary school: Basisschool Petrus Canisius in Puth in Limburg , Netherlands. In 1850 the Canisius Hospital was established on the corner of the Houtmarkt and the Pauwelstraat in Nijmegen. In 1974 it merged with Wilhelmina Hospital located at the Weg door Jonkerbos in Nijmegen, to become Canisius-Wilhelmina Ziekenhuis .

[ 25 ] The Apologetisch Vereniging St. Petrus Canisius (St. Peter Canisius Association for Apologetics ) was founded in the Netherlands in 1904 to defend the Catholic Church against socialism and liberalism .

Peter Canisius House is located in Pymble on Sydney's North Shore. It specialises in residential individual and group retreats and gatherings for schools, not-for-profit, and private business sectors.

From the middle of the nineteenth century on German churchmen, including Michael Cardinal von Faulhaber (1869–1952), considered Canisius as a new "Apostle of Germany", a successor of Saint Boniface , for his importance for German Christianity.

[ 26 ] Works [ edit ] (1555) Summa doctrinae christianae ( A Summary of Christian Teachings ) The longer version (with quotes from authority): Vol. 1: Faith, Hope, Charity, the Precepts of the Church Vol. 2: The Sacraments Vol. 3: Christian Justification, good works, Cardinal Virtues, Gifts and Fruits of the Holy Ghost, Eight Beatitudes, Evangelical Counsels, etc.

(1556) Catechismus minor ( A Smaller Catechism ) (1558) Parvus catechismus catholicorum ( A Little Catechism for Catholics ) (1577) De Maria virgine incomparabili ( On the Incomparable Virgin Mary ) See also [ edit ] Saint Peter Canisius, patron saint archive References [ edit ] ^ Pabel, Hilmar M. (April 2014).

"Peter Canisius and the Protestants" .

Journal of Jesuit Studies .

1 (3): 373– 399.

doi : 10.1163/22141332-00103002 .

S2CID 170005470 .

^ a b c Braunsberger, Otto. "Blessed Peter Canisius" , The Catholic Encyclopedia , vol 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911.

^ Rochford, SJ, Tom. "Peter Canisius", Jesuits Global ^ a b c "Saint Peter Canisius" .

Franciscan Media . 21 December 2015. Archived from the original on 11 August 2018 . Retrieved 20 August 2018 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: University of Innsbruck" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ The college was lost by the Jesuits at the time of their Suppression in 1773. First under the administration of the local diocese and then of the canton , the college, now known as St. Michael College, continues to exist as a coeducational preparatory institution.

^ Law LLD, Thomas Graves.

Catholic Tractes of the Sixteenth Century 1573-1600 (PDF) .

William Blackwood and Sons . pp. lvi.

^ Law LLD, Thomas Graves (1901).

Catholic Tractes of the Sixteenth Century (1573-1600) (PDF) . William Blackwood and Sons. pp. xxvi.

^ Ghezzi, Bert.

"St. Peter Canisius, SJ (1521-1597)" , ignatianspirituality.com' accessed 27 June 2017.

^ "CSM - l'Historique" (in French). Archived from the original on 9 September 2013 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Burg, Kontroverslexikon, Essen, 1903, p. 224 ^ Burg 225 ^ a b Stegmüller, 1052) ^ Streicher, 95,245,267 ^ Cf. his Catechism of 1555 (Streicher Catechismi, I, 12). One form or another of the sentence was already present, though, in certain Italian writings from the previous century (cf. Herbert Thurston, "Hail Mary", Catholic Encyclopedia (New York: Robert Appleton, 1910), vol. 7, New Advent .

^ Meditaciones, 1591-1593 ^ in Book One ^ in Book Two ^ Book Three ^ Book Four ^ Otto Stegmüller 1063 ^ *"Lives of the Saints, For Every Day of the Year" edited by Rev. Hugo Hoever, S.O.Cist., PhD, New York: Catholic Book Publishing Co., 1955, p. 164 ^ Canisius University, Buffalo, New York, United States ^ "Quality of education slides" . Archived from the original on 23 February 2018 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ CWZ ^ Heid, Stefan. "Der vereinnahmte Bonifatius: vom apostolischen Völkermissionar zum "Apostel der Deutschen" ".

Trierer Theologische Zeitschrift (in German).

116 : 238– 72.

Sources [ edit ] Petrus Canisius, (Ed. Bourassee) De Maria Virgine Incomparabili et Dei Genitrice Sacrosancta Libri , 1577 Quinque. Paris, 1862.

Petrus Canisius, (ed. Friedrich Streicher), Meditaciones seunatae in evangelicas lectiones , 1591–1593, (Fribourg, Switzerland, 1939, 1955) In addition to the listed institutions worldwide, there is Peter Canisius College in Sydney, Australia (suburb of Pymble at 102 Mona Vale Road).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petrus Canisius .

Parvus catechismus catholicorum (in English) Archived 26 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine Website of Canisius Kolleg Berlin, Germany (in German) v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Links to related articles v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Saints Biography Catholicism Netherlands Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Artists ULAN People Netherlands BMLO Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐brh95
Cached time: 20250817044251
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.767 seconds
Real time usage: 0.947 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4351/1000000
Revision size: 19094/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 279455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 65980/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104969/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.414/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18667436/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  669.521      1 -total
 16.72%  111.911      1 Template:Reflist
 13.46%   90.147      1 Template:Infobox_saint
 13.04%   87.288      1 Template:Infobox
 11.43%   76.545      1 Template:Catholic_Counter-Reformation
 11.23%   75.156      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.09%   74.241      1 Template:Langx
  9.82%   65.780      2 Template:Cite_journal
  8.74%   58.538      1 Template:Short_description
  8.17%   54.703      1 Template:Infobox_person Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1801702:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044251 and revision id 1303617884. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Canisius&oldid=1303617884 " Categories : 1521 births 1597 deaths 16th-century Christian saints 16th-century Dutch Jesuits 16th-century Dutch Roman Catholic theologians Beatifications by Pope Pius IX Canonizations by Pope Pius XI Clergy from Nijmegen Doctors of the Church Dutch male non-fiction writers Dutch Roman Catholic saints Dutch Roman Catholic writers Jesuit saints Jesuit theologians Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Biography with signature Articles with hCards Articles containing Dutch-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 01:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Canisius 35 languages Add topic

