Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic properties 2 Examples 3 Spin and statistics 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Bosonic field 3 languages Català Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of quantum field In quantum field theory , a bosonic field is a quantum field whose quanta are bosons ; that is, they obey Bose–Einstein statistics . Bosonic fields obey canonical commutation relations , as distinct from the canonical anticommutation relations obeyed by fermionic fields .

Examples include scalar fields , describing spin-0 particles such as the Higgs boson , and gauge fields, describing spin-1 particles such as the photon .

Basic properties [ edit ] Free (non-interacting) bosonic fields obey canonical commutation relations. Those relations also hold for interacting bosonic fields in the interaction picture, where the fields evolve in time as if free and the effects of the interaction are encoded in the evolution of the states. It is these commutation relations that imply Bose–Einstein statistics for the field quanta.

Examples [ edit ] Examples of bosonic fields include scalar fields , gauge fields , and symmetric 2-tensor fields , which are characterized by their covariance under Lorentz transformations and have spins 0, 1 and 2, respectively. Physical examples, in the same order, are the Higgs field, the photon field, and the graviton field. Of the last two, only the photon field can be quantized using the conventional methods of canonical or path integral quantization. This has led to the theory of quantum electrodynamics , one of the most successful theories in physics.

Quantization of gravity , on the other hand, is a long-standing problem that has led to development of theories such as string theory and loop quantum gravity .

Spin and statistics [ edit ] The spin–statistics theorem implies that quantization of local, relativistic field theories in 3+1 dimensions may lead either to bosonic or fermionic quantum fields, i.e., fields obeying commutation or anti-commutation relations, according to whether they have integer or half-integer spin, respectively. Thus bosonic fields are one of the two theoretically possible types of quantum field, namely those corresponding to particles with integer spin.

In a non-relativistic many-body theory, the spin and the statistical properties of the quanta are not directly related. In fact, the commutation or anti-commutation relations are assumed based on whether the theory one intends to study corresponds to particles obeying Bose–Einstein or Fermi–Dirac statistics. In this context the spin remains an internal quantum number that is only phenomenologically related to the statistical properties of the quanta. Examples of non-relativistic bosonic fields include those describing cold bosonic atoms, such as Helium-4.

Such non-relativistic fields are not as fundamental as their relativistic counterparts: they provide a convenient 're-packaging' of the many-body wave function describing the state of the system, whereas the relativistic fields described above are a necessary consequence of the consistent union of relativity and quantum mechanics.

See also [ edit ] Quantum triviality Composite field Auxiliary field References [ edit ] Edwards, David A. (1981). "Mathematical foundations of quantum field theory: Fermions, gauge fields, and supersymmetry part I: Lattice field theories".

International Journal of Theoretical Physics .

20 (7). Springer Nature: 503– 517.

Bibcode : 1981IJTP...20..503E .

doi : 10.1007/bf00669437 .

ISSN 0020-7748 .

S2CID 120108219 .

Hoffmann, Scott E.; Corney, Joel F.; Drummond, Peter D. (18 July 2008). "Hybrid phase-space simulation method for interacting Bose fields".

Physical Review A .

78 (1). American Physical Society (APS): 013622.

arXiv : 0803.1887 .

Bibcode : 2008PhRvA..78a3622H .

doi : 10.1103/physreva.78.013622 .

ISSN 1050-2947 .

S2CID 17652144 .

Peskin, M and Schroeder, D. (1995).

An Introduction to Quantum Field Theory , Westview Press.

Srednicki, Mark (2007).

Quantum Field Theory Archived 2011-07-25 at the Wayback Machine , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-86449-7 .

Weinberg, Steven (1995).

The Quantum Theory of Fields , (3 volumes) Cambridge University Press.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bosonic_field&oldid=1181144754 " Category : Quantum field theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 21 October 2023, at 04:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bosonic field 3 languages Add topic

