Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Science career Toggle Science career subsection 2.1 Professorship 3 Consulting engineer 4 Death 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard Threlfall 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English chemist and engineer Sir Richard Threlfall GBE FRS Sir Richard Threlfall (14 August 1861 – 10 July 1932) [ 1 ] was an English chemist and engineer, he established the School of Physics at the University of Sydney and made important contributions to military science during World War I . He was elected a fellow of the Royal Society in 1899, and was created KBE in 1917 and GBE in 1927.

Early life and education [ edit ] Threlfall was a son of Richard Threlfall of Hollowforth, near Preston, Lancashire . He was educated at Clifton College , where he was captain of the Rugby XV, and shot in the Rifle VIII.

[ 2 ] Going on to Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge , he represented his University at Rugby and also at rifle shooting. He distinguished himself as a speaker at the union, and did a remarkable course, taking a first class in the first part of the natural science tripos, and a first in both physics and chemistry in the second part.

[ 3 ] He married Evelyn Agnes, daughter of John Forster-Baird, one of four sisters who all married distinguished men, one of whom was Bernhard Wise .

Science career [ edit ] After graduating he was appointed a demonstrator in the Cavendish laboratory , where he did successful original research work and showed himself to be an able teacher. He also studied at Strasburg University and for a short period was a successful university coach. He lost two-thirds of his fingers in an explosion while he was carrying nitroglycerine , but in spite of this continued to be an excellent manipulator.

Professorship [ edit ] In 1886 Threlfall was appointed professor of physics at the University of Sydney and founded the school. He had no building and little apparatus when he began his work, but in 1888 a physical laboratory was completed and the necessary appliances were purchased. He carried out his duties with energy and also found time for research. An early invention was the rocking microtome , an instrument which proved to be of great value in biological study. Another was a quartz thread balance which enabled him to obtain great accuracy in his comparison of values for gravity at different places.

After the discovery new waves by Heinrich Hertz , Threlfall suggested in a 1890 oral discussion that "Signaling, for instance, might be accomplished secretly by means of a sort of electric ray flasher", thus predicting yet-uninvented radio communications.

In 1896 he was president of a royal commission on the carriage of coal in ships. He obtained leave of absence in 1898 to inquire into methods of teaching electrical subjects in Europe, but on his return resigned his chair as from 31 December 1898, as circumstances had made it necessary that he should live in England.

Consulting engineer [ edit ] Threlfall now became a consulting engineer and established a high reputation as an electro-chemist, combining chemical insight with the aptitude of an engineer. He joined the firm of Albright and Wilson , large producers of phosphorus , at Oldbury, and continued his connection until the time of his death. His experience in this direction was to prove of the greatest service to his country during the 1914–18 war, particularly in connexion with smoke screens and tracer bullets. In July 1915 he invented the 'Threlfallite' hand grenade , consisting of a cylindrical tin containing white phosphorus, paraffin, oil and petrol. Originally designed as an incendiary device to destroy long grass in front of the trenches that gave cover to enemy raiding parties, it also had a useful smoke-producing effect and was used at the Battle of Loos .

[ 4 ] In 1915 he was on the Board of Invention and Research , in 1916 he joined the advisory council for scientific and industrial research and also the munitions inventions board. In 1917 he became a member of the chemical warfare committee, and in 1918 he joined the food preservation board. An organization which carried on its work after the war, the fuel research board was joined by him in 1917 and he became its chairman in 1923.

Though his main work was in industrial chemistry he kept up his interest in pure science, and was a frequent attendant at meetings of the Royal Society of London.

Death [ edit ] Threlfall died on 10 July 1932 and is buried in a family tomb at St Anne's Church , Woodplumpton , Lancashire. He was survived by four sons and two daughters. He was the author of On Laboratory Arts , published in 1898, and of papers in scientific journals.

References [ edit ] ^ Serle, Percival (1949).

"Threlfall, Richard" .

Dictionary of Australian Biography . Sydney: Angus & Robertson .

^ "Clifton College Register" Muirhead, J.A.O. p42: Bristol; J.W Arrowsmith for Old Cliftonian Society; April, 1948 ^ "Threlfall, Richard (THRL880R)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Brig-Gen Sir James E. Edmonds , History of the Great War: Military Operations, France and Belgium, 1915 , Vol II, London: Macmillan, 1928/Imperial War Museum & Battery Press, 1995, ISBN 0-89839-219-5/Uckfield: Naval & Military Press, 2009, ISBN 978-1-84574-719-0, pp. 160–1.

External links [ edit ] Works by Richard Threlfall at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Richard Threlfall at the Internet Archive Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany People Trove Australia Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Threlfall&oldid=1294800250 " Categories : 1861 births 1932 deaths British chemists Fellows of the Royal Society Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire Academic staff of the University of Sydney Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge People educated at Clifton College English emigrants to colonial Australia X-ray pioneers Australian physicists Cambridge University R.U.F.C. players Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2014 Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Articles with hCards Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Threlfall 1 language Add topic

