Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historic confusions 2 Corpus Toggle Corpus subsection 2.1 Works 2.2 Dating 2.3 Authorship 3 Thought Toggle Thought subsection 3.1 Mystical Theology 4 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 4.1 Eastern Christianity 4.2 Latin Christianity 5 Modern appraisal 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Sources 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Greek editions 10.2 Modern translations 10.3 Secondary sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite 35 languages Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian theologian Not to be confused with Dionysius the Areopagite .

"Pseudo-Dionysius" redirects here. For the chronicle once attributed to Dionysius Telmaharoyo, see Zuqnin Chronicle .

Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Born unknown (5th–6th century AD) Died unknown (5th–6th century AD) Other names "Dionysius" "Denys" "(Saint) Dionysius the Areopagite" (mistaken identification) Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy School Neoplatonism Christian philosophy Main interests Apophatic theology Christian angelology Christian mysticism Notable works De Coelesti Hierarchia Notable ideas Seven Archangels Hierarchy of angels Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (or Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite ) was a Greek [ 1 ] author, Christian theologian and Neoplatonic philosopher of the late 5th to early 6th century, who wrote a set of works known as the Corpus Areopagiticum or Corpus Dionysiacum . Through his writing in Mystical Theology , he has been identified as the "progenitor of apophatic or negative theology ." [ 2 ] Dionysius the Areopagite The author pseudepigraphically identifies himself in the corpus as "Dionysios", portraying himself as Dionysius the Areopagite , the Athenian convert of Paul the Apostle mentioned in Acts 17:34 .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ note 1 ] Historic confusions [ edit ] In the early sixth century, a series of writings of a mystical nature , employing Neoplatonic language to elucidate Christian theological and mystical ideas, was ascribed to the Areopagite.

[ 5 ] They have long been recognized as pseudepigrapha , [ citation needed ] and their author is now called "Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite".

Corpus [ edit ] Works [ edit ] The surviving corpus comprises: [ 6 ] Divine Names ( Περὶ θείων ὀνομάτων ); Celestial Hierarchy ( Περὶ τῆς οὐρανίου ἱεραρχίας ) ; Ecclesiastical Hierarchy ( Περὶ τῆς ἐκκλησιαστικῆς ἱεραρχίας ); Mystical Theology ( Περὶ μυστικῆς θεολογίας ), "a brief but powerful work that deals with negative or apophatic theology and in which theology becomes explicitly ' mystical ' for the first time in history"; [ 7 ] Ten epistles .

Seven other works are mentioned repeatedly by pseudo-Dionysius in his surviving works, and are presumed either to be lost [ 8 ] or to be fictional works mentioned by the Areopagite as a literary device to give the impression to his sixth-century readers of engaging with the surviving fragments of a much larger first-century corpus of writings.

[ 9 ] These seven other works are: Theological Outlines ( Θεολογικαὶ ὑποτυπώσεις ), Symbolic Theology ( Συμβολικὴ θεολογία ), On Angelic Properties and Orders ( Περὶ ἀγγελικῶν ἰδιοτήτων καὶ τάξεων ), On the Just and Divine Judgement ( Περὶ δικαίου καὶ θείου δικαστηρίου ), On the Soul ( Περὶ ψυχῆς ), On Intelligible and Sensible Beings, [ note 2 ] On the Divine Hymns .

[ note 3 ] Dating [ edit ] In the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy Dionysius twice seems to allude to the recitation of the Creed in the course of the liturgy ( EH 3.2 and 3.III.7). It is often asserted that Peter the Fuller first mandated the inclusion of the Nicene Creed in the liturgy in 476, thus providing an earliest date for the composition of the Corpus. Bernard Capelle argues that it is far more likely that Timothy, patriarch of Constantinople , was responsible for this liturgical innovation, around 515—thus suggesting a later date for the Corpus.

[ 10 ] It is often suggested that because Dionysius seems to eschew divisive Christological language, he was probably writing after the Henoticon of Zeno was in effect, sometime after 482. It is also possible that Dionysius eschewed traditional Christological formulae in order to preserve an overall apostolic ambience for his works, rather than because of the influence of the Henoticon . Also, given that the Henoticon was rescinded in 518, if Dionysius was writing after this date, he may have been untroubled by this policy.

[ 10 ] In terms of the latest date for the composition of the Corpus , the earliest datable reference to Dionysius' writing comes in 528, the year in which the treatise of Severus of Antioch entitled Adversus apologiam Juliani was translated into Syriac —though it is possible the treatise may originally have been composed up to nine years earlier.

[ 11 ] Another widely cited latest date for Dionysius' writing comes in 532, when, in a report on a colloquy held between two groups ( dyophysite and miaphysite ) debating the decrees of the Council of Chalcedon , Severus of Antioch and his miaphysite supporters cited Dionysius' Fourth Letter in defence of their view.

[ 12 ] It is possible that pseudo-Dionysius was himself a member of this group, though debate continues over whether his writings do in fact reveal a miaphysite understanding of Christ.

[ 13 ] It seems likely that the writer was located in Syria, as revealed, for example, by the accounts of the sacramental rites he gives in The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy , which seem only to bear resemblance to Syriac rites.

[ 14 ] Authorship [ edit ] The author pseudonymously identifies himself in the corpus as "Dionysios", portraying himself as the figure of Dionysius the Areopagite , the Athenian convert of Paul the Apostle mentioned in Acts 17:34.

[ 15 ] [ note 1 ] Various legends existed surrounding the figure of Dionysius, who became emblematic of the spread of the gospel to the Greek world. A tradition quickly arose that he became the first bishop of Cyprus or of Milan, or that he was the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews; according to Eusebius, he was also said to be the first bishop of Athens. It is therefore not surprising that that author of these works would have chosen to adopt the name of this otherwise briefly mentioned figure.

[ 16 ] The authorship of the Dionysian Corpus was initially disputed; Severus and his party affirmed its apostolic dating, largely because it seemed to agree with their Christology. This dating was disputed by Hypatius of Ephesus , who met the monophysite party during the 532 meeting with Emperor Justinian I ; Hypatius denied its authenticity on the ground that none of the Fathers or Councils ever cited or referred to it. Hypatius condemned it along with the Apollinarian texts, distributed during the Nestorian controversy under the names of Pope Julius and Athanasius, which the monophysites entered as evidence supporting their position.

[ 17 ] The first defense of its authenticity is undertaken by John of Scythopolis , whose commentary, the Scholia ( c.

540 ), on the Dionysian Corpus constitutes the first defense of its apostolic dating, wherein he specifically argues that the work is neither Apollinarian nor a forgery, probably in response both to monophysites and Hypatius—although even he, given his unattributed citations of Plotinus in interpreting Dionysius, might have known better.

[ 18 ] Dionysius' authenticity is criticized later in the century, and defended by Theodore of Raithu ; and by the 7th century, it is taken as demonstrated, affirmed by both Maximus the Confessor and the Lateran Council of 649 . From that point until the Renaissance, the authorship was less questioned, though Thomas Aquinas , [ 19 ] Peter Abelard and Nicholas of Cusa expressed suspicions about its authenticity; their concerns were generally ignored.

[ 20 ] The Florentine humanist Lorenzo Valla (d. 1457), in his 1457 commentaries on the New Testament , did much to establish that the author of the Corpus Areopagiticum could not have been St. Paul's convert, though he was unable to identify the actual historical author.

William Grocyn pursued Valla's lines of textual criticism, and Valla's critical viewpoint of the authorship of the highly influential Corpus was accepted and publicized by Erasmus from 1504 onward, for which he was criticized by Catholic theologians. In the Leipzig disputation with Martin Luther , in 1519, Johann Eck used the Corpus , specifically the Angelic Hierarchy , as argument for the apostolic origin of papal supremacy, pressing the Platonist analogy, "as above, so below".

During the 19th century Catholic historians too came generally to accept that the author must have lived after the time of Proclus . The author became known as 'Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite' only after the philological work of J. Stiglmayr and H. Koch, whose papers, published independently in 1895, demonstrated the thoroughgoing dependence of the Corpus upon Proclus.

[ 20 ] Both showed that Dionysius had used, in his treatise on evil in Chapter 4 of The Divine Names , the De malorum subsistentia of Proclus.

Dionysius' identity is still disputed. Corrigan and Harrington find pseudo-Dionysius to be most probably...

... a pupil of Proclus, perhaps of Syrian origin, who knew enough of Platonism and the Christian tradition to transform them both. Since Proclus died in 485, and since the first clear citation of Dionysius' works is by Severus of Antioch between 518 and 528, then we can place Dionysius' authorship between 485 and 518-28.

[ note 4 ] Ronald Hathaway provides a table listing most of the major identifications of Dionysius: e.g., Ammonius Saccas , Pope Dionysius of Alexandria , Peter the Fuller , Dionysius the Scholastic, Severus of Antioch , Sergius of Reshaina , unnamed Christian followers of everyone from Origen to Basil of Caesarea , Eutyches to Proclus .

[ 21 ] In the past half-century, Alexander Golitzin, Georgian academician Shalva Nutsubidze and Belgian professor Ernest Honigmann have all proposed identifying pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite with Peter the Iberian .

[ 22 ] A more recent identification is with Damascius , the last scholarch of the Neoplatonic Academy of Athens .

[ 23 ] There is therefore no current scholarly consensus on the question of pseudo-Dionysius' identification.

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy claims: It must also be recognized that "forgery" is a modern notion. Like Plotinus and the Cappadocian Fathers before him, Dionysius does not claim to be an innovator, but rather a communicator of a tradition.

[ note 4 ] Others scholars such as Bart D. Ehrman disagree, see for example Forged . While pseudo-Dionysius can be seen as a communicator of tradition, he can also be seen as a polemicist, who tried to alter Neo-Platonic tradition in a novel way for the Christian world that would make notions of complicated Divine Hierarchies more of an emphasis than notions of direct relationship with the figure of Christ as Mediator.

[ 25 ] Some modern scholars, including recent contributor Evangelos Nikitopoulos , [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Romanian professor Dumitru Stăniloae , [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and English translator John Parker , [ 30 ] argue in favor of a traditional composition date in the late first to early second century. Their case draws upon harmonizations with alleged anachronisms, [ 31 ] contemporary lexical parallels and idiosyncrasies, [ 32 ] and internal literary and historical consistency.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Most significant are the pre-Proclean references to the corpus by figures such as John Chrysostom and Juvenal of Jerusalem , and especially by members of the Alexandrian tradition — Pantaenus , Origen , Gregory Nazianzus , and Jerome —who demonstrate familiarity with the Corpus Dionysiacum .

[ 35 ] Even Proclus himself, who admitted to "summariz[ing] the observations rightly made... by some of our predecessors" [ 36 ] such as Origen, [ 37 ] appears to cite an external source for the euphemism "flowers and supersubstantial lights" [ 38 ] —a phrase explicitly found only in Dionysius.

[ 39 ] Linguistic analyses further suggest that nearly two-thirds of Dionysius' terminology lacks precedent in any known pre-sixth-century Christian or Neoplatonic text, while another quarter can be traced to ante-Nicene philosophical sources such as Platonic dialogues.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Nikitopoulos argues that this primitive theological vocabulary aligns with the intellectual profile reconstructed for another second-century Eastern convert with a pagan Greek education: Justin Martyr .

[ 44 ] Thought [ edit ] Dionysius attributed his inspiration to pseudo-Hierotheus, professing that he was writing to popularize the teachings of his master.

[ 45 ] Pseudo-Hierotheus was the author of "The book of Hierotheus on the hidden mysteries of the house of God" .  Pseudo-Hierotheus is believed to be the fifth century Syrian monk Stephen Bar Sudhaile , [ 46 ] [ 47 ] a pantheistic writer.

The works of Dionysius are mystical , and show strong Neoplatonic influence . For example, he uses Plotinus ' well-known analogy of a sculptor cutting away that which does not enhance the desired image, and shows familiarity with Proclus . He also shows influence from Clement of Alexandria , the Cappadocian Fathers , Origen , and others.

Mystical Theology [ edit ] According to pseudo-Dionysius, God is better characterized and approached by negations than by affirmations .

[ 7 ] All names and theological representations must be negated. According to pseudo-Dionysius, when all names are negated, "divine silence, darkness, and unknowing" will follow.

[ 7 ] Influence [ edit ] Eastern Christianity [ edit ] His thought was initially used by Miaphysites to back up parts of their arguments but his writings were eventually adopted by other church theologians, primarily due to the work of John of Scythopolis and Maximus the Confessor in producing an orthodox interpretation.

[ 48 ] Writing a single generation at most after Dionysius, perhaps between 537 and 543, [ 49 ] John of Scythopolis composed an extensive set ( c.

600 ) [ 50 ] of scholia (that is, marginal annotations) to the works of Dionysius.

These were in turn prefaced by a long prologue in which John set out his reasons for commenting on the corpus. All Greek manuscripts of the Corpus Areopagiticum surviving today stem from an early sixth-century manuscript containing John's Scholia and Prologue — so John of Scythopolis had an enormous influence on how Dionysius was read in the Greek-speaking world.

[ 51 ] Theologians such as John of Damascus and Germanus I of Constantinople also made ample use of Dionysius' writing.

The Dionysian writings and their mystical teaching were universally accepted throughout the East, amongst both Chalcedonians and non-Chalcedonians.

Gregory Palamas , for example, in referring to these writings, calls the author, "an unerring beholder of divine things".

The Corpus is also present in Syriac and Armenian versions, the former of which, by Sergius of Reshaina in the early sixth century, serves as a terminus ante quem for the dating of the original Greek.

Latin Christianity [ edit ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e The first notice of Dionysius in the West comes from Pope Gregory I , who probably brought a codex of the Corpus Areopagitum back with him on his return from his mission as papal legate to the Emperor in Constantinople in c.

585 . Gregory refers occasionally in his writings to Dionysius, although Gregory's Greek was probably not adequate to fully engage with Dionysius's work.

[ 52 ] In the seventh and eighth centuries, Dionysius was not widely known in the West, aside from a few scattered references.

The real influence of Dionysius in the West began with the gift in 827 of a Greek copy of his works by the Byzantine emperor Michael II to the Carolingian emperor Louis the Pious . King Louis in turn gave the manuscript to the Abbey of St. Denis near Paris [ 53 ] where, in about 838, Dionysius' works were translated into Latin for the first time by Hilduin , abbot of the monastery. It may well have been Hilduin himself who promoted his work (and his abbey) by developing the legend (which would be widely accepted during subsequent centuries), that Denis was the same person as Dionysius the Areopagite of Acts 17.34, and that he had traveled to Rome and then was commissioned by the Pope to preach in Gaul , where he was martyred.

[ 54 ] Hilduin's translation is almost unintelligible.

[ 53 ] About twenty years later, a subsequent Carolingian Emperor, Charles the Bald , requested the Irishman John Scotus Eriugena to make a fresh translation. He finished this in 862.

[ 53 ] This translation itself did not widely circulate in subsequent centuries. Moreover, although Eriugena's own works, such as the Homily on the Prologue of St John , show the influence of Dionysian ideas, these works were not widely copied or read in subsequent centuries.

[ 53 ] The Benedictine monasticism that formed the standard monasticism of the eighth to eleventh centuries, therefore, in general paid little attention to Dionysius.

In the twelfth century, greater use gradually began to be made of Dionysius among various traditions of thought: Among Benedictines (especially at the Abbey of Saint-Denis), greater interest began to be shown in Dionysius. For example, one of the monks of Saint Denys, John Sarrazin , wrote a commentary on The Celestial Hierarchy in 1140, and then in 1165 made a translation of the work.

[ 53 ] Also, Suger , abbot of Saint-Denis from 1122 to 1151, drew on Dionysian themes to explain how the architecture of his new 'Gothic' abbey church helped raise the soul to God.

[ 55 ] Among the Canons Regular .

Hugh of Saint Victor edited two commentaries on The Celestial Hierarchy between 1125 and 1137, later revising and combining them as one.

Richard of Saint Victor was familiar with Dionysius through Hugh. Through Hugh, others became exposed to Dionysian thought, including Thomas Gallus and Gilbert de la Porrée .

[ 53 ] In the Cistercian tradition , it seems that early writers such as Bernard of Clairvaux , William of St Thierry and Aelred of Rievaulx were not influenced by Dionysian thought. Among second-generation Cistercians, Isaac of Stella clearly shows the influence of Dionysian ideas.

[ 53 ] It is in the Schools, though, that the twelfth-century growth in influence of Dionysius was truly significant. There are few references to Dionysius in scholastic theology during the tenth and eleventh centuries. At the beginning of the twelfth century, though, the masters of the Cathedral school at Laon , especially Anselm of Laon , introduced extracts from John Scotus Eriugena's Commentary on St John into the Sentences and the Glossa Ordinaria . In this manner, Dionysian concepts found their way into the writing of Peter Lombard and others.

[ 53 ] Bonaventure uses images and even direct quotations from Dionysius' Mystical Theology in the last chapter of his famous work Itinerarium Mentis in Deum (The Soul's Journey into God).

[ 56 ] During the thirteenth century, the Franciscan Robert Grosseteste made an important contribution by bringing out between 1240 and 1243 a translation, with commentary, of the Dionysian corpus.

[ 53 ] Soon after, the Dominican Albertus Magnus did likewise. The thirteenth-century Parisian corpus provided an important reference point by combining the "Old Translation" of John Scotus Eriugena with the "New Translation" of John Sarrazin , along with glosses and scholia by Maximus the Confessor , John of Scythopolis and others, as well as the "Extracts" by Thomas Gallus , and several commentaries such as John Scotus Eriugena, John Sarrazin and Hugh of Saint Victor on The Celestial Hierarchy .

[ 57 ] It quickly became common to make reference to Dionysius.

Thomas Aquinas wrote an explanation for several works, and cites him over 1700 times.

[ 58 ] Bonaventure called him the "prince of mystics".

[ citation needed ] Martin Luther's ambiguous stance toward Dionysius was notable. The reformer at times seemed to reject him entirely, at other times to appreciate him, and it is well know the passage from " On the Babylonian Captivity of the Church " (1520) in which he says: "I completely disapprove of giving so much credence to this Dionysius, whoever he was, since there is practically no solid learning to be found in him. Take, for instance, the fabrications about the angels in his Celestial Hierarchy (a book much sweated over by people of a curious or superstitious temperament). By what authority or reason, I ask, does he prove any of this? If you read and evaluate this honestly, are not all these things his own dreamlike musings? On the other hand, in his Mystical Theology (so highly praised by some of the most ignorant theologians), he is most dangerous, speaking more like a Platonist than a Christian".

Notwithstanding, in other works, he did not hesitate to cite Dionysius as a reference, such as in his commentary on Psalm 18 contained in the lectures " Dictata super Psalterium " (1513–1515), in which he states: “Therefore, blessed Dionysius teaches that one must enter into anagogical darkness and ascend by way of denials. For thus God is hidden and beyond understanding." [ 59 ] Thus, Luther did not reject Dionysian thought; on the contrary, being someone who so often cited Bernand of Clairvaux , Bonaventure and Johannes Tauler , he was strongly influenced by dionysianism through the German medieval mystics , as shown by Johannes Zachhuber.

[ 59 ] This influence is evident in the fact that the reformer published the mystical writing “ Theologia Germanica ”, which is clearly inspired by Dionysian thought, and it is also visible in a key concept of Luther's theology: the Deus absconditus (hidden God), an essential doctrine of negative theology, as this method is distinctly endorsed by the reformer, who, like Dionysius and the other mystics, believed in the insufficiency of human reason (philosophy and positive theology) to reach God. His criticisms, therefore, are not aimed at Dionysius’s doctrine itself, but at its “abuse” (from Luther’s perspective) by his opponents, such as Johann Eck , a Roman Catholic apologist who cited Dionysius’s writings to justify the papacy and the view that ordination is a sacrament , against whom the reformer debated between 1519 and 1520 , as well the Anabaptists , his adversaries in later disputes.

It was subsequently in the area of mysticism that Dionysius, especially his portrayal of the via negativa , was particularly influential. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries his fundamental themes were hugely influential on thinkers such as Marguerite Porete , Meister Eckhart , Johannes Tauler , John of Ruusbroec , the author of The Cloud of Unknowing (who made an expanded Middle English translation of Dionysius' Mystical Theology ), Jean Gerson , Nicholas of Cusa , Denis the Carthusian , Julian of Norwich , Hendrik Herp and Catherine of Genoa ["The Mystical Element of Religion as Studied in Saint Catherine of Genoa and Her Friends (1908)]. His influence can also be traced in the Spanish Carmelite thought of the sixteenth century among Teresa of Ávila and John of the Cross .

[ 53 ] Modern appraisal [ edit ] In recent decades, interest has increased again in the Corpus Areopagiticum , for three main reasons: because of a recovery of the huge impact of Dionysian thought in later Christian thought, because of an increasing repudiation of older criticisms that Dionysius's thought represented a fundamentally Neoplatonic approach to theology, and finally because of interest in parallels between aspects of modern linguistic theory and Dionysius's reflections on language and negative theology .

Andrew Louth offers the following modern appraisal of the Areopagite; Dionysius/Denys' vision is remarkable because, on the one hand, his understanding of hierarchy makes possible a rich symbolic system in terms of which we can understand God and the cosmos and our place within it, and, on the other, he finds room within this strictly hierarchical society for an escape from it, beyond it, by transcending symbols and realizing directly one's relationship with God as his creature, the creature of his love. There is space within the Dionysian universe for a multitude of ways of responding to God's love. That spaciousness is worth exploring: and therein, perhaps, lies the enduring value of the vision of Dionysius/Denys the Areopagite.

[ 60 ] See also [ edit ] Pseudepigrapha St. Dionysus Institute in Paris Theoria Notes [ edit ] Constructs such as ibid.

, loc. cit.

and idem are discouraged by Wikipedia's style guide for footnotes , as they are easily broken. Please improve this article by replacing them with named references ( quick guide ), or an abbreviated title.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ a b Acts 17:34: "A few men became followers of Paul and believed. Among them was Dionysius, a member of the Areopagus, also a woman named Damaris, and a number of others." ^ Also known as The Intelligible and the Sensible ; this is only referred to in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy .

^ This is only referred to in the Celestial Hierarchy .

^ a b "It must also be recognized that "forgery" is a modern notion. Like Plotinus and the Cappadocians before him, Dionysius does not claim to be an innovator, but rather a communicator of a tradition. Adopting the persona of an ancient figure was a long established rhetorical device (known as declamatio ), and others in Dionysius' circle also adopted pseudonymous names from the New Testament. Dionysius' works, therefore, are much less a forgery in the modern sense than an acknowledgement of reception and transmission, namely, a kind of coded recognition that the resonances of any sacred undertaking are intertextual, bringing the diachronic structures of time and space together in a synchronic way, and that this theological teaching, at least, is dialectically received from another. Dionysius represents his own teaching as coming from a certain Hierotheus and as being addressed to a certain Timotheus. He seems to conceive of himself, therefore, as an in-between figure, very like a Dionysius the Areopagite, in fact.

[ 24 ] References [ edit ] ^ Brock, Sebastian (2011).

"Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite — Gorgias Encyclopedic Dictionary" .

Gorgias Encyclopedic Dictionary .

^ Critchley, Simon (2024).

On Mysticism: The Experience of Ecstasy (1st ed.).

Profile Books . p. 71.

ISBN 978-1800816930 .

^ "Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite summary | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2022-08-09 .

^ Acts 17:34 ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy on the confusion between Dionysius and Pseudo-Dionysius ^ Pseudo Dionysius: The Complete Works , 1987, Paulist Press, ISBN 0-8091-2838-1 .

^ a b c Corrigan & Harrington 2014 .

^ Andrew Louth, "The Reception of Dionysius up to Maximus the Confessor", in: Sarah Coakley, Charles M. Stang (eds), Re-thinking Dionysius the Areopagite , John Wiley & Sons, 2011, p. 49.

^ In support of this view, there is no trace at all of these 'lost' treatises: despite the interest in Dionysius from as early as the sixth century, no mention of them is to be found. See Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite , (1987), p. 20.

^ a b Paul Rorem and John C. Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), p. 9. The point was first proposed by Stiglmayr.

^ Hathaway, Hierarchy and the Definition of Order in the Letters of Pseudo-Dionysius , p. 4, supports the dating of 519 for this treatise.

^ Andrew Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), reissued by Continuum Press, London & New York, 2001, under the title Denys the Areopagite .

^ See Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), p. 14, who suggests that, although ambiguous, Dionysius is not miaphysite (he also points out that Severus and his supporters misquote Dionysius's Fourth Epistle to back up their view). Paul Rorem and John C. Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), esp. p. 11, make an extensive study of the early evidence, arguing that (1) Hypatius's apparent rejection in 532 of the works of Dionysite as miaphysite is not as straightforward as often suggested, and that (2) Dionysius's writing was appealed to by just about all parties in the sixth-century Christian east, and at no point was it considered the exclusive preserve of the Miaphysites.

^ Dionysius' description in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy corresponds well with what is known of Syriac worship from other sources, for example: (1) his account of baptism and the Eucharist is similar to the Homilies on Baptism and the Eucharist of Theodore of Mopsuetsia, which depict worship in the Church of West Syria at the beginning of the fifth century. See Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), p. 55; (2) Dionysius' account of the sacrament of oil in the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy is not found in most other patristic sources, except for those in the Syrian tradition. See Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), p. 64; (3) his understanding of monasticism. See Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), p. 70. Louth is certain that Dionysius/Denys was writing in Syria. See p.14 and passim.

^ Acts 17:34 .

^ Luibheid, Pseudo-Dionysius, (1987), p. 22.

^ Hathaway, Hierarchy and the Definition of Order in the Letters of Pseudo-Dionysius , p. 13 ^ Rorem, "John of Scythopolis on Apollinarian Christology," p. 482. John of Scythopolis was also proficient identifier of Apollinarian forgeries, giving his defense that much more credibility.

^ Jean-Yves Lacoste , Encyclopedia of Christian Theology , 3 vols., vol. 1, p. 439.

^ a b Franke 2007 , p. 158.

^ Hathaway, Hierarchy and the Definition of Order in the Letters of Pseudo-Dionysius , p. 31 ^ Sh. Nutsubidze. "Mystery of Pseudo-Dionys Areopagit (a monograph), Tbilisi, 1942; E. Honigmann, Pierre l'Iberian et les ecrits du Pseudo-Denys l'Areopagita . Bruxelles, 1952; Golitzin, Alexander.

Et Introibo Ad Altare Dei: The Mystagogy of Dionysius Areopagita, with Special Reference to Its Predecessors in the Eastern Christian Tradition . (Thessalonika: Patriarchikon Idruma Paterikôn Meletôn, 1994), p. 419.

^ Carlo Maria Mazzucchi, Damascio, Autore del Corpus Dionysiacum, e il dialogo Περι Πολιτικης Επιστημης , Aevum: Rassegna di scienze storiche linguistiche e filologiche, ISSN 0001-9593, Anno 80, Nº 2, 2006, pp. 299-334. Mazzucchi's arguments have been dismissed by Emiliano Fiori in his review of the article, in Adamantius 14 (2009), pp. 670-673.

^ Pseudo-Dionysius in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ "One might ask why it is necessary [in the Pseudo-Dionysian Corpus] to have an ordered hierarchy of angels at all in the Christian tradition, considering that the Bible has no concept of celestial hierarchy. ... That it was found necessary to invent a system of this nature [in the Pseudo-Dionysisn Corpus]  after 500 years is tantamount to denying the efficacy of Christ as mediator altogether." Rosemarie A. Arthur. (2011) The Pseudo Dionysius as Polemicist: The Development and Purpose of the Angelic Hierarchy in Sixth Century Syria , pp. 63–64. London: Ashgate.

^ Nikitopoulos, E., & Truglia, P. C. (2024). In defense of the authenticity of the Dionysian corpus (I). Revista Teologică, 105(1), 5–21.

^ Nikitopoulos, E., & Truglia, P. C. (2024). In defense of the authenticity of the Dionysian corpus (II). Revista Teologică, 106(2), 5–33.

^ Stăniloae, D. (1996). Sfântul Dionisie Areopagitul: Opere complete și școlile Sfântului Maxim Mărturisitorul (pp. 7–13). Bucharest: Paideia.

^ Sani‑Dopoulos, J. (2009). The Dionysian Authorship of the “Corpus Areopagiticum” According to Fr. Dumitru Stăniloae. Mystagogy Resource Center. Retrieved from https://www.johnsanidopoulos.com/2009/10/apostolic-authorship-of-corpus.html ^ Parker, J. (1897). Dionysius the Areopagite, works (pp. 6–7, 123–126). Retrieved from https://www.ccel.org/ccel/d/dionysius/works/cache/works.pdf ^ Divine institution of threefold mono-episcopal structure [Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 1.2, 2.2.6, 3.2] is taken for granted in the Ignatius Corpus; pre-Nicene use of hypóstasis for person instead of nature [Divine Names 1.4, 2.4–5, 2.11] is prevalent in Origen, Clement of Alexandria, and Philo; clerical tonsures [Ecclesiastical Hierarchy 6.2] are evidenced in both Old Testament (Num 6:18) and New Testament (Acts 18:18) religious vows ^ The uncommon word therapeút , which shifted in meaning after post-Nicene desert ascetic traditions, is only specifically used to link monastic life with the divine monad in Philo of Alexandria and Dionysius; leitourgói (from Heb 1:14) is strangely used for the third order of the clergy, as if the standard designation diákonos was not yet custom; incarnational theology rarely employs the standard Nicene term enanthrṓpēsis , instead opting for odd phrases including andrikēn zōēn ("manly life"), anthrōpikē theourgia ("human divine-work"), and even anthrōpikōs ousiōthenta ("taking substance humanly").

^ Attic form of Athenian dialect; second sophistic rhetoric (only prevalent from the mid-first century to the early-third century); interest in apathetic theology; highly stylized prose.

^ Intimate acquaintance with and strong opposition to Simon Magus's doctrine; interaction with the author and contents of the Clementine Homilies; writes only to early Christians living near Athens (Apostle John; Timothy; Polycarp).

^ Anthony Pavoni and Evangelos Nikitopoulos, The Life of Saint Dionysius the Areopagite. Scriptorium Press: Montreal, 2023, 14–180.

^ On the Existence of Evils, 196/57.

^ Platonic Theology, Book II.4.

^ Procli Commentarii in Parmenidem Platonis, Book VI.16 – "as one has said".

^ Divine Names 2.7. In one of the Proclean manuscripts, a later scribe has even added a marginal note at this point: "Mark you: it is from the Great Dionysius".

^ Sassi, N. (2017). Le fonti del lessico teologico del De Mystica Theologia dello Pseudo-Dionigi Areopagita. Textual Cultures, 11(1–2), 130–171.

^ Sassi, N. (2018). Le fonti del lessico teologico delle Epistole dello Pseudo-Dionigi Areopagita. Lexicon Philosophicum, 6, 69–115.

^ Jahn, A. (1889). Dionysiaca: sprachliche und sachliche Platonische Blüthenlese aus Dionysius, dem sogenannten Areopagiten. Altona/Leipzig: Verlag Von A.C. Reher.

^ Corsini, E. (1962). Il trattato De Divinis Nominibus dello Pseudo-Dionigi. [Publication city and publisher not specified].

^ Nikitopoulos, E., & Truglia, P. C. (2024). In defense of the authenticity of the Dionysian corpus (II). Revista Teologică, 106(2), 7.

^ Inge, William Ralph. Christian Mysticism, The Brampton Lectures, London: Methuen, 1899. p 102.

^ Marsh, Fred Shipley, ed. & trans. Stephanus Bar Sudhaile. The Book which is called The Book of the Holy Hierotheos, with extracts from the prolegomena and commentary of Theodosius of Antioch and from the Book of Excerpts and other works of Gregory Bar-Hebraeus. APA-Philo Press, 1927 (reprint).

^ Frothingham, Arthur Lincoln. Stephen bar Sudaili, The Syrian Mystic and The Book of Hierotheos. Leiden: Brill, 1886 (Reprinted Eugene, OR: Wipf And Stock, 2010).

^ Rorem, Pseudo-Dionysius , p. 14 ^ Paul Rorem and John C. Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), p. 39.

^ Paul Rorem and John C. Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), p. 38.

^ Paul Rorem and John C. Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite , (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), pp. 1-3. Rorem and Lamoreaux produce a translation of about two-thirds of John's Prologue and Scholia on pp. 144-263.

^ Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite , (1987), p. 120.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Jean LeClercq, 'Influence and Noninfluence of Dionysius in the Western Middle Ages', in Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid, (New York: Paulist Press, 1987), pp. 25-33.

^ Roman Martyrology . Lutétiæ Parisiórum natális sanctórum Mártyrum Dionysii Areopagítæ Epíscopi, Rústici Presbyteri, et Eleuthérii Diáconi. Ex his Dionysius, ab Apóstolo Paulo baptizátus, primus Atheniénsium Epíscopus ordinátus est; deínde Romam venit, atque inde a beáto Cleménte, Románo Pontífice, in Gállias prædicándi grátia diréctus est. [October 9 (Séptimo Idus Octóbris]).

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Louth, Dionysius the Areopagite (1987), p. 122, citing E. Panofsky (Edited, translated and annotated) Abbot Suger on the Abbey Church of St-Denis and its Art Treasures (Princetown, NJ,) 2nd ed. 1979.

^ "Journey of the Mind into God by St Bonaventure of Bagnoregio" (PDF) .

^ Karlfried Froehlich, 'Pseudo-Dionysius and the Reformation of the Sixteenth Century', in Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid, (New York: Paulist Press, 1987), pp. 33-46.

^ Doherty, K.F. "St. Thomas and the Pseudo-Dionysian Symbol of Light". In: The New. Scholasticism, 34 (1960), pp. 170-189.

^ a b Edwards, Mark; Pallis, Dimitrios; Steiris, Georgios (2022-02-25).

The Oxford Handbook of Dionysius the Areopagite . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-253880-2 .

^ Andrew Louth Dionysius the Areopagite 1987. Reissued in 2001 under the title Denys the Areopagite.

Sources [ edit ] Corrigan, Kevin; Harrington, L. Michael (2014), Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Franke, William (2007), On What Cannot Be Said: Apophatic Discourses in Philosophy, Religion, Literature, and the Arts Volume 1 , ISBN 978-0268028824 Lamarre, Mark, Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite (fl.

c.

650 — c.

725 CE ) , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Elena Ene D-Vasilescu, "Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and Byzantine Art", Journal of Early Christian History , Taylor & Francis, Volume 11, Issue 2, 2021, pp. 50–75; DOI: 10.1080/2222582X.2020.1743955 Elena Ene D-Vasilescu, "If you wish to contemplate God': Pseudo-Dionysius on the notion of will", Studia Patristica, vol. C (100), 2020: 247-257 Further reading [ edit ] Greek editions [ edit ] Migne, Patrologiae Cursus Completus, Series Graeca III, (Paris, 1857) [Greek text] Beate Regina Suchla (ed.), Corpus Dionysiacum , 2 vols (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1990–1) [the modern critical edition] La Hiérarchie Céleste , ed. Roques R, Heil G and Gandillac M, Sources Chrétiennes 58 (Paris: Les Éditions de Cerf, 1958) [Critical edition of the Celestial Hierarchy with French translation] Pseudo-Dionysius Areopagita, De Coelesti Hierarchia , London, 2012. limovia.net, ISBN 978-1-78336-010-9 Modern translations [ edit ] Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid (New York: Paulist Press, 1987) [The only complete modern English translation (and the only modern English translation of The Celestial Hierarchy ), based almost entirely on the text in Migne] Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite: The Ecclesiastical Hierarchy , trans. Thomas L. Campbell, (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1981) Hathaway, Ronald F, Hierarchy and the definition of order in the letters of Pseudo-Dionysius. A study in the form and meaning of the Pseudo-Dionysian writings , (The Hague, Nijhoff, 1969), [Includes a translation of the Letters on pp130–160] Jones, John D, The Divine Names and Mystical Theology , (Milwaukee, 1980) Rolt, CE, The Divine Names and the Mystical Theology , (London: SPCK, 1920) [reprinted as Clarence Edwin Rolt, Dionysius the Areopagite on the Divine Names and the Mystical Theology , 2004, IBIS PRESS, ISBN 0-89254-095-8 ] The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite , trans. Rev. John Parker (James Parker and Co., 1897) Internet Archive Secondary sources [ edit ] Bucur, Bogdan, ed., (Collegeville, MN: Cistercian Publications, 2014), a revised edition of Et Introibo Ad Altare Dei: The Mystagogy of Dionysius Areopagita, with Special Reference to Its Predecessors in the Eastern Christian Tradition (Thessalonika: Patriarchikon Idruma Paterikôn Meletôn, 1994) Coakley, Sarah and Charles M Stang, eds., Re-Thinking Dionysius the Areopagite , (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2008) [also published as Modern Theology 24:4, (2008)] Frend, W. H. C.

, The Rise of the Monophysite Movement (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1972).

Golitzin, Alexander, Mystagogy: A Monastic Reading of Dionysius Areopagita . Cistercian Studies 250.

Griffith, R., "Neo-Platonism and Christianity: Pseudo-Dionysius and Damascius", in E. A. Livingstone, ed., Studia patristica XXIX. Papers presented at the Twelfth International Conference on Patristic Studies held in Oxford 1995 (Leuven: Peeters, 1997), pp. 238–243 Hathaway, Ronald F., Hierarchy and the definition of order in the letters of Pseudo-Dionysius: A study in the form and meaning of the Pseudo-Dionysian writings (The Hague, Nijhoff, 1969) Ivanovic, Filip, Symbol and Icon: Dionysius the Areopagite and the Iconoclastic Crisis (Eugene: Pickwick, 2010).

ISBN 978-1-60899-335-2 LeClercq, Jean , 'Influence and noninfluence of Dionysius in the Western Middle Ages', in Pseudo-Dionysius: The Complete Works , trans. Colm Luibheid (New York: Paulist Press, 1987), pp. 25–33 Louth, Andrew, Dionysius the Areopagite (London: Geoffrey Chapman, 1989). Reissued by Continuum Press (London & New York) 2001 under the title Denys the Areopagite .

Perl, Eric D., Theophany: The Neoplatonic Philosophy of Dionysius the Areopagite (Albany: SUNY Press, 2007).

ISBN 978-0-7914-7111-1 .

Rorem, Paul, Pseudo-Dionysius: A commentary on the texts and an introduction to their influence (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993) Rorem, Paul, and John C Lamoreaux, John of Scythopolis and the Dionysian Corpus: Annotating the Areopagite (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998) Scouteris, Constantine , Platonic Elements in Pseudo-Dionysius Anti-Manichaean Ontology , Ἐπιστημονική Ἐπετηρίς τῆς Θεολογικῆς Σχολῆς τοῦ Πανεπιστημίου Ἀθηνῶν, Τόμος ΚΘ΄, Πανεπιστήμιον Ἀθηνῶν, Ἀθῆναι 1994, pp. 193-201 Scouteris, Constantine, "Malum privatio est": St. Gregory of Nyssa and Psedo-Dionysius on the Existence of Evil (Some further Comments) , paper presented at the Ninth International Conference on Patristic Studies held in Oxford 1983, Studia Patristica, 18 (1990), pp. 539–550 Stock, Wiebke-Marie, Theurgisches Denken. Zur "Kirchlichen Hierarchie" des Dionysius Areopagita (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2008) ( Transformationen der Antike , 4) Elena Ene D-Vasilescu, "'If you wish to contemplate God': Pseudo-Dionysius on the notion of will", Studia Patristica, vol. C (100), 2020: 247–257 External links [ edit ] Works by or about Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite at Wikisource Quotations related to Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite at Wikiquote Corrigan, Kevin; Harrington, Michael.

"Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

" Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite " in the Catholic Encyclopedia Commentary by Clarence Rolt (1920) on pseudo-Dionysius's works (available in PDF , HTML , and plain text formats) accessed September 1, 2006 Works about Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite Christian Classics Ethereal Library The Identity of Dionysius Areopagite. A Philosophical Approach.

Logos 1–2007.

Pope Benedict XVI on Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite May 14, 2008, Zenit.org In Defense of the Dionysian Authorship Three essays from the Eastern Orthodox website Pravoslavie Works by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) External links to bibliography "Celestial Hierarchy" . September 1, 2006.

Mystical Theology ( Theologica Mystica ) accessed September 1, 2006 Works ( Corpus Areopagiticum ) of pseudo-Dionysius including The Divine Names , Mystical Theology , Celestial Hierarchy , Ecclesiastical Hierarchy , and Letters (available in PDF, HTML, and text formats) accessed September 1, 2006 Christian Classics Ethereal Library De caelesti hierarchia 14th century Greek manuscript found at Constantinople , page images at Oxford Digital Library from Magdalen College, Oxford Theologia vivificans, cibus solidus ; Dionysii Opera omnia ([reprod.]) / translatio per Ambrosium Traversarium ; Jacobus Faber Stapulensis edidit – per Johannem Higmanum et Wolfgangum Hopylium (Parisius), 1498.

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k543103.r=.langEN accessed September 7, 2010.

S. Dionysii Areopagitae martyris inclyti, athenarum episcopi, et galliarum apostoli opera ([reprod.]) / translatio nova Ambrosii Florentini,...

– A. Wechelum (Paris), 1555.

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k52472f.r=.langEN accessed September 7, 2010.

S. Dionysii Areopagitae Opera omnia, Georgii Pachymerae paraphrasi continenter illustrata / opera et studio Balthasaris Corderii,...

; Patrologiae Graecae , Latine Tantum Editae , Tomus II.

J. P. Migne (Petit-Montrouge), 1856.

http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k411615d.r=.langEN accessed September 7, 2010.

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Philosophers and theologians associated with death of God theology Thomas J. J. Altizer Paul van Buren (association disavowed) John D. Caputo Meister Eckhart (posthumous attribution) William Hamilton G. W. F. Hegel Friedrich Nietzsche Pseudo-Dionysius (posthumous attribution) John Robinson Richard L. Rubenstein Paul Tillich Gabriel Vahanian Gianni Vattimo Slavoj Žižek John S. Dunne (observer-attributed) William Blake (posthumous attribution) Peter Carravetta v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pseudo-Dionysius_the_Areopagite&oldid=1304164216 " Categories : 5th-century Byzantine people 5th-century Christian mystics 5th-century Christian theologians 5th-century Greek philosophers 6th-century Byzantine writers 6th-century Christian mystics 6th-century Christian theologians 6th-century Greek philosophers Christian Greek pseudepigrapha Christianity and Hellenistic philosophy Hesychasts Christian mystics Neoplatonists Philosophers of religion Unidentified people Pseudonymous writers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles with ibid from May 2025 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with LibriVox links Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 11:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite 35 languages Add topic

