Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Free samples 2 History 3 Other samples 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Product sample 13 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Magyar मराठी 日本語 Português Русский Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sample of a consumer product to try This article is about a corporate practice. For the 2012 film, see Free Samples . For the SpongeBob episode, see SpongeBob SquarePants (season 8) .

Free sample of Peter Pan peanut butter , promising it "does not stick to the roof of your mouth" A product sample is a sample of a consumer product that is given to the consumer free of cost so that they may try a product before committing to a purchase. When it comes to marketing non-durable commodities, such as food items, sampling is crucial. It gives room to highlight new items on the market as well as to bring back classic product categories with fresh tastes, inventive ingredients, and other changes.

[ 1 ] Free samples [ edit ] A free sample or "freebie" or "trial packs" is a portion of food or other product (for example beauty products) given to consumers in shopping malls, supermarkets, retail stores, or through other channels (such as via the Internet).

[ 2 ] Sometimes samples of non-perishable items are included in direct marketing mailings. The purpose of a free sample is to acquaint the consumer with a new product, and is similar to the concept of a test drive , in that a customer is able to try out a product before purchasing it.

Many consumer product companies now offer free samples through their websites, to encourage consumers to use the products regularly, [ 2 ] and to gather data for mailing lists of potentially interested customers.

Paint chips are samples of paint colors that are sometimes offered as free samples.

The expansion of online marketing with regards to promotional giveaways has facilitated the rise of "Freebie sites" that seek to aggregate all promotional free sample offers in one place. These sites will often compile free product samples from all over the World Wide Web and categorize them by type. Some product sample offers may require consumers to complete a survey or refer a friend in order to qualify for the freebies. When all requirements are fulfilled, the product samples are shipped to the consumer.
Some sample products might be digital goods, where sample might be closely related to a product trial .

History [ edit ] 19th-century soap manufacturer Benjamin T. Babbitt was one of the first known people, though not the first ever, to offer free samples of his products. For example, innkeepers are portrayed offering free samples in the 14th-century poem Piers Plowman : "Tauerners 'a tast for nouht' tolden the same" (Innkeepers said the same thing, 'A taste for free!').

[ 3 ] In the 1900s, bags containing product samples from vendors became a common sight at Australian agricultural shows , where they were given away for free or at a small cost. These so-called "sample bags" gradually evolved into the product branded showbags still popular today in the country.

[ 4 ] In 1987 C. A. Courtesy became the first demonstration company to secure exclusivity with a retailer.

[ citation needed ] Other samples [ edit ] So-called "color chips" or color samples, used in the plastic industry to help designers visually identify available colors of plastic pellets .

It is also possible to purchase products in small " trial size" containers. This is common with toiletries such as shampoo, which are useful for vacations or other travel, where large bottles or other containers would be impractical (or more recently, not permitted for air travel). These are also often provided in hotel and motel rooms for the guests. Samples may also be loaned to the customer if they are too valuable to be given for free, such as samples of a countertop or of carpet to be used for remodeling .
Sometimes companies in business-to-business markets will offer sample of data or service for free before engaging business relationship.

Other type of samples may include industrial samples, such as in the plastic industry , provided to companies for trial molding to see if the selected material is suitable for manufacturing the application (testing).

[ 5 ] Such samples may or may not be free of charge.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Product samples .

International Convention to Facilitate the Importation of Commercial Samples and Advertising Material Sample (material) Mailing list Test drive Shareware References [ edit ] ^ Sedliačiková, Mariana & Kocianová, Anna & Dzian, Michal & Moresova, M & Drábek, Josef. (2020). Product Sampling Effect on Purchase Decision Also by Social Aspects. Marketing and Management of Innovations.

^ a b De Bower, Herbert Francis= (1919).

Advertising principles . Original from the University of California: Alexander Hamilton Institute (U.S.). p.

156 .

Free sample.

^ Piers Plowman, C-text, Passus I, line 228 ^ Bochenski, Natalie (2015-08-06).

"From free to Frozen: a potted history of Ekka showbags" . Brisbane Times . Retrieved 2022-07-30 .

^ Philip Mitchell (1996).

Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook: Plastic Part Manufacturing . pp.

2– 63.

ISBN 9780872634565 .

Displayed by permission of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Product_sample&oldid=1258386166 " Categories : Sales promotion Free goods and services Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 November 2024, at 12:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Product sample 13 languages Add topic

