Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 1699-1925 2.2 1925–27 2.3 1931–32 2.4 1933–36 2.5 1945 3 Principal points of the Sikh Rehat Maryada Toggle Principal points of the Sikh Rehat Maryada subsection 3.1 Definition of Sikh 3.2 Sikh living 3.2.1 Communal life 3.2.2 Personal life 3.3 Meditation and scripture 3.4 Congregation and Gurdwara service 3.4.1 Kirtan 3.4.2 Akhand Paath and Sadharan Paath 3.5 Festivals and ceremonies 4 Other codes 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Rehat 5 languages বাংলা Français हिन्दी Italiano ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sikh Rehat Maryada ) Sikh codes of conduct This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rehat" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Rehat" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Sikh practices and discipline Foundations of Practice Simran Sewa Three pillars Naam Japo Kirat Karo Vand Chhako Discipline Five Virtues Five Thieves Five Ks Rehat Prohibitions in Sikhism Daily Prayers and Hymns Nitnem Amrit Velā Communal Practices Daswandh Langar Kirtan Liturgical Practices Akhand Pāth Sadharan Pāth Ardās Hukam Sanskars Naam Karan Amrit Sanskar Anand Karaj Antam Sanskar v t e Part of a series on Sikhism People Topics Outline History Glossary Sikh gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib Selected revered saints Bhagat Kabir Bhagat Ravidas Bhagat Farid Bhagat Ramanand Bhagat Beni Bhagat Namdev Bhagat Sadhana Bhagat Bhikhan Bhagat Parmanand Bhagat Sain Bhagat Dhanna Bhagat Pipa Bhagat Surdas Bhagat Jaidev Bhagat Trilochan Bhatt Kalshar Bhatt Balh Bhatt Bhalh Bhatt Bhika Bhatt Gayand Bhatt Harbans Bhatt Jalap Bhatt Kirat Bhatt Mathura Bhatt Nalh Bhatt Salh Baba Sundar Satta Doom Balvand Rai Philosophy Naam Japo Kirat Karō Vand Chakkō Charhdi Kalā Guru Maneyo Granth Five Thieves Five Virtues Practices Sikh Rehat Maryada Prohibitions Ardās Kirtan Amrit Velā Dasvand The Five Ks Langar Sewa Simran Nitnem Dastaar (Turban) Naam Karan Amrit Sanskar Anand Karaj Antam Sanskar Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Five Banis Places and Takhts Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Akal Takht Keshgarh Sahib Damdama Sahib Patna Sahib Hazur Sahib Culture Literature Music Names Khanda Khalsa General topics Ik Onkar Waheguru Panj Pyare Nirgun and Sargun Nanakshahi calendar Criticism Jathedar of Akal Takht War Sects Sikhism and other religions Sikhism and Hinduism Sikhism and Islam Sikhism and Jainism Religion portal v t e Rehat ( Punjabi : ਰਹਿਤ, alternatively transliterated as Rehit , Rahit , or Rahat ) refers to the rules and traditions which govern the unique Sikh lifestyle and determines correct Sikh orthodoxy and orthopraxy .

[ 1 ] The Sikh Rehit Maryada [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 1 ] [ 5 ] ( Punjabi : ਸਿੱਖ ਰਹਿਤ ਮਰਯਾਦਾ , Sikkh Rahit Maryādā ; also transcribed as Sikh Reht Maryada or Khalsa Rehat Maryada ) [ 6 ] is a code of conduct and conventions for Sikhism . The final version of the Rehat Maryada was controversially approved by the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee , Amritsar in 1945.

[ 7 ] The Rehat Maryada was created to provide guidance to Sikhs (and those desirous of embracing the Sikh faith) on practical and functional aspects of daily life, including the operations of Sikh Gurdwaras, [ 8 ] and religious practices to foster cohesion throughout the community.

[ 9 ] Rehitnāma (meaning "epistles of conduct; [ 10 ] plural: Rehitnāme ) is a Punjabi term that refers to a genre of Sikh religious literature which expounds upon specifying an approved way of life for a Sikh.

[ 11 ] Etymology [ edit ] Rehat derives from the Punjabi word rahiṇā (to live, to remain) and means "mode of living".

Maryādā derives from a Sanskrit compound word composed of marya (limit, boundary, mark) and ādā (to give to oneself, to accept, to undertake), meaning bounds or limits of morality and propriety, rule, or custom.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Part of a series on Sikh literature Hagiographical Janamsakhi Gurbilases Suraj Parkash Sau Sakhi Sri Gur Sobha Lexis Mahan Kosh Praxis Rehatnamas Jhatka Parkash Historiographical Bhat Vahis Prachin Panth Prakash Umdat-ut-Tawarikh Twarikh Guru Khalsa Rebuttals Ham Hindu Nahin Exegeses Gobind Gita Hanuman Natak Faridkot Teeka Steek (Sikh literature) Periodicals Akhbar Sri Darbar Sahib Khalsa Akhbar Khalsa Samachar The Khalsa Advocate Gurmat Parkash Letters Hukamnama Authors Bhatra Sikhs Kavi Darbar Koer Singh Kavi Santokh Singh Ratan Singh Bhangu Sohan Lal Suri Giani Gian Singh Tara Singh Narotam Kahn Singh Nabha Sumer Singh Vir Singh Khalsa Tract Society Faridkot Teeka Committee Sikh scriptures • Punjabi literature v t e Before the passing of the 10th Sikh Guru, Guru Gobind Singh , in 1708, he transferred the Guruship and authority to the Sikh Holy Scripture, Guru Granth Sahib , and the body of initiated Sikhs, called the Khalsa Panth . Before his death, [ according to whom?

] Guru Gobind Singh provided what is known as 52 Hukams and instructed his followers to formalize them by writing Rehat Namas. The 52 Hukams are a set of 52 rules on proper conduct. As per Dr. William Hewat McLeod , these set of rules were transcribed into the Rehatnamas by Sikh scholars Bhai Nand Lal , Bhai Dessa Singh, son of Bhai Mani Singh , Bhai Chaupa Singh , Bhai Daya Singh and Bhai Prahlad Singh . However, for the next almost 100 years, persecution at the hands of Mughal rulers put the affairs of Sikh faith into disarray. The control of Sikh Gurdwaras and affairs fell into the hands of Udasis and Nirmala Sikh, who had embraced vedic philosophy. According to scholars of the time such Bhai Vir Singh these Nirmala and Udasi Sikhs introduced vedic concepts into the Sikh Rehat, which led sectarianism in the absence of any centralized authority apart from that arranged under British rule from 1849.

[ 12 ] A range of other codes and collections of tradition existed, which were corrected in 1898 by Bhai Kahn Singh Nabha , who collected all the old Rehat Namas and removed spurious references to Hinduism.

[ citation needed ] 1699-1925 [ edit ] While the Khalsa was gaining political power in the 18th century, a large number of sehajdharis began joining its ranks from around the mid-18th century onwards.

[ 13 ] Sehajdharis Sikhs practiced religion in a more fluid manner without following boundaries, in-contrast to the Khalsa Sikhs, which had always been a small minority.

[ 13 ] This presented a paradigm where as Sikhs gained political power, they further relapsed back into Hinduism.

[ 13 ] Sikh theology began to be re-interpreted under a Brahminical lens, such as in relation to the varnasramadharma .

[ 13 ] Sikh rehatnamas (codes of conduct) from this period, such as Chaupa Singh's, are heavily influenced by Hindu practices, especially with regard to the status of women and interactions with Muslims.

[ 13 ] These manuals were more akin to the stridharma (moral system for women) laid out in Hindu texts, such as the Dharamshastra .

[ 13 ] Rehat Maryada document issued by the Akal Takht in the year 1877. It is written in larivār Gurmukhi There was no standard rehat but there were many with the same points and concepts, like the Muktinamah (ਮੁਕਤੀਨਾਮਾਹ), Bhai Nand Lal's Rehatnamah (ਰਹਿਤਨਾਮਾਹ, 1695) and Tankhahnamah (ਤਨਖਾਹਨਾਮਾਹ, circa 1704), 54 Hukams (੫੪ ਹੁਕਮ) etc. As per Giani Gian Singh (1885), in 1857, Bhai Rai Singh travelled and stayed at Hazur Sahib , Nanded , (where the 10th Guru, Guru Gobind Singh receded) for 3 + 1 ⁄ 2 months to document and reproduce the code of conduct of the Sikhs at the time for the Namdhari sect of Sikhism. As per Dr.

McLeod (1987), several books were published during this period that attempted to provide a renaissance to the faith. Budh Singh published Khalsa Dharm Shatak in 1876, Kahn Singh Nabha wrote Raj Dharm (1884), Ham Hindu Nahin (1898) and Mahan Kosh (1930), Gurmat Sudhakar (1898 Hindi, 1901 Punjabi). In 1915, Chief Khalsa Diwan published Gurmat Parkash Bhag Sanskar while Teja Singh Bhasaur published Khalsa Rahit Parkash in 1911 and Bhai Jodh Singh 's Gurmati Niranay was published in 1932. Finally Sikh Rahit Maryada was brought out by the SGPC in 1945. These publications showed a significant attempt by the Sikh intelligentsia and bodies to develop appropriate code of conduct reflective of the Sikh philosophy.

The early Sikh rahit namas were markedly anti Mughal, the rahits derided Mughals as being "polluting"; injunctions included avoiding contact with the ritually sacrificed meat of all faiths, a ban on sexual contact with Muslim women, and a proscription on all intoxicants. Furthermore, an early rahit-nama asserted that karah parsad, whilst to be distributed to everyone irrespective of their religious background, was not to be consumed by a Sikh in the company of a Mughal.

William Hewat McLeod writes that these injunctions were a reflection of a period of extended warfare between the Sikhs and Muslims during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Pashaura Singh writes that the Tat Khalsa scholars refused to accept the anti Muslim injunctions and remarks as the work of Guru Gobind Singh and quietly removed them from their revised rahit-namas.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Six Rahitnamas were placed in the time of Guru Gobind Singh, the Tankhahnama of those in particular stresses hostility towards Mughal Aristocrats, referred to as "Turks". Although there was unanimous hostility and antipathy directed towards Mughals in the Sikh writings of the eighteenth and nineteenth century, the works of Chaupa, Kesar Singh Chibbar , and Koer Singh are considered the apotheosis of this aversion.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The twentieth century versions of the rahit; drawing upon and furthering developing earlier forms of rahits were representative of an effort to systemize codes presented in different versions and modify them in line with the evolving Sikh orthodoxy associated with the Singh Sahba reform movement. W.H McLeod further comments that while Guru Gobind's utterance of the rahit does not oppose nor is it inconsistent with the traditional version used today, it is suggested that he announced a considerably simpler one. Only a portion of the current Rahit dates to the time of Guru Gobind Singh, and it evolved according to the conditions and circumstances of the time. While the early eighteenth century rahits feature considerable variation; W.H. McLeod noted a few consistent features among them; "a sense of deepening problems and the ultimate triumph of the community; a set of behavioral injunctions meant to distinguish the Sikhs from other religious communities; with a clear sense that the Sikh community saw itself in conflict with Muslims; and, within several versions, the declaration of a Vaishnava savior in relation the triumph of the community." [ 21 ] Louis Fenech (2003) notes that the eighteenth century Sikh literature consisting of the rahit-namas and gur-bilas genres impart hostile attitudes towards Muslims and Islam and mention that Muslims were desirous of converting all Indians.

[ 22 ] He also noted that while the eighteenth century rahits disagreed on many points, a universal belief that the Khalsa was the principal sovereign not just of India, but the entire world, was accorded among them, and that many of the earliest rahit-namas violated certain Sikh precepts in the Guru Granth Sahib- including observation of caste status. He also notes that the eighteenth and nineteenth century Sikh manuscripts proclaimed Guru Gobind Singh to be the avatar of Vishnu and four of the five Panj Pyare as the incarnations of a Hindu demigod ( Lava ) and three Hindu bhakts (the exception being Himmat Singh- considered an incarnation of a hunter). He adds that the Tat Khalsa expunged the Hindu elements of the Panj Pyare tradition within these manuscripts. The Tat Khalsa's origins are said to be influenced by contemporary nineteenth century European understanding of religion and modernity; their objective became to reduce the Sikh faith of its contemporary plurality, multiplicity and diversity to a single solidarity identity centered around the Khalsa and to inculcate firm religious boundaries within the community through various methods including purging content they deemed offensive and non Sikh in the early rahit-namas and the permuting of Sikh history towards a certain trajectory.

[ 23 ] Many Sikhs today assert that during the early 1800s, many Brahmanical and other Hindu influences came into the writings of Sikhs, which led to a "corruption" of the rehitnamahs.

1925–27 [ edit ] In 1925, the Sikh Gurdwaras Act was made in Punjab, legislating the establishment of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC), an elected body of Sikhs, for the purpose of administering Gurdwaras .

A general meeting of the SGPC was held on 15 March 1927 to establish a subcommittee with the task of producing a draft Code of Conduct. The subcommittee at the time consisted of 29 high-profile Sikhs, [ 24 ] listed by name in the Introduction to the Sikh Rehat Maryada.

1931–32 [ edit ] A preliminary draft was circulated to Sikhs in April 1931, for comment. The subcommittee met on the 4th and 5 October 1931, then on the 3rd and 31 January 1932, at the Akal Takht in Amritsar . During this time the number of subcommittee members present at meetings reduced, and other people were listed as present.

[ 25 ] On March 1, four members were exited from the subcommittee, and eight more were appointed. Of the four who were exited, one had died and another was excommunicated.

[ 24 ] The subcommittee met again to deliberate and consider the draft on 8 May and 26 September 1932. On 1 October, the sub-committee submitted its report to the SGPC Secretary recommending a special session of the Committee be convened to consider the final draft and approve it for acceptance.

[ 25 ] 1933–36 [ edit ] The SGPC arranged a conclave of Sikhs on 30 December, where 170 individuals attended and debated the draft. Only nine attendees were members of the original sub-committee, and the conclave ultimately failed to reach an agreement.

[ 24 ] The SGPC then received comments on the draft from a subcommittee of 50 individuals and 21 Panthic Associations (including international organisations), all of whom are listed in the Introduction to the Sikh Rehat Maryada.

[ 25 ] After nearly three years, on 1 August 1936, the broader subcommittee approved the draft, and the general body of the SGPC ratified it on 12 October 1936.

[ 24 ] [ 9 ] Thereafter, the Rehat was implemented.

1945 [ edit ] At their meeting on 7 January 1945 the SPGC's Advisory Committee on Religious Matters recommended some changes to be made to the Code. The Advisory Committee consisted of eight individuals as listed in the Preface to the Sikh Rehat Maryada. The SGPC accepted the recommendations at their meeting on 3 February 1945.

[ 9 ] Since then, several minor updates have been made to clarify content, but no significant review has been undertaken.

Principal points of the Sikh Rehat Maryada [ edit ] The Sikh Rehat Maryada ordained by the SGPC addresses key issues such as the definition of a Sikh, personal and communal obligations such as meditation and volunteer service, rules for gurdwara services to include appropriate music and festivals, and the conduct of assorted Sikh ceremonies.

[ 26 ] Definition of Sikh [ edit ] A Sikh is defined as any person, male or female, who faithfully: believes in the existence of One Eternal God follows the teachings of, and accepts as their only Spiritual guides, the Guru Granth Sahib and the ten human Gurus believes in the baptism ( Amrit Sanchar ), as promoted by the tenth Guru Sikh living [ edit ] There are two aspects to a Sikh living: first is the adherence to a personal discipline and the development of a strong family life; the other is the involvement in communal life and to ensure community well-being and infra-structure for support of the weak within the community local and globally. This is the practical aspect of the three pillars of Sikhism promoted by Guru Nanak called Vand Chhako ('share what you eat [or have]').

A Sikh is always to live and promote the tenets stipulated by the Gurus.

Belief in One God Equality of All the Human race Respect for All, irrespective of gender, age, status, color, caste, sexual orientation, etc.

Self-Control – Kill the Five Evils ; no rituals or superstitions; no gambling, tobacco, alcohol, intoxicating drugs, etc.

Self-Improvement – Promote the Five Virtues Communal life [ edit ] In the communal life, the Sikh has a duty to actively contribute to the community outside the family unit. A Sikh should undertake free voluntary service ( seva ) within the community at Gurdwaras, community projects, hospitals, old peoples homes, nurseries, etc. At every opportunity, a Sikh ought to dedicate their free time to voluntary community work, and devote at least 10% of their wealth in time or money to support community projects. This also includes positively supporting weaker members within the community.

Time needs to be given to the greater Sikh community and the even wider world community. It is the duty of the Sikh to hold a continuous dialogue with all members of the larger community, to treat them as equals, and respect their religions and their customs. Sikhism offers strong support for a healthy community life and a Sikh must undertake to support all worthy projects which would benefit the community and promote Gurmat principles. Importance is given to inter-faith dialogue, support for the poor and weak, better community understanding and co-operation.

Seva (voluntary service) is an important prominent part of the Sikh religion and all Sikhs must get involved in this communal service whenever an opportunity arises.  This in its simple forms can be: sweeping and washing the floors of the Gurdwara, serving water and food ( Langar ) to or fanning the congregation, offering provisions or preparing food and doing other 'house keeping' duties.

Guru ka Langar ('Guru's free food') is a very important part of Sikhism. When Langar is being served or when sangat is being sat down “ Sat-Naam Waheguru " must be chanted. The main philosophy behind the langar is two-fold: to provide training to engage in seva and an opportunity to serve people from all walks of life; and to help banish all distinctions between high and low castes.

Personal life [ edit ] In their personal life, a Sikh should live humbly and with love in an extended family group encouraging Gurmat principles and offering moral support within this extended structure. A Sikh should undertake free voluntary service ( seva ) within the community at Gurdwaras, community projects, hospitals, old peoples homes, nurseries, etc. At every opportunity, a Sikh ought to dedicate their free time to voluntary community work, and devote at least 10% of their wealth in time or money to support community projects. This also includes positively supporting weaker members within the community.

Following the teachings of the Sri Guru Granth Sahib , the Sikh is commanded by the Gurus to lead a disciplined life and to not blindly follow rituals and superstitions that bring no spiritual or material benefit to the person or community. A Sikh must not eat meat that has been slaughtered in a ritualistic way ( Kutha meat ) and refrain from using all forms of intoxicants ; hence, alcohol and tobacco are strictly prohibited.

[ 27 ] Sikhs must also refrain from rituals, superstitions and other anti-Sikh behavior such as gambling, etc. The Sikh is to practice and promote complete equality between the genders, castes, races, religions, etc. Apart from their spouse, a Sikh must treat all people as their kin; treat all females as daughters, sisters, or mothers, and males as sons, brothers, or fathers, depending on their age.

The Sikh is to meditate on God's Name ( Naam Japna or Naam Simran ) and recite the holy scriptures.

[ 28 ] This includes remembering God at all times and reciting his name whenever possible. The Sikh is to arise in the early hours and recite Nitnem , a collection of Gurbani to be read in the morning (Five Banis ), evening ( Rehras ), and night ( Kirtan Sohila ), followed each time with the Ardas prayer. The Ardas signifies that the Sikh need only seek the support of the Almighty Lord before beginning any new task or venture.

A Sikh must also follow the principle of Kirat Karni , thereby leading their life in accordance with the Guru's teachings. This includes engaging in an honest profession, work, or course of study, as well as promoting the family way of life giving time to children in an active way so as to ensure their proper awareness of the Sikh way of life.

Meditation and scripture [ edit ] Sikhs engage in personal and communal meditation, Kirtan and the study of the holy Scriptures. Meditating and understanding of the Guru Granth Sahib is important to the development of a Sikh. One should not only study Gurmukhi and be able to read Gurbani but also understand the meaning of the text. Translations and other material may be used to assist the Sikh. The Sikh should revert to the Guru Granth Sahib for the all spiritual guidance in one's life.

Congregation and Gurdwara service [ edit ] It is believed that a Sikh is more easily and deeply affected by Gurbani when engaged in congregational gatherings. For this reason, it is necessary for a Sikh to visit Gurdwaras , the places where the Sikhs congregate for worship and prayer. On joining the holy congregation, Sikhs should take part and obtain benefit from the joint study of the holy scriptures.

No one is to be barred from entering a Gurdwara, no matter in which country, religion, or caste he/she belongs to. The Gurdwara is open to all for the Guru's darshan (seeing the holy Guru) and Langar. However the person must not have on his/her person anything, such as tobacco or other intoxicants, which are tabooed by the Sikh religion. Shoes must be removed, one's head must be covered, and respectful clothing is a must.

During service ( seva ) in a Gurdwara and while congregational sessions are in session, only one activity should be done at a time in one hall in the presence of the Guru—performing of kirtan , delivering of discourse, interpretative elaboration of the scriptures, or the reading of the scriptures. Before taking a hukam from the Guru, an ardas must be done: all the congregation would stand for the ardas and then sit down and carefully listen to the Hukam of the Guru.

Kirtan [ edit ] Sikhs, as well as anyone with correct pronunciation and understanding of Gurbani who desires to take part in the congregation, perform kirtan (spiritual hymn singing) in a congregation and only hymns ( shabad ) from the holy scriptural compositions in traditional musical measures should be sung. Only shabads from Guru Granth Sahib Ji Gurbani and the compositions of Bhai Gurdas and Bhai Nand Lal , may be performed. It is improper to sing kirtan to rhythmic folk tunes or popular film tunes.

Akhand Paath and Sadharan Paath [ edit ] An Akhand Paath is the non-stop reading of the Guru Granth Sahib carried on during difficult times or during occasions of joy and celebration. The reading takes approximately forty eight hours of continuous and uninterrupted reading by a relay of skilled Gurbani readers. The reading must be done in a clear voice and with correct and full pronunciation. Reading the Gurbani too fast, so that the person listening in cannot follow the contents, is discouraged and is considered as disrespect for the Scriptures and the congregation ( sangat ).

A Sadharan Paath is a non-continuous reading of the Guru Granth Sahib and one can take from seven days to many months to complete the full reading of the 1430 Anga of the text.

Festivals and ceremonies [ edit ] The important Sikh festivals that are celebrated include Gurpurbs , in celebration of the birthday and other important anniversaries ( martyrdom , etc.) from the lives of the Gurus; and Vaisakhi , celebration of the first Amrit Sanchar and Harvest festival.

Along with other rites and conventions, Sikh ceremonies include: Naam Karan : baby naming ceremony Amrit Sanchar : Initiation into the Khalsa Anand Karaj : marriage ceremony Antam Sanskar : funeral ceremony Other codes [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sikh Rehat Maryada is based on earlier codes ( Rehat nama ), including: Tanakhah-nama ( Nasîhatnâme ) Samvat 1776 (1718–1719 CE), ten years after Guru Gobind Singh gave up his mortal body. According to H. H. McLeod, it has been wrongly attributed to Nand Lal .

[ 29 ] The Prahilad Rai Rehat-namab Sakhi Rehat ki: about 1735 CE Chaupa Singh Rehat-nama: 1740–1765 CE (1700 CE according to Piara Singh Padam).

Chaupa Singh was a member of the Guru's retinue. He was entrusted with the care of infant Gobind Das by Guru Tegh Bahadur . Some members of Chaupa Singh's family became martyrs with Guru Tegh Bahadur in Delhi and others served under the 10th Guru.

Desa Singh Rehat-nama: late 18th century Daya Singh Rehat-nama.

See also [ edit ] Prohibitions in Sikhism Cannabis and Sikhism Diet in Sikhism References [ edit ] ^ a b c The encyclopaedia of Sikhism . Harbans Singh. Patiala: Punjabi University. 1992–1998. pp.

424– 426.

ISBN 0-8364-2883-8 .

OCLC 29703420 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Haynes, Jeffrey (30 Jun 2008).

"19" .

Routledge handbook of religion and politics (1 ed.). Routledge. p. 316.

ISBN 978-0-415-41455-5 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ Singh, Nirmal (2008).

"10" .

Searches In Sikhism: thought, understanding, observance . New Delhi: Hemkunt Publishers. pp. 184 onwards.

ISBN 978-81-7010-367-7 .

OCLC 320246878 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ Kapoor, Sukhbir Singh; Mohinder Kaur Kapoor (2008).

"Introduction" .

The Making of the Sikh Rehatnamas . New Delhi, India: Hemkunt Publishers. p. 9.

ISBN 978-81-7010-370-7 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Rehit Maryada - The Sikh Encyclopedia" . 19 December 2000 . Retrieved 2024-07-08 .

^ "Preface to the English Version of Reht Maryada" . Secretary, Dharam Parchar Committee (Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee, Amritsar) . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

^ Singh, I. J. (Jul 22, 2005).

"A History of the Sikh Code of Conduct: A review of Darpan Sikh Rehat Maryada (Punjabi) by Gurbaksh Singh Gulshan" .

The Sikh Times . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

^ Singh, Teja. [1932] 1994. " Introduction: Report of S.G.P.C.'s Code of Conduct and Conventions Sub-Committee ." In Sikh Reht Maryada . Amritsar.

Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee . Retrieved 10 July 2020.

^ a b c Singh, Kulraj. 31 August 1994. " Preface to the English Version of Reht Maryada ." In Sikh Reht Maryada . Amritsar.

Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee . Retrieved 10 July 2020.

^ Maini, Darshan Singh (1999). "The Moment of the Khalsa: Vision, Values, and World View".

Nishaan Nagaara magazine - premiere issue (PDF) . p. 10.

^ The encyclopaedia of Sikhism . Harbans Singh. Patiala: Punjabi University. 1992–1998. pp.

426– 431.

ISBN 0-8364-2883-8 .

OCLC 29703420 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Kalsi, Sewa Singh. 1995. " Problems of Defining Authority in Sikhism ." DISKUS 3(2):43–58.

ISSN 0967-8948 .

^ a b c d e f Singh, Gurharpal; Shani, Giorgio (Nov 25, 2021).

Sikh Nationalism . Cambridge University Press. pp.

42– 44.

ISBN 9781009213448 .

^ McLeod, W. H. (1989).

The Sikhs: History, Religion, and Society . Columbia University Press. p. 73.

ISBN 978-0-231-06815-4 .

^ Fenech, Louis E.; McLeod, W. H. (2014-06-11).

Historical Dictionary of Sikhism . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 214.

ISBN 978-1-4422-3601-1 .

^ Hawley, John Stratton; Mann, Gurinder Singh (1993-07-01).

Studying the Sikhs: Issues for North America . SUNY Press. p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1426-2 .

^ Singh, Pashaura (2004).

Sikhism and History . Oxford University Press. p. 40.

ISBN 978-0-19-566708-0 .

Under Ranjit Singh, feelings slowly became more subdued and by the time the Singh Sabha emerged there was some embarrassment at the unconcealed enmity of the inherited rahit -namas. Tat Khalsa scholars in particular viewed such anti-Muslim items as the kind of utterance that Guru Gobind Singh could never have made and quietly dropped them from their revised rahit-namas.

^ Fenech, Louis E. (2013-02-07).

The Sikh Zafar-namah of Guru Gobind Singh: A Discursive Blade in the Heart of the Mughal Empire . Oxford University Press. pp. xv (Preface).

ISBN 978-0-19-993143-9 .

^ Grewal, J. S. (2019-07-25).

Guru Gobind Singh (1666–1708): Master of the White Hawk . Oxford University Press. p. 96.

ISBN 978-0-19-099038-1 .

^ Malhotra, Anshu; Lambert-Hurley, Siobhan (2015-10-23).

Speaking of the Self: Gender, Performance, and Autobiography in South Asia . Duke University Press. p. 195.

ISBN 978-0-8223-7497-8 .

From the time of the establishment of the Khalsa in 1699, some from within the Sikhs, more specifically the Khalsa, tried to create religious norms and codes of behavior that worked toward imparting a distinct Sikh identity partly by distancing from the Muslims. A stream within the Khalsa set about creating codes of conduct, the rahit literature, that began "othering" the Muslim/Turak (used interchangeably), passing tenets that included the avoidance of halal meat associated with the Muslims, and sleeping with Muslim women.

^ Murphy, Anne (2012-11-29).

The Materiality of the Past: History and Representation in Sikh Tradition . Oxford University Press. pp.

56– 59.

ISBN 978-0-19-991627-6 .

^ Fenech, Louis E. (2003).

Religious Conversion in India: Modes, Motivations, and Meanings . Oxford University Press. p. 173.

^ Singh, Pashaura; Fenech, Louis E. (2014).

The Oxford Handbook of Sikh Studies . Oxford University Press. pp.

240– 248.

ISBN 978-0-19-969930-8 .

^ a b c d Singh. "A History of the Sikh Code of Conduct: A review of Darpan Sikh Rehat Maryada (Punjabi) by Gurbaksh Singh Gulshan".

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b c Singh, "Report of SGPC's Code of Conduct and Conventions Sub-Committee." ^ "Sikh Reht Maryada, the Definition of Sikh, Sikh Conduct & Conventions, Sikh Religion Living, India" . Archived from the original on 2009-08-20 . Retrieved 2009-08-29 .

^ "Sikh Reht Maryada, the Definition of Sikh, Sikh Conduct & Conventions, Sikh Religion Living, India" . Archived from the original on 2002-02-02 . Retrieved 2010-11-22 .

^ "Sikh Reht Maryada, the Definition of Sikh, Sikh Conduct & Conventions, Sikh Religion Living, India" . Archived from the original on 2008-10-10 . Retrieved 2008-11-06 .

^ McLeod, William Hewat (11 August 2024).

"Sikh literature" .

Britannica . Retrieved 25 August 2024 .

Piara Singh Padam.

Rehatname . Patiala, 1974.

W.H. Mcleod.

Sikhs of the Khalsa : History of Khalsa Rehat . Oxford Press 2003.

Sikh Rehat Maryada: A Guide to the Sikh Way of Life . Published by the SGPC and re-printed by many Sikh missionary groups.

External links [ edit ] Damdami Taksal Rehat Maryada Rehat Maryada at SGPC.net Bhai Nand Lal's Tankahnama v t e Sikhism Glossary and History Gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh holy book) Philosophy Beliefs and principles Guru Maneyo Granth Sikh Rehat Maryada The 52 Hukams Prohibitions Cannabis and Sikhism Diet in Sikhism Practices Khalsa Sikh practices Sikh rites Ardās Kirtan Langar Naam Karan Anand Karaj Amrit Sanchar Amrit Velā Antam Sanskar Three Pillars Kirat Karo Naam Japo Vand Chhako The Five Ks Simran Sewa Charhdi Kala Dasvand Jhatka Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Gurbani Mul Mantar Japji Sahib Chaupai Jaap Sahib Rehras Sukhmani Sahib Tav-Prasad Savaiye Architecture Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Janam Asthan Darbar Sahib Kartarpur List Africa Asia Europe North America Bahadurgarh Fort Fateh Burj Hazuri Bagh Baradari Kesgarh Qila Khanda museum Moti Bagh Palace Nanak Shahi bricks Pul Kanjri Qila Mubarak, Patiala Ramgarhia Bunga Samadhi of Ranjit Singh Well of Dina Nath By country Diaspora Afghanistan Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Canada Vancouver China Denmark Fiji Finland France Germany Greece India Jammu and Kashmir Kochi Punjab Indonesia Iran Iraq Italy Japan Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Niue Norway Pakistan Panama Poland Singapore South Africa South Korea Sweden Switzerland Thailand United Arab Emirates United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland United States U.S. Military Groups, sects and communities Sects of Sikhism Khalsa Mina Namdhari Nanakpanthi Nihang Nirankari Sewapanthi Nirmala Ramraiya Udasi Mazhabi Sikh Piara Singh Bhaniara Agrahari Sikh Jatha Damdami Taksal Akhand Kirtani Jatha Singh Sabha Contemporary Sant Mat movements 3HO Sikh Empire v t e Sikh Empire Rulers Ranjit Singh Kharak Singh Nau Nihal Singh Chand Kaur Sher Singh Jind Kaur Duleep Singh Military conflicts Mughal-Sikh Wars Battle of Bhangani Nadaun Basoli 1st Anandpur 2nd Anandpur Chamkaur Sarsa Muktsar Sonepat Samana Sirhind Sadhaura Chappar Chiri Rahon Lohgarh Jalalabad Jammu Gurdas Nangal Delhi Afghan–Sikh wars Battle of Attock Battle of Multan Battle of Shopian Battle of Nowshera Battle of Peshawar Battle of Jamrud First Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Mudki Battle of Ferozeshah Battle of Aliwal Battle of Sobraon Second Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Ramnagar Battle of Chillianwala Siege of Multan Battle of Gujrat Others Nepal–Sikh War , Sino-Sikh war , Katoch–Sikh War, Hill States–Sikh Wars, Panchayati Revolution , List of battles involving the Sikh Empire Military forces Sikh Khalsa Army Fauj-i-Khas Fauj-i-Ain Kampu-i-mu'alla Adversaries Mughal Empire Durrani Empire Emirate of Afghanistan British East India Company Kingdom of Nepal Qing Empire Hill States Alliance Kingdom of Mankera Namgyal dynasty Barakzai dynasty Sudhans of Poonch Maqpon Dynasty Forts Jamrud Fort Multan Fort Harkishangarh Lahore Fort Zorawar Fort Bahu Fort Gobindgarh Fort Phillaur Fort Firozpur Fort Officials and warriors Natives Dhian Singh Diwan Dina Nath Diwan Bhawani Das Diwan Buta Singh Pratap Singh Misr Diwan Chand Diwan Mulraj Hari Singh Nalwa Mahan Singh Mirpuri Dewan Mokham Chand Khushal Singh Jamadar Zorawar Singh Tej Singh Lal Singh Gulab Singh Balbhadra Kunwar Jawahar Singh Mehta Basti Ram Sham Singh Attariwalla Sher Singh Attariwalla Chattar Singh Attariwalla Desa Singh Majithia Amar Singh Majithia Lehna Singh Majithia Ranjodh Singh Majithia Surat Singh Majithia Mangal Singh Ramgarhia Akali Phula Singh Chandu Lal Ajit Singh Sandhawalia Kahan Singh Nakai Sangat Singh Saini Hukma Singh Veer Singh Jarnail Ghaus Khan Ilahi Bakhsh Fakir Azizuddin Sultan Mahmud Khan Malik Fateh Khan Tiwana Sohan Lal Suri Moti Ram Diwan Ram Dayal Diwan Kirpa Ram Foreigners Jean-François Allard Jean-Baptiste Ventura Claude Auguste Court François Henri Mouton Alexander Gardner Paolo Avitabile Josiah Harlan Johann Martin Honigberger Henry Lawrence Influential families Sandhawalia family Majithia family Tiwana family Mian family Treaties Treaty of Amritsar (1809) Tripartite Treaty (1838) Treaty of Chushul (1842) Treaty of Lahore (1846) Treaty of Amritsar (1846) Miscellaneous Khalsa Darbar records Festivals Bandi Chhor Divas Hola Mohalla Maghi Mela Maghi Vaisakhi Culture Art Music Films Literature Music Names Other topics History Ik Onkar Waheguru Khanda Panj Pyare Places Politics Sikhs in the British Indian Army 11th Sikh Regiment Sikh Regiment Sikh Light Infantry Nanakshahi calendar Ramananda Fariduddin Ganjshakar Kabir Sardar Dastar Dharamyudh Islam Jainism Hinduism Rama Sikhs Ravidassia Women in Sikhism Sikhism and sexual orientation In Fiction Idolatry in Sikhism Criticism Punjab History Punjabis Punjabi language ( Gurmukhī ) Sacred trees Takht Akal Takht Damdama Sahib Kesgarh Sahib Hazur Sahib Patna Sahib Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rehat&oldid=1301189385 " Categories : 1945 documents Sikh practices Codes of conduct Warrior code Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from April 2012 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Punjabi-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles needing additional references from April 2012 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 15:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rehat 5 languages Add topic

