Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Current facilities 2 LIGO-Australia 3 Co-located facilities 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents AIGO 2 languages Français Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research facility in Western Australia Australian International Gravitational Observatory Alternative names AIGO Location(s) Gingin , Western Australia , AUS [ edit on Wikidata ] For the Chinese consumer electronics brand, see aigo .

The Australian International Gravitational Observatory ( AIGO ) is a research facility located near Gingin , north of Perth in Western Australia .  It is part of a worldwide effort to directly detect gravitational waves . Note that these are a major prediction of the general theory of relativity and are not to be confused with gravity waves , a phenomenon studied in fluid mechanics .

It is operated by the Australian International Gravitational Research Centre (AIGRC) through the University of Western Australia under the auspices of the Australian Consortium for Interferometric Gravitational Astronomy (ACIGA).

The current aim of the facility is to develop advanced techniques for improving the sensitivity of interferometric gravitational wave detectors such as LIGO and VIRGO . A study of operational interferometric gravitational wave detectors shows that AIGO is situated in almost the ideal location to complement existing detectors in the Northern hemisphere.

[ 1 ] Current facilities [ edit ] Current facilities (AIGO Stage I) consist of an L-shaped ultra high vacuum system, measuring 80 m on each side forming an interferometer for detecting gravitational waves .

[ 2 ] LIGO-Australia [ edit ] LIGO-Australia was a proposed plan (AIGO Stage II) to install an Advanced LIGO interferometer at AIGO, forming a triangle of three Advanced LIGO detectors.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It was to consist of an L-shaped interferometer, measuring 5 km on each side, with vacuum pipes about 700 mm in diameter.

[ 2 ] A 2010 developmental roadmap [ 5 ] issued by the Gravitational Wave International Committee (GWIC) for the field of gravitational-wave astronomy recommended that an expansion of the global array of interferometric detectors be pursued as a highest priority. In its roadmap, GWIC identified the Southern Hemisphere as one of the key locations in which a gravitational-wave interferometer could most effectively complement existing detectors. The AIGO facility in Western Australia was well-located to work with the existing and planned components of the global network, and already possessed an active gravitational-wave community.

The LIGO-Australia plan was approved by LIGO's US funding agency, the National Science Foundation , contingent on the understanding that it involved no increase in LIGO's total budget. The cost of building, operating and staffing the interferometer would have rested entirely with the Australian government.

[ 6 ] After a year-long effort, the LIGO Laboratory reluctantly acknowledged that the proposed relocation of an Advanced LIGO detector to Australia was not to occur. The Australian government had committed itself to a balanced budget and this precluded any new starts in science. The deadline for a response from Australia passed on 1 October 2011.

The proposal was then moved to India, where the Indian Initiative in Gravitational-wave Observations obtained some government support to pursue a similar plan, named LIGO-India , as AIGO had attempted. India is not quite as good a location as Australia, but provides most of the benefit.

Co-located facilities [ edit ] AIGO is on the same grounds as the Gravity Discovery Centre and the GDC Observatory , of which are educational and instructional facilities open to the general public. It is also the site of the Geoscience Australia Gingin Magnetic Observatory, one of a network of nine for monitoring the Earth's magnetic field.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Interferometric gravitational-wave detector References [ edit ] ^ Searle, Antony C.; Scott, Susan M.

; McClelland, David E.; Finn, L. Samuel (2006). "Optimal location of a new interferometric gravitational wave observatory".

Physical Review D .

73 (12): 124014.

Bibcode : 2006PhRvD..73l4014S .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.73.124014 .

^ a b David Blair (ed.).

AIGO Stage II . Australian Consortium for Interferometric Gravitational Astronomy (ACIGA).

^ "The Need for a Southern Hemisphere Detector" . AIGO. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 28 April 2012 .

^ Reaching Still Higher by Going Down Under: the LIGO-Australia Concept , by Dave Beckett, 10/11/2010, LIGO Laboratory News.

^ "The future of gravitational wave astronomy" (PDF) . GWIC. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 February 2016 . Retrieved 28 April 2012 .

^ http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/sci;329/5995/1003 , article from Science magazine, 27 August 2010.

^ "Geomagnetic observatory relocated" . Australian Government Geoscience Australia. Archived from the original on 21 March 2012 . Retrieved 28 April 2012 .

^ "Gnangara geomagnetic observatory—50 years young" . Australian Government Geoscience Australia . Retrieved 28 April 2012 .

External links [ edit ] LIGO-Australia Home Page Archived 19 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine ACIGA Home Page Gravity Discovery Center Home Page v t e Gravitational-wave astronomy Gravitational wave Gravitational-wave observatory Detectors Resonant mass antennas Active NAUTILUS ( IGEC ) AURIGA ( IGEC ) MiniGRAIL Mario Schenberg Past EXPLORER ( IGEC ) ALLEGRO ( IGEC ) NIOBE ( IGEC ) Stanford gravitational wave detector ALTAIR GEOGRAV AGATA Weber bar Proposed TOBA Past proposals GRAIL (downsized to MiniGRAIL ) TIGA SFERA Graviton (downsized to Mario Schenberg ) Ground-based interferometers Active AIGO ( ACIGA ) CLIO Fermilab holometer GEO600 Advanced LIGO ( LIGO Scientific Collaboration ) KAGRA Advanced Virgo ( European Gravitational Observatory ) Past TAMA 300 TAMA 20, later known as LISM TENKO-100 Caltech 40m interferometer Planned INDIGO (LIGO-India) Proposed Cosmic Explorer Einstein Telescope Past proposals LIGO-Australia Space-based interferometers Planned LISA Proposed Big Bang Observer DECIGO TianQin Pulsar timing arrays EPTA IPTA NANOGrav PPTA Data analysis Einstein@Home PyCBC Zooniverse : Gravity Spy Observations Events List of observations First observation (GW150914) GW151226 GW170104 GW170608 GW170814 GW170817 (first neutron star merger ) GW190412 GW190521 (first-ever possible light from bh-bh merger) GW190814 (first-ever "mass gap" collision) GW200105 (first black hole - neutron star merger) Methods Direct detection Laser interferometers Resonant mass detectors Proposed: Atom interferometers Indirect detection B-modes of CMB Pulsar timing array Binary pulsar Theory General relativity Tests of general relativity Metric theories Graviton Effects / properties Polarization Spin-flip Redshift Travel with speed of light h strain Chirp signal ( chirp mass ) Carried energy Gravitational wave background Types / sources Stochastic Cosmic inflation - quantum fluctuation Phase transition Binary inspiral Supermassive black holes Stellar black holes Neutron stars EMRI Continuous Rotating neutron star Burst Supernova or from unknown sources Hypothesis Colliding cosmic string and other unknown sources Portals : Western Australia Australia Physics Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=AIGO&oldid=1305701435 " Categories : Interferometers Gravitational-wave telescopes Astronomical observatories in Western Australia Shire of Gingin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with infoboxes completely from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2014 Use Australian English from March 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Webarchive template wayback links Western Australia articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents AIGO 2 languages Add topic

