Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early modern period 1.2 19th century 1.3 20th century 1.3.1 Eurocommunism 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Communism in France Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Communism has been a part of French politics since the early 20th century at the latest. It has been described as "an enduring presence on the French political scene" for most of the 20th century.

[ 1 ] In 1920, the French Section of the Communist International was founded.

[ 2 ] This organization went on to become the French Communist Party ( Parti communiste français , PCF ). Following World War II , the French Communist Party joined the government led by Charles de Gaulle before being dropped by the coalition.

[ citation needed ] From November 1946 to 1956, the French Communist Party won more votes than any other party in the French national elections.

[ citation needed ] After 1956, their share of the vote gradually declined.

[ citation needed ] In addition to the French Communist Party , there are and have been other French communist political parties.

History [ edit ] Early modern period [ edit ] During the early modern period in Europe, various groups supporting communist ideas appeared. In the 18th century, the French philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau in his hugely influential The Social Contract (1762) outlined the basis for a political order based on popular sovereignty rather than the rule of monarchs.

[ 3 ] His views proved influential during the French Revolution of 1789 in which various anti-monarchists, particularly the Jacobins , supported the idea of redistributing wealth equally among the people, including Jean-Paul Marat and Gracchus Babeuf . The latter was involved in the Conspiracy of the Equals of 1796 intending to establish a revolutionary regime based on communal ownership, egalitarianism and the redistribution of property.

[ 4 ] However, the plot was detected and he and several others involved were arrested and executed. Despite this setback, the example of the French Revolutionary regime and Babeuf's doomed insurrection was an inspiration for radical French thinkers such as Henri de Saint-Simon , Louis Blanc , Charles Fourier and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , who declared that " property is theft!

" [ 5 ] 19th century [ edit ] By the 1830s and 1840s, the egalitarian concepts of communism and the related ideas of socialism had become widely popular in French revolutionary circles thanks to the writings of social critics and philosophers such as Pierre Leroux and Théodore Dézamy , whose critiques of bourgeoisie liberalism led to a widespread intellectual rejection of laissez-faire capitalism on both economic, philosophical and moral grounds.

[ 6 ] Importantly, Philippe Buonarroti , one of Babeuf's co-conspirators, survived the crackdown on the Conspiracy of the Equals and went on to write the influential book History of Babeuf's Conspiracy for Equality first published in 1828.

[ 6 ] Buonarroti's works and teachings went on to inspire early Babouvist communist groups such as the Christian communist League of the Just in 1836 led by Wilhelm Weitling which would later be merged with the Communist Correspondence Committee in Brussels.

[ 7 ] This merger of the two groups in 1847 formed the Communist League , headed by German socialist labour leader Karl Schapper , who then that same year tasked two founding members, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, to write a manifesto laying out the principles of the new political party.

[ 8 ] During the latter half of the 19th century, various left-wing organisations across Europe continued to campaign against the many autocratic right-wing regimes that were then in power. In France, socialists set up a government known as the Paris Commune after the fall of Napoleon III in 1871, but they were soon overthrown and many of their members executed by counter-revolutionaries.

[ 9 ] 20th century [ edit ] In Europe, front organizations were especially influential in France which became the base for communist front organizer Willi Münzenberg in 1933.

[ 10 ] During the Sino-Soviet split , the French Communist Party aligned with the Soviet perspective.

[ 11 ] : 226 By the middle of the 1960s, the French Communist Party lost members and sympathizers due to its ambivalent positions during the Algerian war and its perceived excessive focus on class and inadequate focus on imperialism and race.

[ 11 ] : 226 French Maoism developed after the Sino-Soviet split and particularly from 1966 to 1976.

[ 11 ] : 225 After May 68 , the cultural influence of French Maoists increased.

[ 12 ] : 122 Maoists became the first group of French intellectuals to emphasize gay and lesbian rights in their publications and contributed to the nascent feminist movement in France .

[ 12 ] : 122 Eurocommunism [ edit ] Main article: Eurocommunism Eurocommunism, a revisionist trend in the 1970s and 1980s within various Western European communist parties, was especially prominent in France. They claimed to be developing a theory and practice of social transformation more relevant for Western Europe. During the Cold War , they sought to undermine the influence of the Soviet Union and the Communist Party of the Soviet Union .

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Alternative libertaire French Communist Party History of the French Communist Party Independent Workers' Party Marxist–Leninist Communist Organization – Proletarian Way Pole of Communist Revival in France Workers' Communist Party of France References [ edit ] ^ "Rural Communism in France, 1920-1939" .

Department of History . 30 January 1998.

^ "French Communist Party | political party, France" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ David Priestland (2010).

The Red Flag: Communism and the Making of the Modern World . Penguin. pp. 5–7.

^ David Priestland (2010) The Red Flag: Communism and the Making of the Modern World . Penguin. pp. 18–19.

^ Service (2007:16–17) ^ a b Paul E Corcoran; Christian Fuchs (25 August 1983).

Before Marx: Socialism and Communism in France, 1830–48 . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

3– 5, 22.

ISBN 978-1-349-17146-0 .

^ Franz Mehring , Karl Marx: The Story of His Life .

Edward Fitzgerald, trans. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1936; pg. 139.

^ Christian Fuchs (23 October 2015).

Reading Marx in the Information Age: A Media and Communication Studies Perspective on Capital . Routledge. p. 357.

ISBN 978-1-317-36449-8 .

^ Service (2007:28).

^ Julian Jackson, The Popular Front in France (1990) p. x.

^ a b c Bourg, Julian (2013). "Principally Contradiction: The Flourishing of French Maoism". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b Crean, Jeffrey (2024).

The Fear of Chinese Power: an International History . New Approaches to International History series. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 978-1-350-23394-2 .

^ Richard Kingsley, ed., In Search of Eurocommunism, (Macmillan, 1981).

v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communism_in_France&oldid=1289106184 " Categories : Communism in France Politics of France Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 14:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communism in France Add languages Add topic

