Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Proof 3 Finding solutions 4 Variants 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Revelation principle 3 languages Español فارسی Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Principle in economics and game theory This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs editing to comply with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

Please help improve the content .

( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Revelation principle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs attention from an expert in Mathematics, Economics or Game theory .  Please add a reason or a talk parameter to this template to explain the issue with the article.

WikiProject Mathematics , WikiProject Economics or WikiProject Game theory may be able to help recruit an expert.

( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The revelation principle is a fundamental result in mechanism design , social choice theory , and game theory which shows it is always possible to design a strategy-resistant implementation of a social decision-making mechanism (such as an electoral system or market ).

[ 1 ] It can be seen as a kind of mirror image to Gibbard's theorem . The revelation principle says that if a social choice function can be implemented with some non-honest mechanism —one where players have an incentive to lie—the same function can be implemented by an incentive-compatible (honesty-promoting) mechanism with the same equilibrium outcome (payoffs).

[ 2 ] : 224–225 The revelation principle shows that, while Gibbard's theorem proves it is impossible to design a system that will always be fully invulnerable to strategy (if we do not know how players will behave), it is possible to design a system that encourages honesty given a solution concept (if the corresponding equilibrium is unique).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The idea behind the revelation principle is that, if we know which strategy the players in a game will use, we can simply ask all the players to submit their true payoffs or utility functions ; then, we take those preferences and calculate each voter's optimal strategy before executing it for them. This procedure means that an honest report of preferences is now the best-possible strategy, because it guarantees the mechanism will play the optimal strategy for the player.

Examples [ edit ] Consider the following example. There is a certain item that Alice values as v A {\displaystyle v_{A}} and Bob values as v B {\displaystyle v_{B}} . The government needs to decide who will receive that item and in what terms.

A social-choice-function is a function that maps a set of individual preferences to an optimal social outcome. An example function is the utilitarian rule , which says "give the item to a person that values it the most". We denote a social choice function by Soc and its recommended outcome given a set of preferences by Soc(Prefs) .

A mechanism is a rule that maps a set of individual actions to a social outcome. A mechanism Mech induces a game which we denote by Game(Mech) .

A mechanism Mech is said to implement a social-choice-function Soc if, for every combination of individual preferences, there is a Nash equilibrium in Game(Mech) in which the outcome is Soc(Prefs) . Two example mechanisms are: "Each individual says a number between 1 and 10. The item is given to the individual who says the lowest number; if both say the same number, then the item is given to Alice". This mechanism does NOT implement the utilitarian function, since for every individual who wants the item, it is a dominant strategy to say "1" regardless of his/her true value. This means that in equilibrium the item is always given to Alice, even if Bob values it more.

First-price sealed-bid auction is a mechanism which implements the utilitarian function. For example, if v B > v A {\displaystyle v_{B}>v_{A}} , then any action profile in which Bob bids more than Alice and both bids are in the range ( v A , v B ) {\displaystyle (v_{A},v_{B})} is a Nash-equilibrium in which the item goes to Bob. Additionally, if the valuations of Alice and Bob are random variables drawn independently from the same distribution, then there is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium in which the item goes to the bidder with the highest value.

A direct-mechanism is a mechanism in which the set of actions available to each player is just the set of possible preferences of the player.

A direct-mechanism Mech is said to be Bayesian-Nash- Incentive-compatible (BNIC) if there is a Bayesian Nash equilibrium of Game(Mech) in which all players reveal their true preferences. Some example direct-mechanisms are: "Each individual says how much he values the item. The item is given to the individual that said the highest value. In case of a tie, the item is given to Alice". This mechanism is not BNIC, since a player who wants the item is better-off by saying the highest possible value, regardless of his true value.

First-price sealed-bid auction is also not BNIC, since the winner is always better-off by bidding the lowest value that is slightly above the loser's bid.

However, if the distribution of the players' valuations is known, then there is a variant which is BNIC and implements the utilitarian function.

Moreover, it is known that second price auction is BNIC (it is even IC in a stronger sense—dominant-strategy IC). Additionally, it implements the utilitarian function.

Proof [ edit ] Suppose we have an arbitrary mechanism Mech that implements Soc .

We construct a direct mechanism Mech' that is truthful and implements Soc .

Mech' simply simulates the equilibrium strategies of the players in Game( Mech ). i.e.

Mech' asks the players to report their valuations.

Based on the reported valuations, Mech' calculates, for each player, his equilibrium strategy in Mech .

Mech' returns the outcome returned by Mech .

Reporting the true valuations in Mech' is like playing the equilibrium strategies in Mech . Hence, reporting the true valuations is a Nash equilibrium in Mech' , as desired. Moreover, the equilibrium payoffs are the same, as desired.

Finding solutions [ edit ] In mechanism design , the revelation principle is importance in finding solutions. The researcher need only look at the set of equilibria characterized by incentive compatibility . That is, if the mechanism designer wants to implement some outcome or property, they can restrict their search to mechanisms in which agents are willing to reveal their private information to the mechanism designer that has that outcome or property. If no such direct and truthful mechanism exists, no mechanism can implement this outcome by contraposition . By narrowing the area needed to be searched, the problem of finding a mechanism becomes much easier.

Variants [ edit ] The principle comes in various flavors corresponding to different kinds of incentive-compatibility : The dominant-strategy revelation-principle says that every social-choice function that can be implemented in dominant-strategies can be implemented by a dominant-strategy-incentive-compatible (DSIC) mechanism. This variant was first introduced by Allan Gibbard .

[ 1 ] The Bayesian-Nash revelation-principle says that every social-choice function that can be implemented in Bayesian-Nash equilibrium ( Bayesian game , i.e. game of incomplete information) can be implemented by a Bayesian-Nash incentive-compatibility (BNIC) mechanism. This broader solution concept was introduced by Dasgupta, Hammond and Maskin ; [ 3 ] Holmström ; [ 5 ] and Myerson .

[ 4 ] The revelation principle also works for correlated equilibria : [ citation needed ] for every arbitrary coordinating device a.k.a. correlating, there exists another direct device for which the state space equals the action space of each player.

[ jargon ] Then the coordination is done by directly informing each player of his action.

[ clarification needed ] See also [ edit ] Mechanism design Incentive compatibility The Market for Lemons Nash equilibrium Game theory Constrained Pareto efficiency Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem References [ edit ] ^ a b Gibbard, A. 1973. Manipulation of voting schemes: a general result. Econometrica 41, 587–601.

^ Vazirani, Vijay V.

; Nisan, Noam ; Roughgarden, Tim ; Tardos, Éva (2007).

Algorithmic Game Theory (PDF) . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-87282-0 .

^ a b Dasgupta, P., Hammond, P. and Maskin, E. 1979. The implementation of social choice rules: some results on incentive compatibility. Review of Economic Studies 46, 185–216.

^ a b Myerson, R. 1979. Incentive-compatibility and the bargaining problem. Econometrica 47, 61–73.

^ Holmstrom, B. 1977. On incentives and control in organizations. Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Revelation_principle&oldid=1281103526 " Categories : Mechanism design Principles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2016 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles needing expert attention with no reason or talk parameter Articles needing expert attention from April 2024 All articles needing expert attention Mathematics articles needing expert attention Economics articles needing expert attention Game theory articles needing expert attention Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 All articles that are too technical Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2024 This page was last edited on 18 March 2025, at 09:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Revelation principle 3 languages Add topic

