Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mathematical work Toggle Mathematical work subsection 1.1 Surveying 2 See also 3 Further reading 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Liu Hui 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kernowek Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese mathematician and writer For other people named Liu Hui, see Liu Hui (disambiguation) .

In this Chinese name , the family name is Liu .

Liu Hui 劉徽 Born c.

225 [ 1 ] Zibo , Shandong Died c.

295 [ 1 ] Occupation(s) Mathematician, writer Liu Hui Traditional Chinese 劉徽 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Liú Huī IPA [ljǒʊ xwéɪ] Liu Hui ( fl.

3rd century CE ) was a Chinese mathematician who published a commentary in 263 CE on Jiu Zhang Suan Shu ( The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art ).

[ 2 ] He was a descendant of the Marquis of Zixiang of the Eastern Han dynasty and lived in the state of Cao Wei during the Three Kingdoms period (220–280 CE) of China.

[ 3 ] His major contributions as recorded in his commentary on The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art include a proof of the Pythagorean theorem , theorems in solid geometry , an improvement on Archimedes's approximation of π , and a systematic method of solving linear equations in several unknowns. In his other work, Haidao Suanjing (The Sea Island Mathematical Manual) , he wrote about geometrical problems and their application to surveying. He probably visited Luoyang , where he measured the sun's shadow.

[ 3 ] Mathematical work [ edit ] Liu Hui expressed mathematical results in the form of decimal fractions that utilized metrological units (i.e., related units of length with base 10 such as 1 chǐ = 10 cùn , 1 cùn = 10 fēn , 1 fēn = 10 lí , etc.); this led Liu Hui to express a diameter of 1.355 feet as 1 chǐ , 3 cùn , 5 fēn , 5 lí .

[ 4 ] Han Yen (fl. 780-804 CE) is thought to be the first mathematician that dropped the terms referring to the units of length and used a notation system akin to the modern decimal system  and Yang Hui (c. 1238–1298 CE) is considered to have introduced a unified decimal system.

[ 5 ] Liu provided a proof of a theorem identical to the Pythagorean theorem .

[ 3 ] Liu called the figure of the drawn diagram for the theorem the "diagram giving the relations between the hypotenuse and the sum and difference of the other two sides whereby one can find the unknown from the known." [ 6 ] In the field of plane areas and solid figures, Liu Hui was one of the greatest contributors to empirical solid geometry. For example, he found that a wedge with rectangular base and both sides sloping could be broken down into a pyramid and a tetrahedral wedge.

[ 7 ] He also found that a wedge with trapezoid base and both sides sloping could be made to give two tetrahedral wedges separated by a pyramid.

[ 7 ] He computed the volume of solid figures such as cone, cylinder, frustum of a cone, prism, pyramid, tetrahedron, and a wedge.

[ 2 ] However, he failed to compute the volume of a sphere and noted that he left it to a future mathematician to compute.

[ 2 ] In his commentaries on The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art , he presented: An algorithm for the approximation of pi ( π ). While at the time, it was common practice to assume π to equal 3, [ 8 ] Liu utilized the method of inscribing a polygon within a circle to approximate π to equal 157 50 {\textstyle {\frac {157}{50}}} on the basis of a 192-sided polygon.

[ 9 ] This method was similar to the one employed by Archimedes whereby one calculates the length of the perimeter of the inscribed polygon utilizing the properties of right-angled triangles formed by each half-segment. Liu subsequently utilized a 3072-sided polygon to approximate π to equal 3.14159, which is a more accurate approximation than the one calculated by Archimedes or Ptolemy.

[ 10 ] Gaussian elimination .

Cavalieri's principle to find the volume of a cylinder and the intersection of two perpendicular cylinders [ 11 ] [ 12 ] although this work was only finished by Zu Chongzhi and Zu Gengzhi . Liu's commentaries often include explanations why some methods work and why others do not. Although his commentary was a great contribution, some answers had slight errors which was later corrected by the Tang mathematician and Taoist believer Li Chunfeng .

Through his work in the Nine Chapters , he could have been the first mathematician to discover and compute with negative numbers; definitely before Ancient Indian mathematician Brahmagupta started using negative numbers.

Surveying [ edit ] Survey of sea island Liu Hui also presented, in a separate appendix of 263 AD called Haidao Suanjing or The Sea Island Mathematical Manual , several problems related to surveying . This book contained many practical problems of geometry, including the measurement of the heights of Chinese pagoda towers.

[ 13 ] This smaller work outlined instructions on how to measure distances and heights with "tall surveyor's poles and horizontal bars fixed at right angles to them".

[ 14 ] With this, the following cases are considered in his work: The measurement of the height of an island opposed to its sea level and viewed from the sea The height of a tree on a hill The size of a city wall viewed at a long distance The depth of a ravine (using hence-forward cross-bars) The height of a tower on a plain seen from a hill The breadth of a river-mouth seen from a distance on land The width of a valley seen from a cliff The depth of a transparent pool The width of a river as seen from a hill The size of a city seen from a mountain.

Liu Hui's information about surveying was known to his contemporaries as well. The cartographer and state minister Pei Xiu (224–271) outlined the advancements of cartography, surveying, and mathematics up until his time. This included the first use of a rectangular grid and graduated scale for accurate measurement of distances on representative terrain maps.

[ 15 ] Liu Hui provided commentary on the Nine Chapter's problems involving building canal and river dykes , giving results for total amount of materials used, the amount of labor needed, the amount of time needed for construction, etc.

[ 16 ] Although translated into English long beforehand, Liu's work was translated into French by Guo Shuchun, a professor from the Chinese Academy of Sciences , who began in 1985 and took twenty years to complete his translation.

See also [ edit ] Chinese mathematics Fangcheng (mathematics) Lists of people of the Three Kingdoms Liu Hui's π algorithm Haidao Suanjing History of geometry Further reading [ edit ] Chen, Stephen. "Changing Faces:  Unveiling a Masterpiece of Ancient Logical Thinking." South China Morning Post , Sunday, January 28, 2007.

Crossley, J.M et al. The Logic of Liu Hui and Euclid, Philosophy and History of Science, vol 3, No 1, 1994 Guo, Shuchun.

"Liu Hui" .

Encyclopedia of China (Mathematics Edition), 1st ed.

Ho Peng Yoke. "Liu Hui." Dictionary of Scientific Biography , vol. 8. Ed. Charles C. Gillipsie. New York: Scribners, 1973, 418–425.

Hsu, Mei-ling. "The Qin Maps: A Clue to Later Chinese Cartographic Development." Imago Mundi (Volume 45, 1993): 90–100.

Lee, Chun-yue & C. M.-Y. Tang (2012).

"A Comparative Study on Finding Volume of Spheres by Liu Hui (劉徽) and Archimedes: An Educational Perspective to Secondary School Students." Mikami, Yoshio (1974).

Development of Mathematics in China and Japan .

Siu, Man-Keung. Proof and Pedagogy in Ancient China: Examples from Liu Hui's Commentary On Jiu Zhang Suan Shu, 1993 References [ edit ] ^ a b Lee & Tang.

^ a b c "Liu Hui – Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved 2022-04-17 .

^ a b c Stewart, Ian (2017).

Significant Figures: The Lives and Work of Great Mathematicians (First US ed.). New York: Basic Books. p. 40.

ISBN 978-0-465-09613-8 .

^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilization in China, Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . With the collaboration of Wang Ling. Cambridge University Press. pp.

84– 85.

ISBN 978-0521058018 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . With the Collaboration of Wang Ling. Cambridge University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0521058018 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Needham, Volume 3, 95–96.

^ a b Needham, Volume 3, 98–99.

^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . With the Collaboration of Wang Ling. Cambridge University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0521058018 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . With the Collaboration of Wang Ling. Cambridge University Press. p. 100.

ISBN 978-0521058018 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 3, Mathematics and the Sciences of the Heavens and the Earth . With the Collaboration of Wang Ling. Cambridge University Press. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0521058018 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Needham, Volume 3, 143.

^ Siu ^ Needham, Volume 3, 30.

^ Needham, Volume 3, 31.

^ Hsu, 90–96.

^ Needham, Volume 4, Part 3, 331.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Liu Hui (mathematician) .

Chinese Wikisource has original text related to this article: Liu Hui O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Liu Hui" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Liu Hui and the first Golden Age of Chinese Mathematics, by Philip D. Straffin Jr Works by Hui Liu at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Hui Liu at the Internet Archive v t e Prominent people of Cao Wei Emperors Cao Cao (posthumously) Cao Pi Cao Rui Cao Fang Cao Mao Cao Huan Empresses Empress Dowager Bian Lady Zhen Empress Wende Empress Mingdao Empress Mingyuan Empress Huai Empress Zhang Empress Wang Empress Bian (Cao Mao's wife) Empress Bian (Cao Huan's wife) Princes and male royal figures Cao Biao Cao Gan Cao Gong Cao Gun Cao Hui Cao Jian Cao Ju (Prince of Pengcheng) Cao Jun (Prince of Chenliu) Cao Li Cao Lin (Prince of Donghai) Cao Lin (Prince of Pei) Cao Mao Cao Rui Cao Xie Cao Xun Cao Yan Cao Yong Cao Yu Cao Zhang Cao Zhi Cao Zhi (Yungong) Princess and female royal figures Duquess Cao Cao Hua Cao Xian Princess Dongxiang Princess Jinxiang Princess Anyang Princess Changle Princess Qinghe Lady Yu Princess Linfen Regents Cao Shuang Sima Yi Sima Shi Sima Zhao Sima Yan Civil officers Bao Xun Bi Gui Cang Ci Chang Lin Chen Jiao Chen Qun Cui Lin Deng Yang Dong Zhao Du Ji Du Xi Fu Jia Fu Xuan Fu Xun Gao Rou Gaotang Long Guan Ning Han Ji He Kui He Qia He Yan Hu Zhi Hua Xin Huan Fan Huan Jie Jia Chong Jia Xu Jiang Ji Li Dian Li Feng Li Sheng Liang Xi Liu Shao Liu Ye Liu Yi Lu Yu Pang Yu Pei Qian Pei Xiu Sima Fu Sima Zhi Su Ze Wang Chen Wang Guan Wang Lang Wang Jing Wang Su Wang Xiang Wang Ye Wei Ji Wei Zhen Wu Zhi Xiahou He Xiahou Hui Xiahou Wei Xiahou Xuan Xin Pi Xing Yong Xu Miao Xu Shu Xu Xuan Xun Xu Xun Yi Yang Fu Yang Jun Yu Huan Zhang Hua Zhang Ji (Derong) Zhang Ji (Jingzhong) Zheng Hun Zhong Yao Zhong Yu Military officers Cao Hong Cao Ren Cao Xiu Cao Zhang Cao Zhen Chen Tai Deng Ai Du Yu Fei Yao Gongsun Yuan Guanqiu Jian Guo Huai Hao Zhao Huang Quan Jia Kui Liu Jing Lü Qian Man Chong Meng Da Niu Jin Pang De Qian Hong Qian Zhao Qin Lang Sima Wang Sima Zhou Sun Li Tang Zi Tian Xu Tian Yu Wang Chang Wang Hun Wang Ji Wang Jun Wang Ling Wang Shuang Wang Zhong Wei Guan Wen Ping Wen Qin Wen Yang Xiahou Ba Xiahou Dun Xiahou Mao Xiahou Shang Xu Chu Xu Huang Xu Zhi Yang Hu Yang Qiu Yin Li Yu Jin Yue Jin Zang Ba Zhang He Zhang Liao Zhang Te Zhao Yan Zhong Hui Zhou Tai Zhu Ling Zhuge Dan Zhuge Xu Other notable women Cai Yan Cuishi Guo Huai Pang E Wang Yi Wang Yuanji Xiahou Hui Xin Xianying Yang Huiyu Xiahou Lingnü Zhang Chunhua Zhang Changpu Princess Changshan Yang Yan Wei Huacun Xun Cai Xu Yi Other notable figures Budugen Du Kui Guan Lu Huangfu Mi Huchuquan Liu Bao Kebineng Liu Hui Ma Jun Mohuba Murong Muyan Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove Tuoba Liwei Wang Bi Xieguini Xun Can Pei Xiu Zhou Xuan Zhu Jianping Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Netherlands Latvia Israel Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liu_Hui&oldid=1278068048 " Categories : Cao Wei science writers Mathematicians from Shandong People from Zibo People of Cao Wei Writers from Zibo 3rd-century Chinese mathematicians Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liu Hui 35 languages Add topic

