Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Consistency 2 Consistency strength 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Equiconsistency 1 language Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Being equally consistent In mathematical logic , two theories are equiconsistent if the consistency of one theory implies the consistency of the other theory, and vice versa .  In this case, they are, roughly speaking, "as consistent as each other".

In general, it is not possible to prove the absolute consistency of a theory T .  Instead we usually take a theory S , believed to be consistent, and try to prove the weaker statement that if S is consistent then T must also be consistent—if we can do this we say that T is consistent relative to S .  If S is also consistent relative to T then we say that S and T are equiconsistent .

Consistency [ edit ] In mathematical logic, formal theories are studied as mathematical objects . Since some theories are powerful enough to model different mathematical objects, it is natural to wonder about their own consistency .

Hilbert proposed a program at the beginning of the 20th century whose ultimate goal was to show, using mathematical methods, the consistency of mathematics. Since most mathematical disciplines can be reduced to arithmetic , the program quickly became the establishment of the consistency of arithmetic by methods formalizable within arithmetic itself.

Gödel 's incompleteness theorems show that Hilbert's program cannot be realized: if a consistent computably enumerable theory is strong enough to formalize its own metamathematics (whether something is a proof or not), i.e. strong enough to model a weak fragment of arithmetic ( Robinson arithmetic suffices), then the theory cannot prove its own consistency. There are some technical caveats as to what requirements the formal statement representing the metamathematical statement "The theory is consistent" needs to satisfy, but the outcome is that if a (sufficiently strong) theory can prove its own consistency then either there is no computable way of identifying whether a statement is even an axiom of the theory or not, or else the theory itself is inconsistent (in which case it can prove anything, including false statements such as its own consistency).

Given this, instead of outright consistency, one usually considers relative consistency: Let S and T be formal theories. Assume that S is a consistent theory. Does it follow that T is consistent? If so, then T is consistent relative to S . Two theories are equiconsistent if each one is consistent relative to the other.

Consistency strength [ edit ] If T is consistent relative to S , but S is not known to be consistent relative to T , then we say that S has greater consistency strength than T .  When discussing these issues of consistency strength, the metatheory in which the discussion takes places needs to be carefully addressed. For theories at the level of second-order arithmetic , the reverse mathematics program has much to say. Consistency strength issues are a usual part of set theory , since this is a computable theory that can certainly model most of mathematics. The most widely used set of axioms of set theory is called ZFC . When a set-theoretic statement A is said to be equiconsistent to another B , what is really being claimed is that in the metatheory ( Peano arithmetic in this case) it can be proven that the theories ZFC+ A and ZFC+ B are equiconsistent. Usually, primitive recursive arithmetic can be adopted as the metatheory in question, but even if the metatheory is ZFC or an extension of it, the notion is meaningful. The method of forcing allows one to show that the theories ZFC, ZFC+CH and ZFC+¬CH are all equiconsistent (where CH denotes the continuum hypothesis ).

When discussing fragments of ZFC or their extensions (for example, ZF, set theory without the axiom of choice, or ZF+AD, set theory with the axiom of determinacy ), the notions described above are adapted accordingly. Thus, ZF is equiconsistent with ZFC, as shown by Gödel.

The consistency strength of numerous combinatorial statements can be calibrated by large cardinals .  For example: the negation of Kurepa's hypothesis is equiconsistent with the existence of an inaccessible cardinal , the non-existence of special ω ω 2 {\displaystyle \omega _{2}} - Aronszajn trees is equiconsistent with the existence of a Mahlo cardinal , the non-existence of ω ω 2 {\displaystyle \omega _{2}} - Aronszajn trees is equiconsistent with the existence of a weakly compact cardinal .

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Large cardinal property References [ edit ] ^ * Kunen, Kenneth (2011), Set theory , Studies in Logic, vol. 34, London: College Publications, p. 225, ISBN 978-1-84890-050-9 , Zbl 1262.03001 Akihiro Kanamori (2003).

The Higher Infinite . Springer.

ISBN 3-540-00384-3 v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal v t e Metalogic and metamathematics Cantor's theorem Entscheidungsproblem Church–Turing thesis Consistency Effective method Foundations of mathematics of geometry Gödel's completeness theorem Gödel's incompleteness theorems Soundness Completeness Decidability Interpretation Löwenheim–Skolem theorem Metatheorem Satisfiability Independence Type–token distinction Use–mention distinction Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equiconsistency&oldid=1191609570 " Categories : Large cardinals Mathematical logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 December 2023, at 15:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equiconsistency 1 language Add topic

