Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Precedents in religious thought 3 Further exploration 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ecotheology 15 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano Magyar മലയാളം Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theological reflection on the environment This article is about the field of ecotheology. For the journal Ecotheology (1996–2006), see Journal for the Study of Religion, Nature and Culture .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ecotheology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Ecotheology is a form of constructive theology that focuses on the interrelationships of religion and nature , particularly in the light of environmental concerns . Ecotheology generally starts from the premise that a relationship exists between human religious/spiritual worldviews and the degradation or restoration and preservation of nature . It explores the interaction between ecological values, such as sustainability , and the human domination of nature. The movement has produced numerous religious-environmental projects around the world.

The burgeoning awareness of environmental crisis has led to widespread religious reflection on the human relationship with the earth. Such reflection has strong precedents in most religious traditions in the realms of ethics and cosmology , and can be seen as a subset or corollary to  the theology of nature.

Ecotheology explores not only the relationship between religion and nature in terms of degradation of nature , but also in terms of ecosystem management in general. Specifically, ecotheology seeks not only to identify prominent issues within the relationship between nature and religion, but also to outline potential solutions. Many supporters and contributors of ecotheology argue that science and education are simply not enough to inspire the change necessary in the current environmental crisis.

[ 1 ] There is not a clear distinction between environmental theology and ecotheology, though the term environmental theology might indicate a theology in which environmental ethics is established prior to one's understanding of the meaning of God.

Background [ edit ] Seyyed Hossein Nasr , a pioneering figure in the field of ecotheology, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] was among the early thinkers "to draw attention to the spiritual dimensions of the environmental crisis" He first presented his insight in a 1965 essay, expanding it in a series of lectures given at the University of Chicago the following year, in May 1966, several months before Lynn White, Jr. gave his famous lecture before the American Academy of Arts and Sciences on December 26, 1966 (published in Science in 1967 as "The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis").

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Nasr’s lectures were later published as Man and Nature: The Spiritual Crisis of Modern Man in 1968 in which he argued, in a detailed manner, "for the revival of a sacred view of the universe in order to combat the contemporary environmental crisis".

[ 2 ] Anna M. Gade states that the "short and often credited" article by Lynn White contained "similar arguments" made by Nasr in his "influential" Rockefeller Series Lectures at the University of Chicago Divinity School , about a year ago.

[ 7 ] Richard Foltz is also of the view that Nasr's Lectures that "preceded" White's 1967 article presented "similar argument".

[ 8 ] Foltz argues that "Nasr has made the connection between the West's spiritual and environmental crises since the 1950s" and "actually anticipated White's critique in his own lectures given at the University of Chicago earlier in the same year as White's address".

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Nasr is credited for making "significant methodological and theoretical contributions to the development of eco-theology".

[ 2 ] The relationship of theology to the modern ecological crisis, however, became an intense issue of debate in Western academia in 1967, following the publication of the article, "The Historical Roots of Our Ecologic Crisis", by Lynn White Jr., Professor of History at the University of California at Los Angeles . In this work, White puts forward a theory that the Christian model of human dominion over nature has led to environmental devastation, providing a voice for "The Ecological Complaint".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 1973, theologian Jack Rogers published an article in which he surveyed the published studies of approximately twelve theologians which had appeared since White's article. They reflect the search for "an appropriate theological model" which adequately assesses the biblical data regarding the relationship between God, humans, and nature.

Precedents in religious thought [ edit ] Some scholars argue that Christians actually helped bring about the current global environmental crisis by instructing followers that God, and by extension mankind, transcends nature. Much of the development of ecotheology as a theological discourse was in response to this argument, which has been called "The Ecological Complaint". Defendants of this perspective essentially claim that Christianity promotes the idea of human dominion over nature, treating nature itself as a tool to be used and even exploited for survival and prosperity.

[ 13 ] However, Christianity has often been viewed as the source of positive values towards the environment, and there are many voices within the Christian tradition whose vision embraces the well-being of the earth and all creatures. While Francis of Assisi is one of the more obvious influences on Christian ecotheology, there are many theologians and teachers, such as Isaac of Nineveh and Seraphim of Sarov , whose work has profound implications for Christian thinkers. Many of these are less well known in the West because their primary influence has been on the Orthodox Church rather than the Roman Catholic Church .

The significance of indigenous traditions for the development of ecotheology also cannot be overstated. Systems of Traditional Ecological Knowledge , in combination with modern scientific methods of ecosystem management , are steadily gaining interest as environmental activists realize the importance of locally invested groups.

[ 14 ] Further exploration [ edit ] Christian ecotheology draws on the writings of such authors as Jesuit priest and paleontologist Pierre Teilhard de Chardin , philosopher Alfred North Whitehead , and Passionist priest and historian Thomas Berry . It is well represented in Protestantism by John B. Cobb, Jr.

, Jürgen Moltmann , and Michael Dowd ; in ecofeminism by feminist theologians Rosemary Radford Ruether , Catherine Keller , and Sallie McFague ; in ecowomanism by Melanie Harris and Karen Baker-Fletcher ; in liberation theology by Leonardo Boff and Tink Tinker; in Roman Catholicism by John F. Haught and Pope Francis ; and in Orthodoxy by Elizabeth Theokritoff and George Nalunnakkal (currently Bishop Geevarghese Mor Coorilose of the Jacobite Syrian Christian Church ). Besides works on theology per se, interpreters of the ecological significance of scripture, such as Ellen Davis , [ 15 ] also play an important role.

Creation Spirituality is another important expression of ecotheology that has been developed and popularized by Matthew Fox , a former Catholic Dominican friar turned Episcopal priest.

Abraham Joshua Heschel and Martin Buber , both Jewish philosophers, have also left their mark on Christian ecotheology , and provide significant inspiration for Jewish ecotheology . The most recent and most complete expressions of Jewish ecotheology to date can be found in Rabbi Arthur Ocean Waskow 's work on ecotheology in the Hebrew scriptures [ 16 ] and Rabbi David Mevorach Seidenberg 's work on Kabbalah and ecology.

[ 17 ] Hindu ecotheology includes writers such as Vandana Shiva .

Seyyed Hossein Nasr , a Perennialist scholar and Persian Sufi philosopher , was one of the earlier Muslim voices calling for a reevaluation of the Western relationship to nature.

Elisabet Sahtouris is an evolutionary biologist and futurist who promotes a vision she believes will result in the sustainable health and well-being of humanity within the larger living systems of Earth and the cosmos. She is a lecturer in Gaia Theory and a coworker with James Lovelock and Lynn Margulis . Increasingly there are points of reference between Gaianism , environmentalism and the world's major religions.

Annie Dillard , Pulitzer Prize -winning American author, also combined observations on nature and philosophical explorations in several ecotheological writings, including Pilgrim at Tinker Creek .

[ 18 ] Terry Tempest Williams is a Mormon writer and conservationist who sensitively and imaginatively explores ecotheology in her very personal writing.

The majority of the content of Indians of the Americas , by former Bureau of Indian Affairs head John Collier , concerns the link between ecological sustainability and religion among Native North and South Americans.

Mark I. Wallace is a self-described Christian animist ; his research argues that when God appears in the Bible as a dove, a snake, or the burning bush, that this is a literal transformation rather than a metaphorical one.

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Animism Ecospirituality Faith in Place Hima (environmental protection) Kaitiaki Laudato si' Laudate Deum Religion and environmentalism Christianity and environmentalism Judaism and environmentalism Religious naturalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Earth stewardship Yale Forum on Religion and Ecology References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Valerie.

"The Rise of Ecotheology" . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ a b c Hoel, Nina; Nogueira-Godsey, Elaine (2011).

"Transforming Feminisms: Religion, Women, and Ecology" .

Journal for the Study of Religion .

24 (2): 5–15 [7].

JSTOR 24764281 .

^ Sayem, Md. Abu (2019).

"Seyyed Hossein Nasr's Works on Environmental Issues: A Survey" .

Islamic Studies .

58 (3): 439–451 [440].

^ Foltz, Richard (2006). "Seyyed Hossein Nasr". In Taylor, Bron (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature . Continuum. p. 1151.

ISBN 9780199754670 .

^ Johnston, David L. (2012).

"Intra-Muslim Debates on Ecology: Is Shari'a Still Relevant?" .

Worldviews .

16 (3): 218–238 [221].

doi : 10.1163/15685357-01603003 .

JSTOR 43809777 .

^ Murad, Munjed M. (2012).

"Inner and Outer Nature: An Islamic Perspective on the Environmental Crisis" .

Islam and Science .

10 (2). Archived from the original on 2020-08-23 . Retrieved 2020-10-31 .

^ a b Gade, Anna M. (2019). "Muslim Environmentalism as Religious Practice: Accounts of the Unseen".

Muslim Environmentalisms: Religious and Social Foundations . Columbia University Press. p. 207.

ISBN 9780231191050 .

^ Foltz, Richard (2013). "Ecology in Islam". In Runehov, Anne L. C.; Oviedo, Lluis (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Sciences and Religions . Springer. p. 675.

ISBN 978-1402082641 .

^ Foltz, Richard C (2006). "Islam". In Gottlieb, Roger S. (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Religion and Ecology . Oxford University Press. p. 208.

ISBN 978-0199747627 .

^ Foltz, Richard (2006). "Islam". In Taylor, Bron (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Religion and Nature . Continuum.

ISBN 9780199754670 .

^ White, Lynn (1967).

"The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis" .

Science .

155 (3767): 1203– 1207.

Bibcode : 1967Sci...155.1203W .

doi : 10.1126/science.155.3767.1203 .

PMID 17847526 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ Cengage, Gale.

"Ecotheology" . Encyclopedia of Science and Religion. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ Cengage, Gale.

"Ecotheology" . Encyclopedia of Science and Religion. Archived from the original on 4 June 2012 . Retrieved 3 April 2012 .

^ Freeman, Milton.

"The Nature and Utility of Traditional Ecological Knowledge" . Archived from the original on 1 May 2012 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

^ Scripture, Culture and Agriculture: An Agrarian Reading of the Bible (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009) ^ [Dancing in God's Earthquake: The Coming Transformation of Religion] (Orbis, 2020) ^ Kabbalah and Ecology: God's Image in the More-Than-Human World (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2015).

^ Saverin, Diana.

"The Thoreau of the Suburbs" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 23 July 2015 .

Pihkala, Panu (2016). "Rediscovery of Early Twentieth-Century Ecotheology".

Open Theology vol. 2.

https://www.degruyter.com/view/j/opth.2016.2.issue-1/opth-2016-0023/opth-2016-0023.xml?format=INT Rogers, J. (1973). "Ecological Theology: The Search for an Appropriate Theological Model." Reprinted from Septuagesino Anno: Theologiche Opstellen Aangebsden Aan Prof. Dr. G. C. Berkower . The Netherlands: J.H. Kok.

Watling, Tony (2009), Ecological Imaginations in the World Religions: An Ethnographic Analysis , London and New York: Continuum International Publishers.

White, L. Jr. (1971). "The Historical Roots of our Ecologic Crisis." Reprinted in A.E. Lugo & S.C. Snedaker (Eds.) Readings on Ecological Systems: Their Function and Relation to Man . New York: MSS Educational Publishing.

"Why Care for Earth's Environment?" (in the series "The Bible's Viewpoint" ) is a two-page article in the December 2007 issue of Awake!

magazine. This represents the Bible 's viewpoint according to the viewpoint of Jehovah's Witnesses .

v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecotheology&oldid=1303911840 " Categories : Ecotheology Environmentalism and religion Theology Environmental movements Environmental philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2008 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 20:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecotheology 15 languages Add topic

