Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Incorrect identification of source 2 Fallacy 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents False attribution 10 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Nederlands Português ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Credit for a work given to the wrong person False attribution may refer to: Misattribution in general, when a quotation or work is accidentally, traditionally, or based on bad information attributed to the wrong person or group.

A specific fallacy where an advocate appeals to an irrelevant, unqualified, unidentified, biased, or fabricated source in support of an argument.

[ 1 ] Incorrect identification of source [ edit ] One particular case of misattribution is the Matthew effect . A quotation is often attributed to someone more famous than the real author. This leads the quotation to be more famous, but the real author to be forgotten (see also: obliteration by incorporation and Churchillian Drift ).

[ 2 ] Such misattributions may originate as a sort of fallacious argument, if use of the quotation is meant to be persuasive, and attachment to a more famous person (whether intentionally or through misremembering) would lend it more authority.

In Jewish biblical studies, an entire group of falsely-attributed books is known as the pseudepigrapha .

Fallacy [ edit ] A fraudulent advocate may go so far as to fabricate a source in order to support a claim. For example, the "Levitt Institute" was a fake organisation created in 2009 solely for the purposes of (successfully) fooling the Australian media into reporting that Sydney was Australia’s most naive city.

[ 3 ] Contextomy ( quoting out of context ) is a type of false attribution.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Fake news Straw man References [ edit ] ^ Humbug! The skeptic’s field guide to spotting fallacies in thinking , a textbook on fallacies. "False Attribution": p. 56.

^ Mermin, N. David (2004).

"Could Feynman Have Said This?" .

Physics Today .

57 (5): 10– 11.

Bibcode : 2004PhT....57e..10M .

doi : 10.1063/1.1768652 .

^ "Deception Detection Deficiency" .

Media Watch . 2009-09-27.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-16 . Retrieved 2023-12-06 .

^ McGlone, Matthew S. (2005). "Quoted Out of Context: Contextomy and Its Consequences".

Journal of Communication .

55 (2): 330– 346.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2005.tb02675.x .

Further reading [ edit ] Garson O'Toole (2017).

Hemingway Didn't Say That: The Truth Behind Familiar Quotations . Little A.

ISBN 978-1503933408 .

External links [ edit ] Quote Investigator v t e Common fallacies ( list ) Formal In propositional logic Affirming a disjunct Affirming the consequent Denying the antecedent Argument from fallacy Masked man Mathematical fallacy In quantificational logic Existential Illicit conversion Proof by example Quantifier shift Syllogistic fallacy Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise Negative conclusion from affirmative premises Exclusive premises Existential Necessity Four terms Illicit major Illicit minor Undistributed middle Informal Equivocation Equivocation False equivalence False attribution Moral equivalence Quoting out of context Loki's Wager No true Scotsman Reification Map–territory relation Question-begging Circular reasoning / Begging the question Loaded language Leading question Compound question / Loaded question / Complex question No true Scotsman Correlative-based False dilemma Perfect solution Denying the correlative Suppressed correlative Illicit transference Composition Division Ecological Secundum quid Accident Converse accident Faulty generalization Anecdotal evidence Sampling bias Cherry picking McNamara Base rate / Conjunction Double counting False analogy Slothful induction Overwhelming exception Ambiguity Accent False precision Moving the goalposts Quoting out of context Slippery slope Sorites paradox Syntactic ambiguity Questionable cause Animistic Furtive Correlation implies causation Cum hoc Post hoc Gambler's Inverse Regression Single cause Slippery slope Texas sharpshooter Appeals Law/Legality Stone / Proof by assertion Consequences Argumentum ad baculum Wishful thinking Emotion Children Fear Flattery Novelty Pity Ridicule In-group favoritism Invented here / Not invented here Island mentality Loyalty Parade of horribles Spite Stirring symbols Wisdom of repugnance Genetic fallacy Ad hominem Appeal to motive Association Reductio ad Hitlerum Reductio ad Stalinum Bulverism Poisoning the well Tone Tu quoque Whataboutism Authority Accomplishment Ipse dixit Poverty / Wealth Etymology Nature Tradition / Novelty Chronological snobbery Other fallacies of relevance Arguments Ad nauseam Sealioning Argument from anecdote Argument from silence Argument to moderation Argumentum ad populum Cliché The Four Great Errors I'm entitled to my opinion Ignoratio elenchi Invincible ignorance Moralistic / Naturalistic Motte-and-bailey fallacy Psychologist's fallacy Rationalization Red herring Two wrongs make a right Special pleading Straw man Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=False_attribution&oldid=1285509394 " Category : Verbal fallacies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 03:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents False attribution 10 languages Add topic

