Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Works 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents August Böckh 16 languages Dansk Deutsch Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Philipp August Böckh ) German classical scholar and antiquarian (1785–1867) August Böckh Born 24 November 1785 ( 1785-11-24 ) Karlsruhe , Margraviate of Baden Died 3 August 1867 ( 1867-08-04 ) (aged 81) Berlin , German Confederation Nationality German Other names August Boeckh Awards Prussian Academy of Sciences Academic background Alma mater University of Halle Academic advisors Johann August Ernesti [ 1 ] Friedrich Schleiermacher [ 1 ] Influences Friedrich Schleiermacher [ 2 ] Friedrich August Wolf Academic work School or tradition Hermeneutics [ 3 ] Methodological hermeneutics [ 4 ] Institutions University of Heidelberg University of Berlin Notable students Wilhelm Dilthey F. A. Trendelenburg Main interests Philology Notable works Gesammelte kleine Schriften Influenced Johann Gustav Droysen [ 2 ] Wilhelm Dilthey Wilhelm Wackernagel August Böckh or Boeckh [ 5 ] ( / b ɜːr k / ; German: [bœk] ; 24 November 1785 – 3 August 1867) was a German classical scholar and antiquarian .

Life [ edit ] He was born in Karlsruhe , and educated at the local gymnasium ; in 1803 he left for the University of Halle , where he studied theology .

F. A. Wolf was teaching there, and creating an enthusiasm for classical studies; Böckh transferred from theology to philology , and became the best of Wolf's scholars.

In 1807, he established himself as Privatdozent in the University of Heidelberg and was shortly afterwards appointed professor extraordinarius, becoming professor two years later.

[ 6 ] The common misconception of Böckh's forenames being Philipp August originated in Heidelberg where staff of the university misread the abbreviation 'Dr phil' (doctor philosophiae) as 'Dr Philipp August Böckh'.

[ 7 ] In 1811, he moved to the new University of Berlin , where he had been appointed professor of eloquence and classical literature. He remained there till his death. He was elected a member of the Academy of Sciences of Berlin in 1814, and for a long time acted as its secretary. Many of the speeches contained in his Gesammelte kleine Schriften were delivered in this latter capacity.

[ 6 ] He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1853.

[ 8 ] Böckh died in Berlin in 1867, aged 81.

Works [ edit ] Böckh worked out the ideas of Wolf in regard to philology and illustrated them by his practice. Discarding the old idea that philology consisted in a minute acquaintance with words and the exercise of the critical art, he regarded it as the entire knowledge of antiquity ( totius antiquitatis cognitio ), historical and philosophical. He divides philology into five parts: first, an inquiry into public acts, with a knowledge of times and places, into civil institutions, and also into law; second, an inquiry into private affairs; third, an exhibition of the religions and arts of the ancient nations; fourth, a history of all their moral and physical speculations and beliefs, and of their literatures; and fifth, a complete explanation of the language.

[ 6 ] Böckh set forth these ideas in a Latin oration delivered in 1822 ( Gesammelte kleine Schriften , i.). In his speech at the opening of the congress of German philologists in 1850, he defined philology as the historical construction of the entire life – therefore, of all forms of culture and all the productions of a people in its practical and spiritual tendencies. He allows that such a work is too great for any one person; but the very infinity of subjects is the stimulus to the pursuit of truth, and scholars strive because they have not attained. An account of Böckh's division of philology will be found in Freund's Wie studiert man Philologie?

[ 6 ] From 1806, till his death Böckh's literary activity was unceasing. His principal works include an edition of Pindar , the first volume of which (1811) contains the text of the Epinician odes; a treatise, De Metris Pindari , in three books; and Notae Criticae : the second (1819) contains the Scholia ; and part ii. of volume ii. (1821) contains a Latin translation, a commentary, the fragments and indices. It was for a long time the most complete edition of Pindar. But it was especially the treatise on the metres which placed Böckh in the first rank of scholars. This treatise forms an epoch in the treatment of the subject. In it the author threw aside all attempts to determine the Greek metres by mere subjective standards, pointing out at the same time the close connection between the music and the poetry of the Greeks. He investigated minutely the nature of Greek music as far as it can be ascertained, as well as all the details regarding Greek musical instruments; and he explained the statements of the ancient Greek writers on rhythm. In this manner he laid the foundation for a scientific treatment of Greek metres.

[ 6 ] His Die Staatshaushaltung der Athener (1817; 2nd ed. 1851, with a supplementary volume Urkunden über das Seewesen des attischen Staats ; 3rd ed. 1886) was translated into English under the title of The Public Economy of Athens . In it he investigated a subject of peculiar difficulty with profound learning. He amassed information from the whole range of Greek literature, carefully appraised the value of the information given, and shows throughout every portion of it rare critical ability and insight. A work of a similar kind was his Metrologische Untersuchungen über Gewichte, Münzfüsse, und Masse des Alterthums (1838).

[ 6 ] In regard to the taxes and revenue of the Athenian state he derived a great deal of his most trustworthy information from inscriptions, many of which are given in his book. When the Berlin Academy of Sciences projected the plan of a Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum , Böckh was chosen as the principal editor. This work (1828–1877) is in four volumes, the third and fourth volumes being edited by J. Franz, E. Curtius, A. Kirchhoff and H. Röhl.

[ 6 ] Grave marker of August Böckh, designed by Reinhold Begas Begas' portrait medal of Böckh Böckh's activity was continually digressing into widely different fields. He gained for himself a foremost position amongst the investigators of ancient chronology, and his name occupies a place by the side of those of Ideler and Mommsen . His principal works on this subject were: Zur Geschichte der Mondcyclen der Hellenen (1855); Epigraphisch-chronologische Studien (1856); Über die vierjährigen Sonnenkreise der Alten (1863), and several papers which he published in the Transactions of the Berlin Academy. Böckh also occupied himself with philosophy . One of his earliest papers was on the Platonic doctrine of the world, De Platonica corporis mundani fabrica et de vera Indole, Astronomiae Philolaice (1810), to which may be added Manetho und die Hundsternperiode (1845).

[ 6 ] In opposition to Otto Gruppe , he denied that Plato affirmed the diurnal rotation of the earth ( Untersuchungen über das kosmische System des Platon , 1852), and when in opposition to him Grote published his opinions on the subject ( Plato and the Rotation of the Earth ), Böckh was ready with his reply. Another of his earlier papers, and one frequently referred to, was Commentatio Academica de simultate quae Platoni cum Xenophonte intercessisse fertur (1811). Other philosophical writings were Commentatio in Platonis qui vulgo fertur Minoem (1806), and Philolaos des Pythagoreers Lehren nebst den Bruchstücken (1819), in which he endeavoured to show the genuineness of the fragments.

[ 6 ] Besides his edition of Pindar, Böckh published an edition of the Antigone of Sophocles (1843) with a poetical translation and essays. An early and important work on the Greek tragedians is his Graecae Tragoediae Principum ... num ea quae supersunt et genuine omnia sint et forma primitive servata (1808).

[ 6 ] The smaller writings of Böckh began to be collected in his lifetime. Three of the volumes were published before his death, and four after ( Gesammelte kleine Schriften , 1858–1874). The first two consist of orations delivered in the university or academy of Berlin, or on public occasions. The third, fourth, fifth and sixth contain his contributions to the Transactions of the Berlin Academy, and the seventh contains his critiques. Böckh's lectures, delivered from 1809-1865, were published by Bratusehek under the title of Encyklopädie und Methodologie der philologischen Wissenschaften [ 9 ] (1877; 2nd ed. Klussmann, 1886). His philological and scientific theories are set forth in Elze , Über Philologie als System (1845), and Reichhardt, Die Gliederung der Philologie entwickelt (1846). His correspondence with Karl Otfried Müller appeared at Leipzig in 1883.

John Paul Pritchard has made an abridged translation of Böckh's Encyclopädie und Methodologie der philologischen Wissenschaften : August Boeckh, On Interpretation and Criticism , University of Oklahoma Press, 1968.

Works [ edit ] Philolaos des Pythagoreers Lehren nebst den Bruchstücken seines Werkes (1819) Manetho und die Hundssternperiode, Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Pharaonen " Manetho and the Dog Star Period, A Contribution to the History of the Pharaohs" (1845) See also [ edit ] Friedrich August Wolf References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Gustav Shpet, Hermeneutics and Its Problems: With Selected Essays in Phenomenology , Springer, 2019, p. 79.

^ a b Beiser 2011, p. 295.

^ Kurt Mueller-Vollmer (ed.), The Hermeneutics Reader , Continuum, 1988, p. 21.

^ Thomas M. Seebohm, Hermeneutics: Method and Methodology , Springer, 2007, p. 55.

^ Annette M. Baertschi, Die modernen Vater der Antike: die Entwicklung der Altertumswissenschaften an Akademie und Universität im Berlin des 19. Jahrhunderts , Walter de Gruyter, 2009, p. 45: "August Boeckh unterschrieb selbst mit »Böckh«, die Familie und die Fachtradition bevorzugen »Boeckh«." [August Boeckh signed his name as "Böckh"; his family and the professional tradition prefer "Boeckh".] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Chisholm 1911 .

^ Max Hoffmann: August Böckh. Lebensbeschreibung und Auswahl aus seinem wissenschaftlichen Briefwechsel (Leipzig 1901), p. 2 (footnote 1).

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter B" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 9 September 2016 .

^ A systematic articulation of Friedrich Schleiermacher 's hermeneutics ( Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Friedrich Daniel Ernst Schleiermacher" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

).

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Böckh, Philipp August ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Frederick C. Beiser , The German Historicist Tradition , Oxford University Press, 2011.

Max Hoffmann, August Böckh , 1901.

S. Reiter, in Neue Jahrbücher für das klassische Altertum (1902), p. 436.

Sachse, Erinnerungen an August Böckh , 1868.

Stark, in the Verhandlungen den Würzburger Philologensammlung , 1868.

External links [ edit ] Media related to August Boeckh at Wikimedia Commons Works by or about August Böckh at Wikisource Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway 2 Latvia Croatia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=August_Böckh&oldid=1293229086 " Categories : 1785 births 1867 deaths People from the Margraviate of Baden Scholars from the Kingdom of Prussia German classical scholars Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) University of Halle alumni Academic staff of Heidelberg University Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin Writers from Karlsruhe Members of the Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 14:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents August Böckh 16 languages Add topic

