Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Standards 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Playpen 20 languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Limburgs Nederlands Nedersaksies Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Portable enclosure in which young children may safely play For other uses, see Playpen (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Playpen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Child in modern playpen A playpen is a piece of furniture used to contain an infant or young toddler in specific area to prevent the child from getting into harm when her/his parent or guardian is occupied or away while keeping the child occupied with the toys which can be placed inside. The earliest use of the word "playpen" was cited in the Oxford English Dictionary is 1902.

History [ edit ] Playpens were traditionally made of wood , and consisted of a flat rectangular platform, usually square in shape, with vertical bars on four sides, so that the child can see out. The floor of the playpen is usually a soft mat. The walls of the playpen are usually higher than the height of the child, so as to avoid climbing injuries; playpens may also have a detachable lid. There are many more modern and portable designs.

Modern playpens are portable and typically consist of a basic metal and plastic support system and mesh, soft plastic or nylon sides.  An optional removable bassinet can be attached at the top for the child to sleep in or be changed in until four months of age.  Some models have attachments such as mobiles , side pockets for supplies and toys, change table attachment, night lights, music boxes, and clip-on adapter for CD player for the child to listen to music while sleeping or playing.  Portable playpens come in different sizes, but most are expected to be collapsed into a small roll for easy storage and transport.

Historic playpen (here with horizontal bars that can be climbed) Traditionally shaped playpen with vertical bars Standards [ edit ] For playpens , the European Norm EN 12227 is a standard that sets requirements for testing whether clothes or fingers can get caught or crushed. In addition there are stability requirements to ensure that the gate will not give in to pressure, and this is tested with heavy weights to see if the gate easily collapses or falls over.

[ 1 ] Some products have a flexible configuration such that they can be configured either as playpens, safety gates or room dividers . For safety gates and pet gates , EN 1930 is a standard for indoor use.

[ 1 ] In addition, the EN 71 standard sets requirements for the materials it is made of, and these must be free of harmful substances so that it is safe for the child to suck on it.

[ 1 ] Amongst other things, it is tested to see whether children can get their head, hip or leg through the safety gate or otherwise get stuck or pinched, or whether objects can get stuck in such a way that they pose a choking risk. It is also tested that the gate can withstand children running into it with full force without the gate moving.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Baby gate References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Safety Standards" .

www.babydan.com . Retrieved 2025-03-22 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Playpens .

Playpen safety information from the American Academy of Pediatrics v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud v t e Child safety devices Domestic Bed Infant Toddler Baby monitor Child safety lock Childproofing Child-resistant packaging Kiddy Bag Playpen Pool fence Travel Child harness School bus crossing arm Child safety seat Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Playpen&oldid=1282114620 " Categories : Child safety Furniture Play (activity) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 12:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Playpen 20 languages Add topic

