Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Composition and publication 2 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 2.1 Artistic production 2.2 Authenticity 2.3 Critique 2.4 Value: cult and exhibition 2.5 Art as politics 3 Influence 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction 19 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Lietuvių 日本語 Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1935 essay by Walter Benjamin In "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" (1935), Walter Benjamin addresses the artistic and cultural, social, economic, and political functions of art in a capitalist society.

" The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (German: Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit) (1935), by Walter Benjamin , is an essay of cultural criticism which proposes and explains that mechanical reproduction devalues the aura (uniqueness) of a work of art , [ 1 ] and that in the age of mechanical reproduction and the absence of traditional and ritualistic value, the production of art would be inherently based upon the praxis of politics. Written during the Nazi régime (1933–1945) in Germany, in the essay Benjamin presents a theory of art that is "useful for the formulation of revolutionary demands in the politics of art" in a society of mass culture .

[ 2 ] The subject and themes of Benjamin's essay: the aura of a work of art; the artistic authenticity of the artefact; the cultural authority of the work of art; and the aestheticization of politics for the production of art, became resources for research in the fields of art history and architectural theory , cultural studies , and media theory .

[ 3 ] Composition and publication [ edit ] "The Work of Art in the Age of its Technological Reproducibility" was conceived by Benjamin as a contemporary complement to his much larger Arcades Project . He began writing the essay in 1935, from his home in exile in Paris. In October he mentioned the essay in letters to Gretel Karplus and Max Horkheimer , telling the latter that the essay was the beginning of "a materialist theory of art".

[ 4 ] The title in German is 'Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit'. Between December 1935 and February 1936 Benjamin largely rewrote the essay, and added notes – it is this 'second version' that is considered to be the 'urtext', notably by the film historian Miriam Hansen .

[ 5 ] In his letter of October 1935 Benjamin had suggested to Horkheimer that the essay might be published in the Frankfurt School journal Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung . Horkheimer agreed to this, on condition that the essay should appear in French translation. Benjamin – then residing in France and deeply concerned with French politics – readily agreed, and collaborated with the philosopher-translator Pierre Klossowski , finishing the translation work in parallel with his completion of the revised essay itself. In spite of what Howard Eiland calls Benjamin's "meticulous collaboration" with Klossowski, publication in the Zeitschrift was far from straightforward, with editorial intervention leading to what Benjamin regarded as a toning down of the political intensity of the piece.

[ 4 ] In spite of these problems, the essay was published in 1936 in Volume 5, Issue 1 of the Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung , in Klossowski's French translation, with the title: " L'œuvre d'art à l'époque de sa reproduction mécanisée ", followed by abstracts in German and English. Horkheimer's decision to publish in French was immediately vindicated, as the essay was widely discussed in French intellectual circles.

[ 4 ] Benjamin continued to revise the essay down to 1939, and it is this third version that was the first to appear in German, in 1955, in the Gesammelte Schriften, and also the first to be translated into English, as 'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction', in the 1969 volume Illuminations , edited by Harry Zohn . The second (1935/36) version is now generally preferred, and is the text translated in the 2008 Harvard University Press edition titled The Work of Art in the Age of Its Technologica Reproducibility, and Other Writings on Media .

[ 6 ] Summary [ edit ] Benjamin presents the thematic bases for a theory of art by quoting the essay "The Conquest of Ubiquity" (1928), by Paul Valéry , to establish how works of art created and developed in past eras are different from contemporary works of art; that the understanding and treatment of art and of artistic technique must progressively develop in order to understand a work of art in the context of the modern time.

Our fine arts were developed, their types and uses were established, in times very different from the present, by men whose power of action upon things was insignificant in comparison with ours. But the amazing growth of our techniques, the adaptability and precision they have attained, the ideas and habits they are creating, make it a certainty that profound changes are impending in the ancient craft of the Beautiful . In all the arts there is a physical component which can no longer be considered or treated as it used to be, which cannot remain unaffected by our modern knowledge and power. For the last twenty years neither matter nor space nor time has been what it was from time immemorial. We must expect great innovations to transform the entire technique of the arts, thereby affecting artistic invention itself and perhaps even bringing about an amazing change in our very notion of art.

[ 7 ] Artistic production [ edit ] In the preface to the essay, Benjamin presents Marxist analyses of the organisation of a capitalist society and of the place of the arts in a capitalist society, both in the public sphere and in the private sphere ; and explains the socio-economic conditions of society to extrapolate future developments of capitalism that will result in the economic exploitation of the proletariat , and so will produce the socio-economic conditions that would abolish capitalism .  By reviewing the historical and technological developments of the mechanical means for reproducing a work of art, Benjamin establishes that artistic reproduction is not a modern human activity, such as the industrial arts of the foundry and the stamp mill in Ancient Greece (12th–9th c. BC), and the modern arts of woodcut relief-printing and engraving , etching , lithography , and photography , which are industrial techniques of mass production that permit greater accuracy in the mechanical reproduction of a work of art than would an artist manually reproducing an artefact created by a master artist.

[ 8 ] Authenticity [ edit ] The aura of a work of art derives from authenticity (uniqueness) and locale (physical and cultural); Benjamin explains that "even the most perfect reproduction of a work of art is lacking in one element: Its presence in time and space, its unique existence at the place where it happens to be" located. That the "sphere of [artistic] authenticity is outside the technical [sphere]" of mechanised reproduction.

[ 9 ] Therefore, in being unique, the original work of art is an objet d'art independent of the mechanically accurate reproduction; yet, by changing the cultural context of where the artwork is located, the existence of the mechanical copy (an art-product) diminishes the aesthetic value of the original work of art. In that way, the aura – the unique aesthetic authority of a work of art – is absent from the mechanically produced copy.

[ 10 ] Critique [ edit ] Miklos Legrady takes issue with Benjamin’s comment “that which withers in the age of mechanical reproduction is the aura of the work of art”, pointing out that books are made by mechanical reproduction, yet images, and literature retain their aura as much as any individual and unique work of art. The power of art does not reside in the uniqueness of the physical object, but in the statement made by the artist through  the work. Reproducing that statement does not weaken it but strengthens its impact with each additional person such a reproduction reaches. Munch's “The Scream”, for example, is known mostly from reproduction yet its aura, its power to impress, does not come from the uniqueness of a painting or drawing, but the uniqueness of the work’s content, which retains its effect no matter how often reproduced.

[ 11 ] Value: cult and exhibition [ edit ] Regarding the social functions of an artefact , Benjamin said that "Works of art are received and valued on different planes. Two polar types stand out; with one, the accent is on the cult value; with the other, on the exhibition value of the work. Artistic production begins with ceremonial objects destined to serve in a cult. One may assume that what mattered was their existence, not their being on view." [ 12 ] The cult value of religious art is in the fact that "certain statues of gods are accessible only to the priest in the cella ; certain madonnas remain covered nearly all year round; certain sculptures on medieval cathedrals are invisible to the spectator on ground level." [ 12 ] In practice, the diminished cult value of a religious artefact (an icon no longer venerated) increases the exhibition value of the artefact as art created for the spectators' appreciation, because "it is easier to exhibit a portrait bust, that can be sent here and there [to museums], than to exhibit the statue of a divinity that has its fixed place in the interior of a temple." [ 12 ] The mechanical reproduction of a work of art voids its cult value, because removal from a fixed, private space (a temple) and placement in a mobile, public space (a museum) allows exhibiting the work of art to many spectators.

[ 13 ] Further explaining the transition from cult value to exhibition value, Benjamin said that in "the photographic image, exhibition value, for the first time, shows its superiority to cult value." [ 12 ] In emphasising exhibition value, "the work of art becomes a creation with entirely new functions," which "later may be recognized as incidental" to the original purpose for which the artist created the objet d'art .

[ 12 ] As a medium of artistic production, the cinema (moving pictures) does not create cult value for the motion picture, itself, because "the audience's identification with the actor is really an identification with the camera . Consequently, the audience takes the position of the camera; [the audience's] approach is that of testing. This is not the approach to which cult values may be exposed." Therefore, "the film makes the cult value recede into the background, not only by putting the public in the position of the critic, but also by the fact that, at the movies, this [critical] position requires no attention." [ 14 ] Art as politics [ edit ] See also: Aestheticization of politics The social value of a work of art changes as a society change their value systems; thus the changes in artistic styles and in the cultural tastes of the public follow "the manner in which human sense-perception is organized [and] the [artistic] medium in which it is accomplished [are] determined not only by Nature, but by historical circumstances, as well." [ 9 ] Despite the negative effects (social, economic, cultural) of mass-produced art-products upon the aura of the original work of art, Benjamin said that "the uniqueness of a work of art is inseparable from its being embedded in the fabric of tradition", which separates the original work of art from the reproduction.

[ 9 ] Moreover, Benjamin noted that the ritualization of the mechanical reproduction of art also emancipated "the work of art from its parasitical dependence on ritual", [ 9 ] thereby increasing the social value of exhibiting works of art; a social and cultural practice that has progressed from the private sphere of life (the owner's enjoyment of the aesthetics of the artefacts, usually high art) to the public sphere of life, wherein the public enjoy the same aesthetics in a gallery displaying works of art.

Influence [ edit ] In the late-twentieth-century television program Ways of Seeing (1972), John Berger proceeded from and developed the themes of Benjamin's essay to explain the contemporary representations of social class and racial caste inherent to the politics and production of art. Berger contends that in transforming a work of art into a commodity , the modern means of artistic production and of artistic reproduction have destroyed the aesthetic , cultural, and political authority of art: "For the first time ever, images of art have become ephemeral, ubiquitous, insubstantial, available, valueless, free," because they are commercial products that lack the aura of authenticity of the original objet d'art .

[ 15 ] A paralipomena of Benjamin's "Work of Art..." called a "A Short History of Photography", read together with the main essay, provides a theoretical basis for Susan Sontag's well-known monograph, On Photography .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Ideas initially presented in this article also inform Marshall McLuhan's famous slogan or conception that " the medium is the message ".

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Art for art's sake References [ edit ] ^ Elliott, Brian.

Benjamin for Architects (2011) Routledge, London, p. 0000 ^ Scannell, Paddy. (2003) "Benjamin Contextualized: On 'The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction'" in Canonic Texts in Media Research: Are There Any? Should There Be? How About These?

, Katz et al.

(Eds.) Polity Press, Cambridge.

ISBN 9780745629346 . pp. 74–89.

^ Elliott, Brian.

Benjamin for Architects , Routledge, London, 2011.

^ a b c Eiland, Howard; Jennings, Michael William (2014).

Walter Benjamin: a critical life . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. pp.

511– 523.

ISBN 978-0-674-05186-7 .

^ Hansen, Miriam Bratu (2008).

"Benjamin's Aura" .

Critical Inquiry .

34 (2): 336– 375.

doi : 10.1086/529060 .

ISSN 0093-1896 .

^ Benjamin, Walter; Jennings, Michael William; Doherty, Brigid; Levin, Thomas Y. (2008).

The work of art in the age of its technological reproducibility, and other writings on media . Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-02445-8 .

^ Paul Valéry, La Conquête de l'ubiquité (1928) ^ Benjamin, Walter. "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" (1935) p. 01.

^ a b c d Walter Benjamin (1968). Hannah Arendt (ed.).

"The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction," Illuminations . London: Fontana. pp.

214– 18.

ISBN 9781407085500 .

^ Hansen, Miriam Bratu (2008). "Benjamin's Aura," Critical Inquiry No. 34 (Winter 2008) ^ Legrady, Miklos (2017) "Deconstructing Walter Benjamin, 2nd paragraph" Contemporary Aesthetics (Journal Archive): Vol. 15 , Article 30. Available at: https://digitalcommons.risd.edu/liberalarts_contempaesthetics/vol15/iss1/30 ^ a b c d e Benjamin, Walter. "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" (1935) p. 4.

^ "Cult vs. Exhibition, Section II" .

Samizdat Online . 2016-07-20 . Retrieved 2020-05-22 .

^ Benjamin, Walter. "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction" (1935) p. 5–6.

^ Berger, John.

Ways of Seeing . Penguin Books, London, 1972, pp. 32–34.

^ Benjamin, Walter. " "A Short History of Photography" ".

One-Way Street & Other Writings . Verso.

^ Sontag, Susan (1977).

On photography . Internet Archive. New York : Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

^ Sontag, Susan; Benjamin, Walter. "Introduction (by Susan Sontag)".

One Way St. & Other Writings . Verso.

^ Sontag, Susan. "Walter Benjamin".

Under the Sign of Saturn .

^ Russell, Catherine (2004).

"New Media and Film History: Walter Benjamin and the Awakening of Cinema" .

Cinema Journal .

43 (3): 81– 85.

ISSN 0009-7101 .

External links [ edit ] Complete text of the essay, translated ( Marxists.org ) Complete text of the essay, translated ( Massachusetts Institute of Technology ) Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung (1932-1941) - Download the original text in French, "L'œuvre d'art à l'époque de sa reproduction méchanisée," in the Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung Jahrgang V, Félix Alcan, Paris, 1936, pp. 40–68 (23MB) Complete text in German Partial text of the essay , with commentary by Detlev Schöttker (in German) A comment to the essay on diségno v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases National Germany Other ELMCIP Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Work_of_Art_in_the_Age_of_Mechanical_Reproduction&oldid=1298671769 " Categories : Social philosophy Aesthetics essays 1936 essays Essays in literary theory Works about avant-garde and experimental art Works by Walter Benjamin Contemporary philosophical literature Books in philosophy of technology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 23:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction 19 languages Add topic

