Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Education 3 Agent in the Low Countries 4 Financial acumen Toggle Financial acumen subsection 4.1 Rescue of the pound 4.2 Later services to the Crown 4.3 Founding of the Royal Exchange 5 Marriage and progeny 6 Death and burial 7 Bequest for the foundation of Gresham College 8 Gresham's law 9 The Gresham grasshopper 10 Legacy 11 In fiction 12 Gallery 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Thomas Gresham 28 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English merchant and financier (1519–1579) For his great-nephew of the same name, see Thomas Gresham (died 1630) .

Sir Thomas Gresham Portrait of Thomas Gresham, aged approximately 41. From the collection of the Rijksmuseum.

Born Thomas Gresham the Elder c. 1519 London, England Died 21 November 1579 (1579-11-21) (aged 59–60) London, England Resting place St Helen's Church, Bishopsgate , London , England Nationality English Education Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge Occupation(s) Merchant , financier Known for Founder of The Royal Exchange and Gresham College Spouse Anne Ferneley ​ ( m.

1544) ​ Father Sir Richard Gresham Sir Thomas Gresham the Elder ( / ˈ ɡ r ɛ ʃ ə m / ; c. 1519 – 21 November 1579) was an English merchant and financier who acted on behalf of King Edward VI (1547–1553) and Edward's half-sisters, queens Mary I (1553–1558) and Elizabeth I (1558–1603). In 1565 Gresham founded the Royal Exchange in the City of London .

Origins [ edit ] Born in London and descended from an old Norfolk family , Gresham was one of two sons and two daughters of Sir Richard Gresham , a leading merchant mercer and Lord Mayor of London , who was knighted by King Henry VIII for negotiating favourable loans with foreign merchants.

[ 1 ] Education [ edit ] Gresham was educated at St Paul's School .  After that, although his father wanted Thomas to become a merchant, Sir Richard first sent him to university at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge .

[ 2 ] He was concurrently apprenticed in the Mercers' Company to his uncle Sir John Gresham , founder of Gresham's School , while he was still at Cambridge .

Agent in the Low Countries [ edit ] In 1543 the Mercers' Company admitted the 24-year-old Gresham as a liveryman , and later that year he left England for the Low Countries , where, either on his own account or that of his father or uncle, he carried on business as a merchant whilst acting in various matters as agent for King Henry VIII . In 1544 he married Anne Ferneley, widow of the London merchant Sir William Read, but maintained residence principally in the Low Countries , basing his headquarters at Antwerp [ 1 ] in present-day Belgium (then the Spanish Netherlands ), where he became renowned for his adept market-play .

Financial acumen [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Thomas Gresham" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rescue of the pound [ edit ] When in 1551 the mismanagement of Sir William Damsell , King's Merchant to the Low Countries, had caused the English Government much financial embarrassment, the authorities called Gresham for advice, thereafter following his proposals. Gresham advocated the adoption of various methods – highly ingenious, but quite arbitrary and unfair – for raising the value of the pound sterling on the Antwerp bourse which proved so successful that in just a few years King Edward VI had discharged almost all of his debts. The Government sought Gresham's advice in all their money difficulties, and also frequently employed him in various diplomatic missions. He had no stated salary, but in reward of his services received from King Edward various grants of lands, the annual value of which at that time amounted ultimately to about 400 pounds a year.

[ 1 ] Later services to the Crown [ edit ] On the accession of Queen Mary in 1553, Gresham fell out of favour at Court for a short time with Alderman William Dauntsey displacing him. But Dauntsey's financial operations proved unsuccessful and Gresham was soon reinstated; and as he professed his zealous desire to serve the Queen, and manifested great adroitness both in negotiating loans and in smuggling money, arms and foreign goods, not only were his services retained throughout her reign (1553–1558), but besides his salary of twenty shillings per diem he received grants of church lands to the yearly value of 200 pounds.

Under Queen Elizabeth 's reign (1558–1603), besides continuing in his post as financial agent of the Crown, Gresham acted as Ambassador Plenipotentiary to the Court of Duchess Margaret of Parma , Governor of the Netherlands , and was appointed a Knight Bachelor in 1559 prior to his departure. He also passed intelligence to William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley who was chief adviser to Elizabeth I – such as King Philip’s plans to ally with the French King at one stage. The unsettled times preceding the Dutch revolt compelled him to leave Antwerp on 10 March 1567; but, though he spent the remainder of his life in London, he continued his business as merchant and government financial agent in much the same way as he had always done.

[ 1 ] Queen Elizabeth also found Gresham's abilities useful in a variety of other ways, including acting as gaoler to Lady Mary Grey (sister of Lady Jane Grey ), who, as a punishment for marrying Thomas Keyes the sergeant-porter, was imprisoned in his house from June 1569 to the end of 1572.

[ 1 ] Founding of the Royal Exchange [ edit ] In 1565 Gresham made a proposal to the City of London 's Court of Aldermen to build, at his own expense, a bourse or exchange – what became the Royal Exchange , modelled on the Antwerp bourse – on condition that the Corporation provided for this purpose a suitable location. In this proposal he seems to have had a good eye for his self-interest as well as for the general good of the City's merchants, for by a yearly rental of £700 obtained for the shops in the upper part of the building he received more than sufficient return for his trouble and expense.

[ 1 ] The foundation of the Royal Exchange is the background of Thomas Heywood 's play: If You Know Not Me, You Know Nobody part 2 , in which a Lord extols the quality of the building when asked if he has ever seen "a goodlier frame": Not in my life; yet I have been in Venice ... In the Rialto there, called Saint Mark 's; 'tis but a bauble, if compared to this. The nearest, that which most resembles this, is the great Burse in Antwerp , yet no comparable either in height or wideness, the fair cellarage, or goodly shops above. Oh my Lord Mayor , this Gresham hath much graced your City of London; his fame will long outlive him.

[ 3 ] Marriage and progeny [ edit ] In 1544 he married Anne Ferneley, daughter of William Ferneley and Agnes (nee Daundy). Anne was the widow of Sir William Read, a London merchant, with whom she had two sons. By his wife, Gresham, had an only son, Richard, who predeceased both his parents. Gresham also had an illegitimate daughter (also called Anne), who married Sir Nathaniel Bacon , who was related to Gresham's wife. Anne was probably born in the Low Countries , possibly in Bruges and also predeceased her father.

Gresham lived in the Low Countries , most notably in Antwerp , and in 1559 he bought a large mansion on 43 Lange Nieuwstraat, as well as a country mansion outside the city. When he came back to London, he built a mansion in Bishopsgate around 1563, on the site now occupied by Tower 42 , as well as later building Osterley Park and purchasing Boston Manor House from Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester . Elizabeth I stayed with the Greshams at Osterley several times, once stating that she felt a courtyard would look better with a wall dividing it. To please his royal guest, Gresham had the wall built overnight.

Death and burial [ edit ] Gresham died suddenly, apparently of apoplexy , on 21 November 1579 and was buried at St Helen's Church, Bishopsgate in the City of London .

[ 4 ] Bequest for the foundation of Gresham College [ edit ] Apart from some small sums to various charities, Gresham bequeathed the bulk of his property (consisting of estates in London and around England giving an income of more than £2,300 a year) to his widow and her heirs, with the stipulation that after her death his own house in Bishopsgate Street and the rents from the Royal Exchange should be vested in the Corporation of London and the Mercers Company , for the purpose of instituting a college in which seven professors should read lectures, one each day of the week, in astronomy , geometry , physic , law, divinity , rhetoric and music.

[ 1 ] Thus, Gresham College , the first institution of higher learning in London, came to be established in 1597.

Gresham's law [ edit ] Gresham's law (stated simply as: "Bad money drives out good") takes its name from him (although others, including the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus , had recognised the concept for years) because he urged Queen Elizabeth to restore the debased currency of England. However, Sir Thomas never formulated anything like Gresham's law , which was the 1857 conception of Henry Dunning Macleod , an economist with a knack for reading into a text that which was not written.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The Gresham grasshopper [ edit ] The Gresham family crest is: On a Mount Vert a Grasshopper Or [ 7 ] (a golden grasshopper on a green mound); it is displayed by Gresham College , which he founded, and also forms the weathervane on the Royal Exchange in the City of London , also founded by him in 1565. The Faneuil Hall at Boston , Massachusetts , has also borrowed this heraldic device . The Gresham coat of arms is blazoned: Argent, a Chevron Erminés between three Mullets pierced Sable .

[ 8 ] According to ancient legend, the founder of the family, Roger de Gresham, was a foundling abandoned as a new-born baby among long grass in Norfolk during the 13th century and found there by a woman whose attention was drawn to the child by a grasshopper. Although a beautiful story, it is more likely that the grasshopper is simply a canting heraldic crest playing on the sound "grassh-" and "Gresh-". The Gresham family uses as its motto Fiat Voluntas Tua ('Thy will be done').

[ 9 ] Legacy [ edit ] Gresham's law ; The Royal Exchange , which he founded in 1565, was opened in 1571; Gresham College , funded by the bequest of his Will of 1571, was opened in 1597; Gresham Street in the City of London running east from St Martin's Le Grand near St Paul's Cathedral , past the Guildhall and the Bank of England is named in his memory; The Gresham Palace in Budapest is named after him; The Gresham Club in the City was also named in his honour; The Gresham Hotel , Dublin is indirectly named after Gresham. It was established in 1817 by another Thomas Gresham, who was given that name as he was a foundling abandoned on the steps of the Royal Exchange; Gresham Road, nearby Gresham's mansion at Hounslow : Osterley Park .

In fiction [ edit ] Gresham appears as a background figure in a series of fictional mystery novels by the British author Valerie Anand writing under the pen-name of Fiona Buckley.  The fictional heroine of the stories, Ursula Blanchard, lived in Antwerp with her first husband while he worked as one of Gresham's agents.

Gresham also features as the central character of Herbert Strang 's book On London River: A Story of the Days of Queen Elizabeth ( Oxford University Press , 1936).

Gallery [ edit ] 18th century engraving of Sir Thomas Gresham Gresham's bust at Stowe School Gresham's initials "TG" and date 1563 with his golden grasshopper emblem, serving as the sign of a bank [ 10 ] in Lombard Street , the historic centre of banking in the City of London Sir Thomas & Lady Gresham's townhouse in Bishopsgate Street Sir Thomas Gresham, portrait c.

1554 by Anthonis Mor Dame Anne née Ferneley, wife of Sir Thomas Gresham. Portrait c.

1560 by Anthonis Mor Intwood Hall , Gresham's Norfolk estate Gresham arms : Argent a Chevron Erminés between three Mullets pierced Sable Sir Thomas Gresham's merchant's mark as depicted in the 1544 portrait of him owned by the Mercers' Company . Also as illustrated in Elmhirst, 1959, [ 11 ] with more pronounced "heart shape", used by other marks of this type, e.g.

the later HEICS mark See also [ edit ] List of multiple discoveries Titsey Place Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Chisholm 1911 .

^ "Thomas Gresham (GRSN530T)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Heywood, Thomas, The Dramatic Works of Thomas Heywood , 6 volumes, ed. J. Payne Collier, London: The Shakespeare Society, 1851.

^ Memorials of the Institutions – St Helen's Bishopgate ^ Roover, Raymond de, Gresham on Foreign Exchange , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949 ^ Macleod, Henry Dunning (1858).

The Elements of Political Economy . London: Longman, Brown, Green, Longmans, and Roberts. pp.

476-477 – via Internet Archive .

^ Burke's Armorials, 1884 ^ Burke's Armorials, 1884 ^ Granville William Gresham Leveson Gower, JP, DL, FSA , Genealogy of the family of Gresham (1883) p. 27 ^ Early banks all had distinctive signs displayed in this way, for example Lloyd's Bank in Birmingham was "the sign of the black horse", which usage survives ^ Elmhirst, Edward Mars, Merchants' Marks , ed. Dow, Leslie, Harleian Society, 1959, p. 12, image no. 450 References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Gresham, Sir Thomas ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

The Life and Times of Sir Thomas Gresham by J.W. Burgon (London, 1839, new edition 1968) Sir Thomas Gresham (1518–1579) by F. R. Salter (Parsons, London, 1925) Baynes, T. S., ed. (1875–1889).

"Sir Thomas Gresham" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (9th ed.). New York: Charles Scribner's Sons.

Welch, Charles (1890).

"Gresham, Thomas" . In Stephen, Leslie ; Lee, Sidney (eds.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 23. London: Smith, Elder & Co.

Blanchard, Ian. "Gresham, Sir Thomas (c.1518–1579)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/11505 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) John William Burgon , The life and times of Sir Thomas Gresham comp. chiefly from his correspondence preserved in Her Majesty's state-paper office: including notices of many of his contemporaries. Published 1839 by R. Jennings in London . Volume I.

John William Burgon The life and times of Sir Thomas Gresham Volume II.

Knight, Charles (1845).

The Life of Sir Thomas Gresham: Founder of the Royal Exchange . Charles Knight & Co.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Thomas Gresham .

The Life and Times of Sir Thomas Gresham (1839) "Gresham and Antwerp", Gresham College Magna Carta Ancestry , Douglas Richardson (2011) v t e Gresham College Professors Astronomy Commerce Divinity Environment Geometry Information Technology Law Music Physic Rhetoric Visiting Related Thomas Gresham (founder) Barnard's Inn (location) Gresham College and the formation of the Royal Society Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Gresham&oldid=1300343621 " Categories : 1510s births 1579 deaths 16th-century English politicians Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge Founders of English schools and colleges People from the City of London People educated at St Paul's School, London Gresham College 16th-century English merchants Ambassadors of England to the Dutch Republic Knights Bachelor Court of Edward VI People from Keswick, South Norfolk Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Gresham 28 languages Add topic

