Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Significance 2 Editions 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano Latina 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Essay by Karl Marx A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Author Karl Marx Language German Subject Political economy Published 1859 Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy ( German : Zur Kritik der Politischen Ökonomie ) is a book by Karl Marx , first published in 1859. The book is mainly a critique of political economy achieved by critiquing the writings of the leading theoretical exponents of capitalism at that time: these were the political economists , nowadays often referred to as the classical economists ; Adam Smith (1723–90) and David Ricardo (1772–1823) are the foremost representatives of the genre.

Significance [ edit ] Much of the Critique was later incorporated by Marx into his magnum opus , Capital (Volume I) , published in 1867, and the Critique is generally considered [ citation needed ] to be of secondary importance among Marx's writings. This does not apply, however, to the Preface of the Critique . It contains the first connected account of one of Marx's main theories: the materialist conception of history , and its associated "base and superstructure" model of society, which divides human social development into an economic-technological "base" which "conditions"— not determines — the forms of its political-ideological " superstructure ".

[ 1 ] Briefly, this is the idea that economic factors – the way people produce the necessities of life – conditions the kind of politics and ideology a society can have: The totality of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond ( entsprechen ) definite forms of social consciousness . The mode of production of material life conditions ( bedingt ) the general process of social, political and intellectual life.

[ 2 ] Marx expressed this himself in the preface of the book: "It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines ( German : bestimmt , lit.

'determines/specifies/forms/foretells') their consciousness." [ 3 ] Editions [ edit ] In English, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy is available in an edition edited by Maurice Dobb , published by Progress Publishers , Moscow (translation by S. W. Ryazanskaya). Lawrence and Wishart (London), and International Publishers (New York) cooperated in the publication of the Progress Publishers edition.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Critique of political economy Neue Marx-Lektüre Notes [ edit ] ^ Otto Ruhle ("The Materialist Interpretation of History", in Ruhle (1943)) says that the "Preface" contained "the first connected account" of Marx's economic interpretation of history.

^ Michael Evans, Karl Marx , p. 61. Evans refers to the "Preface" as "the classic account of his general conclusions" in history, and also pointed out (p. 52) that "Marx never published a general systematic treatise detailing his views as an ordered whole. The nearest he came to this is in the first volume of Capital , and in the "Preface" to the Critique of Political Economy .

^ "Es ist nicht das Bewusstsein der Menschen, das ihr Sein, sondern umgekehrt ihr gesellschaftliches Sein, das ihr Bewusstsein bestimmt." - Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der Politischen Ökonomie . Vorwort .

Marx-Engels-Werke [ de ] volume 13, page 9, 1971 [1859].

^ "Economic Manuscripts: A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 1859" .

www.marxists.org .

References [ edit ] Evans, Michael (2013).

Karl Marx . London: Routledge. First published 1975, London: Allen and Unwin.

Ruhle, Otto (1943).

Karl Marx: His Life and Works . New York, 1943. First published, New York, 1929.

External links [ edit ] A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels Marx Das Kapital Das Kapital, Volume I (1867) Das Kapital, Volume II (1885, posthumous) Das Kapital, Volume III (1894, posthumous) Other works Scorpion and Felix (1837) Oulanem (1839) The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature (1841) " The Philosophical Manifesto of the Historical School of Law " (1842) Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right (1843, published 1927) " On the Jewish Question " (1843) " Notes on James Mill " (1844) Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (1844, published 1932) " Theses on Feuerbach " (1845, published 1888) The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) " Wage Labour and Capital " (1847) The Class Struggles in France, 1848–1850 (1850) The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) Grundrisse (1857, published 1939) A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859) Theories of Surplus Value (three volumes, 1862) " Value, Price and Profit " (1865) " The Belgian Massacres " (1869) " The Civil War in France " (1871) Critique of the Gotha Programme (1875) Mathematical manuscripts (1968) Notebooks on the history of technology Marx and Engels The Holy Family (1844) The German Ideology (1845, published 1932) The Communist Manifesto (1848) The Civil War in the United States (1861) Engels The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) Principles of Communism (1847) The Peasant War in Germany (1850) " The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man " (1876) Anti-Dühring (1878) Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) Dialectics of Nature (1883) The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State (1884) Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886) A Contribution to the History of Primitive Christianity (1894) Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (1896, posthumous) Collections Marx/Engels Collected Works (1975–2004) Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe (1975–today) Karl Marx Library (1971–1977) v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_Contribution_to_the_Critique_of_Political_Economy&oldid=1262801535 " Categories : 1859 books Books by Karl Marx 1859 in economic history Historical materialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 13 December 2024, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy 19 languages Add topic

