Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Political career 3 Personal life 4 Death 5 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 5.1 Articles 5.1.1 Books 6 References Toggle the table of contents Anuradha Ghandy 14 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Euskara മലയാളം مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Svenska தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian communist and revolutionary Anuradha Ghandy Source - bbc.co.uk - © [2009] BBC Born Anuradha Shanbag ( 1954-03-28 ) 28 March 1954 Died 12 April 2008 (2008-04-12) (aged 54) Mumbai , India Nationality Indian Other names Narmada, Varsha, Rama, Anu, Janaki Alma mater Elphinstone College , Mumbai Known for Prominent Figure of Maoist movement in India Spouse Kobad Ghandy ​ ( m.

1983) ​ Part of a series on Communism in India People M. N. Roy M. P. T. Acharya Sahajanand Saraswati Shripad Amrit Dange Abani Mukherji Yashpal A. K. Gopalan B. T. Ranadive Nripen Chakraborty P. Krishna Pillai Puran Chand Joshi Damodar Dharmananda Kosambi Bhagat Singh Ajoy Ghosh E. M. S. Namboodiripad S.K. Limaye Promode Dasgupta V. Subbiah Puchalapalli Sundarayya Kondapalli Seetharamaiah Saroj Dutta Jyoti Basu Bhupesh Gupta Hare Krishna Konar Dasarath Deb Harkishan Singh Surjeet T. Nagi Reddy Jagjit Singh Lyallpuri Charu Majumdar Indrajit Gupta E. K. Nayanar Shibdas Ghosh V. S. Achuthanandan Geeta Mukherjee Mohit Sen A. G. Noorani Biman Bose Buddhadeb Bhattacharjee Pinarayi Vijayan Vinod Mishra Manik Sarkar D. Raja Ganapathy Kobad Ghandy Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharya Sitaram Yechury Anuradha Ghandy Mohammed Salim History Colonial period and partition Communism in the independence movement Conspiracy cases Peshawar Kanpur Bolshevik Meerut Kakori conspiracy Foundation of the CPI Tanka movement Quit India Movement Telangana Rebellion 1946 Naval Uprising Tebhaga movement Punnapra-Vayalar uprising Post-independence and Cold War 2nd Congress of the CPI Goa liberation movement 1957 general election in Kerala Angamaly police firing Sino-Indian border dispute 1964 split in the CPI Historic Eight Documents Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising Timeline Left Front Tripura West Bengal Rajan case Operation Barga Left Democratic Front Indravelli massacre Contemporary history Bara massacre Laxmanpur Bathe massacre Maoism in the Nandigram violence Salwa Judum 2013 Naxal attack in Darbha valley Ideologies Marxism–Leninism Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Stalinism Marxist feminism Marxist humanism National communism Primitive communism Trotskyism Principles Agrarian socialism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Class conflict Land reform in Kerala Left-wing nationalism Left-wing populism People's war Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary socialism Welfare Current organisations AIFB TUCC BPI CPI AISF AITUC AIYF BKMU NFIW CPI(M) AIDWA AIKS CITU DYFI SFI CPI (Maoist) KAMS PLGA RYL CPI(ML)L AIKM AISA CPIML ND MCPI(U) AICTU MFB MLPI (Red Flag) NSA RCPI RMPI RSP SUCI(C) UCPI Defunct organisations AICP BLPI CIC CC Communist Marxist Party Communist Party of French India Comrades Association CPI (ML) HSRA ICS Lal Communist Party Lal Sena LKPH MCPI WPP Media Deshabhimani Ganashakti LeftWord Books Nava Telangana People's Democracy Prajasakti Qaumi Jang Theekkathir Visalaandhra Related topics Anarchism in India Communism in Kerala Communism in Nepal Communist movements in India Gandhian socialism Inquilab Zindabad Lal Salam List of communist parties in India Red corridor Socialism in India State of socialist orientation Communism portal v t e Anuradha Ghandy (28 March 1954 – 12 April 2008) was an Indian communist , Marxist feminist theorist, writer, and revolutionary leader. She was a Central Committee member of the Communist Party of India (Maoist) . She was one of the founding members of the Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) , in Maharashtra .

[ 1 ] Among the policy papers drafted by the Marxist movement, she contributed significantly to the ones on castes and ' Feminism and Marxism'. Her writings on feminist theory includes her 2006 book Philosophical Trends in the Feminist Movement . She made the guerillas realise the potential of worker cooperatives in areas like agricultural production, in Dandakaranya . She was also critical on shifting patriarchal ideas that were then dominant in the party.

[ 2 ] In her obituary for Anuradha, with whom she was friends from the days when the latter was still a college student in the 1970s, [ 3 ] Jyoti Punwani wrote: "'The Naxalite menace', says Manmohan Singh , 'is the biggest threat to the country'. But I remember a girl who was always laughing and who gave up a life rich in every way to change the lives of others".

Early life [ edit ] Anuradha was born to an older generation of communists, Ganesh and Kumud Shanbag, [ 2 ] [ 4 ] who were married in the CPI office in Mumbai .

[ 2 ] They were in the party till the mid-1950s, when it had not yet branched into the present Maoist and Marxist factions.

[ 2 ] Ganesh later got into the Defence committee, and volunteered to work in the cases filed against the communists.

[ 2 ] Kumud has been an active social worker all her life, and is at present involved with a women's group. The couple were very progressive in the way they brought up their children, who later became revolutionaries. Anuradha's brother, Sunil Shanbag , is a progressive Mumbai -based playwright, writing left-wing revolutionary plays. Anuradha attended J. B. Petit School in Santacruz . The children were exposed to varied views and ideas and were motivated to read a lot and develop their own interests such as classical dancing and theatre.

[ 2 ] Political career [ edit ] In the 1970s, Elphinstone College , Mumbai was a hub of left-wing politics, of which Anuradha played a prime role. What she saw in the refugee camps in war-hit Bangladesh and also the famine-hit areas of Maharashtra prior to that were the prime motives of her commitment to social work. She was one of the leading communist figures in post-Emergency India, when the Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights was founded. Her interests in the trade unions and Dalit movements of the Vidarbha region led to her move from Mumbai to Nagpur in 1982. She was arrested a number of times around this time, after which she went underground. There were mentions of her involvement with tribals in Bastar , Chhattisgarh , as well as in Jharkhand .

[ 2 ] Personal life [ edit ] In November 1983, Anuradha Shanbag married Kobad Ghandy , also a Naxalite like herself.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Ghandy hails from a Gujarati - Parsi family.

[ 7 ] Death [ edit ] Anuradha died of causes related to falciparum malaria on 12 April 2008. Due to her fear of government persecution including arrests or false encounters (she would be seen by the state as a ‘Maoist terrorist’) she had given the doctor she went to for a checkup a false name and dud phone number. When the doctor found that she had the parasite Plasmodium falciparum , he could not get through to her to warn her about these test results. On April 11, 2008, she was admitted to a hospital in Mumbai, but by then it was too late to save her. She died at the age of 54 on April 12, 2008.

Systemic sclerosis had weakened her immune system, leading to multiple organ failure, which was, among other things, a contributing factor to her death.

[ 8 ] It was during her stint in Jharkhand, educating the tribals against oppression of women in their society, when she contracted cerebral malaria.

[ 2 ] During her final days, she had been training the women cadre to develop leadership skills.

Bibliography [ edit ] Articles [ edit ] 2001: "Fascism, Fundamentalism, and Patriarchy" [ 9 ] 2001: "People's War has shattered the hesitations of the women of Dandakaranya" Books [ edit ] 2006: Philosophical Trends in the Feminist Movement 2012: Scripting the Change: Selected Writings of Anuradha Ghandy 2015: The Caste Question In India References [ edit ] ^ Special Correspondent (29 April 2008).

"Maoist leader Anuradha dead" .

The Hindu . Archived from the original on 1 May 2008.

{{ cite news }} : |author= has generic name ( help ) ^ a b c d e f g h Rahul Pandita (26 September 2009).

"The Rebel" .

OPEN .

^ Jyoti Punwani (20 April 2008).

"Memories of a Naxalite friend" .

The Times of India .

^ Punwani, Jyoti (18 December 2020).

"Kumud Shanbag: More than a revolutionary's mother" .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ "The Rebel" . 23 September 2009.

^ Kobad Ghandy (8 May 2010).

"Letter to the Editor" .

OPEN .

^ Nauzer Bharucha (24 September 2009).

"Kobad's father backed cause: Brother-in-law" .

The Times of India . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011.

^ "A Comrade and Companion" .

[Parsiana] . 21 April 2010.

^ Ansari, Halima Zoha (9 January 2022).

"Anuradha Ghandy On Hindutva, Women In RSS & A Complete Abolition Of Caste" .

Feminism In India . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

v t e Communist Party of India (Maoist) General secretaries Muppala Lakshmana Rao Nambala Keshava Rao Prominent leaders Narmada Akka Prashant Bose Anuradha Ghandy Kobad Ghandy Cherukuri Rajkumar Mallojula Koteswara Rao Patel Sudhakar Reddy Sushil Roy Narayan Sanyal Baccha Prasad Singh Katakam Sudarshan Mallujola Venugopal Predecessors Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) People's War Maoist Communist Centre of India Communist Party of India (Marxist–Leninist) Naxalbari Frontal organisations All India Revolutionary Students Federation Awakening and Dramatic Arts Front People's Liberation Guerrilla Army Radical Students Union Radical Youth League Revolutionary Adivasi Women's Organisation Singareni Workers Federation Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Sweden Academics CiNii Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anuradha_Ghandy&oldid=1305311248 " Categories : Communist Party of India (Maoist) politicians 1954 births 2008 deaths Naxalites Indian activists Anti-revisionists Elphinstone College alumni Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use Indian English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anuradha Ghandy 14 languages Add topic

