Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Boundaries 2 Geography 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Amur plate 26 languages Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Amurian microplate ) Minor tectonic plate in eastern Asia "China Plate" redirects here. For the ceramic pottery, see Porcelain .

Amur plate Type Minor Movement 1 South Speed 1 10 mm/year Features Amur , Yalu , Korea , Manchuria , Lake Baikal , Sea of Japan , southwest Honshu ( Kansai , Chūgoku ), Shikoku , most of Kyushu 1 Relative to the African plate The Amur plate (or Amurian plate ; also occasionally referred to as the China plate , not to be confused with the Yangtze plate ) [ citation needed ] is a minor tectonic plate in the northern and eastern hemispheres.

The Amurian Plate is named after the Amur River , which forms the border between the Russian Far East and Northeast China .
It is bounded on the north, west, and southwest by the Eurasian plate , on the east by the Okhotsk plate , to the southeast by the Philippine Sea plate along the Suruga Trough and the Nankai Trough , and the Okinawa plate , and the Yangtze plate .

[ 1 ] The Amurian Plate may have been involved in the 1975 Haicheng earthquake and the 1976 Tangshan earthquake in China.

[ citation needed ] Boundaries [ edit ] The Amurian microplate is a division within the Eurasian plate, with an unknown western boundary, defined on the south by the Qinling suture zone [ additional citation(s) needed ] in central China and the Baikal Rift Zone and Stanovoy Mountains on the north.

[ 2 ] The Baikal Rift Zone is considered a boundary between the Amurian Plate and the Eurasian plate.  GPS measurements indicate that the plate is slowly rotating counterclockwise. The boundary with the Okhotsk Plate is the eastern margin of the Sea of Japan .

[ 3 ] Geography [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) It covers northeastern China , the Korean Peninsula , the Sea of Japan , Shikoku , Kyushu , southwest Honshu ( Kansai , Chūgoku ), eastern Mongolia and the south of Russian Far East .

See also [ edit ] North China Craton References [ edit ] ^ Yu. F. Malyshev, et al. Deep structure of the Amur lithospheric Plate border zone.

^ Barnes, Gina L. (2022).

Tectonic Archaeology: Subduction Zone Geology in Japan and Its Archaeological Implications . Archaeopress Publishing Limited. pp.

35– 6.

^ Nakamura, K. (1983).

"Possible nascent trench along the eastern Japan Sea as the convergent boundary between Eurasian and North American plates" .

Bull. Earthq. Res. Inst .

Further reading [ edit ] Dongping Wei and Tetsuzo Seno. 1998.

Determination of the Amurian Plate Motion . Mantle Dynamics and Plate Interactions in East Asia, Geodynamics Series. v.27, edited by M. F. J. Flower et al., 419p, AGU, Washington D.C. ( abstract Archived 2007-08-30 at the Wayback Machine ) v t e Tectonic plates of East and North Asia ( Eurasian plate - Pacific plate Convergence Zone) Large Eurasian plate North American plate Philippine Sea plate Faults and rift zones Aomori Bay West Coast Fault Zone Baikal Rift Zone Haiyuan Fault Fukozu Fault Futagawa-Hinagu fault zone Idosawa Fault Itoigawa-Shizuoka Tectonic Line Izu–Bonin–Mariana Arc Japan Median Tectonic Line Longmenshan Fault Neodani Fault Nojima Fault Northeastern Japan Arc Philippine Fault System Senya Fault Tanna Fault Ulakhan Fault Urasoko fault Trenches and troughs Kuril Trench Mariana Trench Japan Eastern margin of the Sea of Japan Izu–Ogasawara Trench Japan Trench Nankai Trough Okinawa Trough Ryukyu Trench Sagami Trough Suruga Trough Philippines Manila Trench Philippine Trench Others Boso triple junction v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amur_plate&oldid=1284050471 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of Japan Geology of China Geology of Korea Geology of North Korea Geology of South Korea Geology of the Russian Far East Geology of the Pacific Ocean Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from February 2024 Webarchive template wayback links All stub articles This page was last edited on 5 April 2025, at 07:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amur plate 26 languages Add topic

