Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Trotskyism 2.2 Independent 2.3 Workers Party 2.4 Socialist Workers Party 2.5 News and Letters Committees 3 Legacy 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Articles 4.3 Introductions 4.4 Archives 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Raya Dunayevskaya 17 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français ქართული Kiswahili مصرى پښتو Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American Marxist philosopher and humanist activist Raya Dunayevskaya Born Raya Shpigel May 1, 1910 Yaryshiv , Russian Empire (today Vinnytsia Oblast , Ukraine ) Died June 9, 1987 (1987-06-09) (aged 77) Chicago , Illinois , U.S.

Other names Freddie Forest; Rae Spiegel; Rae Dwyer Movement Johnson–Forest Tendency Spouse John Dwyer [ 1 ] Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Western Marxism , Marxist humanism , Hegelian Marxism , Marxist feminism Main interests Social theory , social revolution , social movements , dialectical philosophy , Marxist praxis , women's liberation Notable ideas State capitalism , movement from practice that is itself a form of theory, absolute negativity as new beginning Raya Dunayevskaya (born Raya Shpigel , Рая Шпигель ; May 1, 1910 – June 9, 1987), later Rae Spiegel , also known by the pseudonym Freddie Forest , was the American founder of the philosophy of Marxist humanism in the United States. At one time Leon Trotsky 's secretary, she later split with him and ultimately founded the organization News and Letters Committees and was its leader until her death.

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] Of Lithuanian Jewish descent, Dunayevskaya was born Raya Shpigel in the Podolia Governorate of the Russian Empire (present-day Ukraine ) and emigrated to the United States in 1922 (her name changed to Rae Spiegel) and joined the revolutionary movement in her childhood.

[ 3 ] Career [ edit ] Trotskyism [ edit ] Active in the American Communist Party youth organization, she was expelled at age 18 and thrown down a flight of stairs when she suggested that her local comrades should find out Leon Trotsky 's response to his expulsion from the Soviet Communist Party and the Comintern . By the following year she found a group of independent Trotskyists in Boston , led by Antoinette Buchholz Konikow , an advocate of birth control and legal abortion .

[ 4 ] In the 1930s, she adopted her mother's maiden name Dunayevskaya.

[ 5 ] Without getting permission from the U.S. Trotskyist organization, she went to Mexico in 1937 to serve as Trotsky's Russian language secretary during his exile there.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Independent [ edit ] Having returned to Chicago in 1938 after the deaths of her father and brother, she broke with Trotsky in 1939 when he continued to maintain that the Soviet Union was a " workers' state " even after the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact . She opposed any notion that workers should be asked to defend this "workers' state" which had signed a non-aggression pact with Nazi Germany . Along with theorists such as C. L. R. James , and later Tony Cliff , Dunayevskaya argued that the Soviet Union had become " state capitalist ".

[ 7 ] Toward the end of her life, she stated that what she called "my real development" only began after her break with Trotsky.

[ 8 ] Her simultaneous study of the Russian economy and of Marx's early writings (later known as the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 ), led to her theory that not only was the USSR a "state capitalist" society, but that "state capitalism" was a new world stage. Much of her initial analysis was published in The New International in 1942–1943.

Workers Party [ edit ] In 1940, she was involved in the split in the Socialist Workers Party (SWP) that led to the formation of the Workers Party (WP), with which she shared an objection to Trotsky's characterisation of the Soviet Union as a " degenerated workers' state ". Within the WP, she formed the Johnson–Forest Tendency alongside C. L. R. James (she being "Freddie Forest" and he "J. R. Johnson", named for their party cadre names). The tendency argued that the Soviet Union was "state capitalist", while the WP majority maintained that it was bureaucratic collectivist .

Socialist Workers Party [ edit ] Differences within the WP steadily widened, and in 1947, after a brief period of independent existence during which they published a series of documents, the tendency returned to the ranks of the SWP. Their membership in the SWP was based on a shared insistence that there was a pre-revolutionary situation just around the corner, and the shared belief that a Leninist party must be in place to take advantage of the coming opportunities.

By 1951, with the failure of their shared perspective to materialize, the tendency developed a theory that rejected Leninism and saw the workers as being spontaneously revolutionary. This was borne out for them by the 1949 U.S. miners' strike. In later years, they were to pay close attention to automation , especially in the automobile industry , which they came to see as paradigmatic of a new stage of capitalism . This led to the tendency leaving the SWP again to begin independent work.

After more than a decade of developing the theory of state capitalism , Dunayevskaya continued her study of the Hegelian dialectic by taking on a task the Johnson–Forest Tendency had set itself: exploring Hegel's Phanomenologie Des Geistes . In 1954 she initiated a decades long correspondence with the critical theorist Herbert Marcuse , in which the necessity and freedom dialectic in Hegel and Marx became a focal point of contention. She advanced an interpretation of Hegel's absolutes holding that they involved a dual movement: a movement from practice that is itself a form of theory and a movement from theory reaching to philosophy. She considered these 1953 letters to be "the philosophic moment" from which the whole development of Marxist Humanism flowed.

News and Letters Committees [ edit ] In 1953 Dunayevskaya moved to Detroit, where she was to live until 1984. In 1954–1955 she and C. L. R. James engaged in a split [ clarification needed ] . In 1955, she founded her own organization, News and Letters Committees , and a Marxist-Humanist newspaper, News & Letters , which remains in publication today. The newspaper covers women's struggles, the liberation of workers, people of color, gay, lesbian, bisexual and transsexual rights and the disability rights movement, while not separating that coverage from philosophical and theoretical articles. The organization split in 2008-2009 and the U.S. Marxist-Humanists (later to become the International Marxist-Humanist Organization ) was formed.

Dunayevskaya wrote what came to be known as her "trilogy of revolution": Marxism and Freedom: From 1776 Until Today (1958), Philosophy and Revolution (1973), and Rosa Luxemburg, Women's Liberation, and Marx's Philosophy of Revolution (1982). In addition, she selected and introduced a collection of writings, published in 1985, Women's Liberation and the Dialectics of Revolution .

In the last year of her life she was working on a new book which she had tentatively titled, Dialectics of Organization and Philosophy: The 'Party' and Forms of Organization Born Out of Spontaneity .

[ 9 ] Legacy [ edit ] Raya Dunayevskaya's speeches, letters, publications, notes, recordings and other items are located in the Walter P. Reuther Library at Wayne State University in Detroit . Microfilm copies of the collection are available from the WSU Archives of Labor and Urban Affairs and PDF copies are online at the Raya Dunayevskaya Memorial Fund website . Guides to the collection are available from News and Letters Committees and in PDF form at the RDMF website.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Trilogy of Revolution Marxism and Freedom: From 1776 Until Today . [1958] 2000. Humanity Books.

ISBN 1-57392-819-4 .

Philosophy and Revolution: from Hegel to Sartre and from Marx to Mao . Third ed. 1989. Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-07061-6 .

Rosa Luxemburg, Women's Liberation, and Marx's Philosophy of Revolution . 1991. University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 0-252-01838-9 .

Other Women's Liberation and the Dialectics of Revolution: Reaching for the Future . 1996. Wayne State University Press.

ISBN 0-8143-2655-2 .

The Marxist-Humanist Theory of State-Capitalism . 1992. News & Letters Committee.

ISBN 0-914441-30-2 .

The Power of Negativity: Selected Writings on the Dialectic in Hegel and Marx . 2002. Lexington Books.

ISBN 0-7391-0266-4 .

Image Archived 2008-02-27 at the Wayback Machine Articles [ edit ] "The Shock of Recognition and the Philosophic Ambivalence of Lenin".

Telos , No. 5 (Spring 1970). New York: Telos Press .

Introductions [ edit ] Lou Turner and John Alan, Frantz Fanon, Soweto & American Black Thought ; new introduction by Raya Dunayevskaya. – new expanded edition, Chicago: News and Letters, 1986.

Archives [ edit ] Raya Dunayevskaya Papers , Walter P. Reuther Library , Detroit, Michigan. The first portion of the collection exists as organized and donated by Ms. Dunayevskaya and relates to the development of Marxist-Humanism. The second portion was donated after Ms. Dunayevskaya's death and relates her last writings and unfinished works. Documents range from 1924-1987. PDF copies are online at the Raya Dunayevskaya Memorial Fund website . Guides to the collection are available from News and Letters Committees and in PDF form at the RDMF website.

Some personal manuscripts, letters and pamphlets are held in the Mitchell Library , Glasgow , as part of the Harry McShane Collection.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Chaulieu–Montal Tendency References [ edit ] ^ https://www.chicagotribune.com/1987/06/11/trotsky-aide-raya-dunayevskaya/ ^ "Raya Dunayevskaya Is Dead; Author Was Aide to Trotsky" .

The New York Times . June 13, 1987.

^ "The Raya Dunayevskaya Internet Archive" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2024-10-29 .

^ a b Moon, Terry (2001). "Dunayevskaya, Raya". In Schultz, Rima Lunin; Hast, Adele (eds.).

Women Building Chicago 1790-1990: A Biographical Dictionary . Bloomington: Indiana University Press . pp.

238– 241.

ISBN 9780253338525 .

^ Rosengarten, Frank (2008).

Urbane Revolutionary: C. L. R. James and the Struggle for a New Society . University Press of Mississippi. p. 65.

^ "Who is Raya Dunayevskaya?" .

News and Letters Committees . Retrieved 2024-10-29 .

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1941).

"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a Capitalist Society" .

Internal Discussion Bulletin of the Workers Party .

^ "Marxist-Humanism, an Interview with Raya Dunayevskaya".

Chicago Literary Review . 15 March 1985. p. 16.

^ Many of her writings that were part of the process of work on the projected book are included in Volume XIII of the Supplement to the Raya Dunayevskaya Collection.

^ "Raya Dunayevskaya Collection, Mitchell Library, Glasgow" . Retrieved 23 April 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Afary, Janet, "The Contribution of Raya Dunayevskaya, 1910-1987: A Study in Hegelian Marxist Feminism," Extramares (1)1, 1989. pp. 35–55.

Anderson, Kevin, chapter 8, From 1954 to Today: "Lefebvre, Colletti, Althusser, and Dunayevskaya," in Lenin, Hegel and Western Marxism: A Critical Study, Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1995.

Anderson, Kevin, "Sources of Marxist-Humanism: Fanon, Kosik, Dunayevskaya," Quarterly Journal of Ideology (10)4, 1986. pp. 15–29.

Dunayevskaya, Raya, " Russia: From Proletarian Revolution to State-Capitalist Counter-Revolution, Selected writings " (co-editors: Franklin Dmitryev and Eugene Gogol), Leiden: Brill, 2017 Dunayevskaya, Raya, " Marx's Philosophy of Revolution in Permanence for Our Day, Selected writings " (editor: Franklin Dmitryev), Leiden: Brill, 2018 Easton, Judith, "Raya Dunayevskaya," Bulletin of the Hegel Society of Great Britain (16), Autumn/Winter 1987, pp. 7–12.

Gogol, Eugene, Raya Dunayevskaya: Philosopher of Marxist-Humanism, Eugene, Oregon: Wipfandstock Publishers, 2003.

Archived July 28, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Greeman, Richard, "Raya Dunayevskaya: Thinker, Fighter, Revolutionary," Against the Current, January/February 1988.

Hudis, Peter, "Workers as Reason: The Development of a New Relation of Worker and Intellectual in American Marxist-Humanism," Historical Materialism (11)4, pp. 267–293.

Jeannot, Thomas M., "Dunayevskaya's Conception of Ultimate Reality and Meaning," Ultimate Reality and Meaning (22)4, December 1999. pp. 276–293.

Kellner, Douglas, "A Comment on the Dunayevskaya-Marcuse Dialogue," Quarterly Journal of Ideology (13)4, 1989. p. 29.

Le Blanc, Paul, "The Philosophy and Politics of Freedom," Monthly Review (54)8.

[1] Lovato, Brian, Democracy, Dialectics, and Difference: Hegel, Marx, and 21st Century Social Movements, New York: Routledge, 2016.

Rich, Adrienne, "Living the Revolution," Women's Review of Books (3)12, September 1986.

Rockwell, Russell, "Hegel and Social Theory in Critical Theory and Marxist-Humanism," International Journal of Philosophy (32)1, 2003.

Rockwell, Russell, Hegel, Marx, and the Necessity and Freedom Dialectic: Marxist-Humanism and Critical Theory in the United States . Palgrave Macmillan. 2018.

https://marxist-humanistdialectics.blogspot.com/2018/03/coming-out-in-may-necessity-and-freedom.html Schultz, Rima Lunin, and Adele Hast, "Introduction," in Women Building Chicago 1790-1990, Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2001.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Raya Dunayevskaya .

Library resources about Raya Dunayevskaya Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Raya Dunayevskaya Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Biography News and Letters Newspaper Raya Dunayevskaya Collection at Walter Reuther Library, Wayne State University Archive at struggle.net Libertarian Communist Library Raya Dunayevskaya holdings Marxists Internet Archive Raya Dunayevskaya Archive Marxist-Humanist Dialectics International Marxist-Humanist Organization Marxist-Humanist Initiative Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic 2 Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raya_Dunayevskaya&oldid=1305965227 " Categories : 1910 births 1987 deaths People from Vinnytsia Oblast People from Mogilyovsky Uyezd (Podolian Governorate) 20th-century Ukrainian Jews Soviet emigrants to the United States American people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent Members of the Workers Party (United States) 20th-century American writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American women writers American humanists American Marxists American revolutionaries Jewish American anti-racism activists American anti-racism activists Scholars of feminist philosophy Jewish American feminists Jewish humanists Jewish philosophers Jewish socialists Marxist feminists Marxist humanists Marxist theorists Hegelian philosophers American political philosophers American women philosophers American women religious writers Communist women writers American socialist feminists Women Marxists Hegel scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2014 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raya Dunayevskaya 17 languages Add topic

