Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication 2 Themes 3 Influence 4 Gallery of prints 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Kunstformen der Natur 23 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book of stylised symmetrical illustrations of animals by Ernst Haeckel Kunstformen der Natur (Art Forms in Nature) Author Ernst Haeckel Language German Subject Natural history, biology, art Genre Non-fiction Publication date Published in sets between 1899 and 1904; collectively in two volumes in 1904 Publication place Germany Kunstformen der Natur (known in English as Art Forms in Nature ) is a book of lithographic and halftone prints by German biologist Ernst Haeckel .

Publication [ edit ] Originally published in sets of ten between 1899 and 1904 and collectively in two volumes in 1904, [ 1 ] it consists of 100 prints of various organisms, many of which were first described by Haeckel himself.  Over the course of his career, over 1000 prints were produced based on Haeckel's sketches and watercolors ; many of the best of these were chosen for Kunstformen der Natur , translated from sketch to print by lithographer Adolf Giltsch.

[ 2 ] A second edition of Kunstformen , containing only 30 prints, was produced in 1914.

The 8th print, Discomedusae . The center and bottom-center images are Desmonema annasethe .

[ 3 ] Themes [ edit ] According to Haeckel scholar Olaf Breidbach, the work was "not just a book of illustrations but also the summation of his view of the world."  The over-riding themes of the Kunstformen plates are symmetry and level of organization .  The subjects were selected to embody these to the full, from the scale patterns of boxfishes to the spirals of ammonites to the perfect symmetries of jellies and microorganisms, while images composing each plate are arranged for maximum visual impact.

[ 4 ] Among the notable prints are numerous radiolarians , which Haeckel helped to popularize among amateur microscopists ; at least one example is found in almost every set of 10.

Cnidaria also feature prominently throughout the book, including sea anemones as well as Siphonophorae , Semaeostomeae , and other medusae .  The first set included Desmonema annasethe (now Cyanea annasethe ), a particularly striking jellyfish that Haeckel observed and described shortly after the death of his wife Anna Sethe; the tentacles reminded him of her long flowing hair.

[ 3 ] Influence [ edit ] Kunstformen der Natur was influential in early 20th-century art, architecture, and design, bridging the gap between science and art.  In particular, many artists associated with Art Nouveau were influenced by Haeckel's images, including René Binet , Karl Blossfeldt , Hans Christiansen , and Émile Gallé . One prominent example is the Amsterdam Commodities Exchange designed by Hendrik Petrus Berlage : it was in part inspired by Kunstformen illustrations.

[ 5 ] Gallery of prints [ edit ] Haeckel's original classifications appear in italics .

Sea anemone ( Actiniae ) Anthomedusa ( Anthomedusae ) Siphonophore ( Siphonophorae ) Diatoms ( Diatomea ) Antelope ( Antilopina ) Arachnid ( Arachnida ) Ascidian ( Ascidiae ) Frog ( Batrachia ) Bryozoa Turtle ( Chelonia ) Ciliate ( Ciliata ) Annelid ( Chaetopoda ) Bat ( Chiroptera ) Conifer ( Coniferae ) Copepod ( Copepoda ) Box jellyfish ( Cubomedusae ) Decapods ( Decapoda ) Cephalopod ( Gamochonia ) Fern ( Filicinae ) Red Algae ( Florideae ) Lichen ( Lichenes ) Lizard ( Lacertilia ) Moss ( Muscinae ) Nepenthes ( Nepenthaceae ) Nudibranch ( Nudibranchia ) Trachylina ( Narcomedusae ) Orchid ( Orchidae ) Boxfish ( Ostraciontes ) Prosobranchia (obsolete classification) Siphonophorae Polycystine ( Spumellaria ) Radiolarian ( Stephoidea ) Moth ( Tineida ) Hummingbird ( Trochilidae ) Tubularia ( Tubulariae ) Cirripedia, Kunstformen der Natur , (1904).

See also [ edit ] On Growth and Form References [ edit ] ^ Juliana D. Kreinik; New York University. Institute of Fine Arts (2008).

The Canvas and the Camera in Weimar Germany: A New Objectivity in Painting and Photography of the 1920s . p. 232.

ISBN 978-0-549-58248-9 .

^ Breidbach, Visions of Nature , p. 253 ^ a b Innes, Shelley (2006). "From Here to Eternity: Ernst Haeckel and Scientific Faith, Religion, Theology, and Natural Science, Vol. 3 by Mario di Gregorio".

Journal of the History of Biology .

39 (1): 214– 216.

doi : 10.1007/s10739-006-0001-9 .

JSTOR 4332000 .

S2CID 189843968 .

^ Breidbach, Visions of Nature , pp. 229-231 ^ Breidbach, Visions of Nature , pp. 231, 268-269 Breidbach, Olaf.

Visions of Nature: The Art and Science of Ernst Haeckel .  Prestel Verlag: Munich, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kunstformen der Natur .

Marine Biological Laboratory Library - An exhibition of material on Haeckel, including background on many Kunstformen der Natur plates.

University Art Gallery, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth - An Ernst Haeckel exhibition from 2005 pairing prints from Kunstformen der Natur with modern sculptures.

Kurt Stüber's Biolib - An online version of Kunstformen der Natur with scanned images of the 100 plates, accompanying descriptions, table of contents and supplemental pages (in German).

Kunstformen der Natur (PDF) Detailed views of the volume are at Biodiversity Heritage Library Individual plate images are available on Flickr v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kunstformen_der_Natur&oldid=1304724423 " Categories : Natural history Biology books Science in art 1899 non-fiction books 1904 non-fiction books Art Nouveau works Animals in art 1899 in biology Lithographs Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Books with missing cover No local image but image on Wikidata Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 19:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kunstformen der Natur 23 languages Add topic

