Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the Rowland Institute for Science 2 Rowland Fellows 3 Notable members and alumni 4 Past directors 5 References Toggle the table of contents The Rowland Institute at Harvard 1 language Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°21′49″N 71°04′40″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3637°N 71.0779°W ﻿ / 42.3637; -71.0779 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nonprofit, privately endowed basic research organization The Rowland Institute at Harvard Established 1980 Research type Experimental science Director Andrew Murray Location Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States Operating agency Harvard University Website www .rowland .harvard .edu The Rowland Institute at Harvard , formerly the Rowland Institute for Science , was founded by Edwin H. Land (founder of Polaroid Corporation ) as a nonprofit, privately endowed basic research organization in 1980. The institute merged with Harvard University on July 1, 2002.

[ 1 ] The Rowland Institute is dedicated to experimental science across a wide range of disciplines. Research subjects at the institute includes chemistry, physics and biology, and focus on interdisciplinary work and the development of new experimental tools. It was originally located on the Charles River near Kendall Square in Cambridge, Massachusetts, a few miles away from the main campus of Harvard. In 2024, the institute moved to Harvard's main campus, to a newly renovated building at 60 Oxford Street, in shared space with the Harvard Quantum Initiative.

[ 2 ] History of the Rowland Institute for Science [ edit ] Land established the Rowland Institute with a mandate to work on problems that are "manifestly important and nearly impossible". For a small institute with such a broad mandate, Land conceived of a "sun and satellite" model, in which lab heads would serve as "suns" for their own research area, and simultaneously contribute their expertise as "satellites" in collaboration with the heads of the other labs. Land wanted members to be able to focus primarily on research, rather than proposal writing. Members were prohibited from applying for external grant support.

The Institute building on Land Blvd. was designed (principal architect Hugh Stubbins) and provisioned to support Land's vision. The ground floor included an expansive library, machine, woodworking, and electronic shops, a computer room, and an auditorium. There was also a large darkroom complex, designed with the help of Ansel Adams. The laboratories were distributed across the 2nd and 3rd floors, with areas for shared instrumentation and meeting rooms of various sizes. Major instrumentation included a JEOL 1200 STEM electron microscope equipped with X-ray detectors for elemental analysis, a JEOL GX-400 NMR spectrometer equipped for multinuclear detection, and a VAX 11/780 computer. The Institute was equipped with four apartments for visiting scientists and an artist studio for an artist-in-residence. Early visitors included Donald Glaser and John Holland.

Founding members of the institute, recruited by Land, spanned a range of disciplines: Joel Parks, trapped metal ion clusters James Foley, synthetic organic chemistry Howard Berg, bacterial locomotion/sensing Jean-Marc Fournier, optics, Lippman photography Jeffrey Hoch, biomolecular NMR Craig Shaefer, numerical optimization Robert Savoy, visual perception Stewart Wilson, classifier systems Land continued to conduct experiments related to color perception.

Following Land's death in 1991, his heirs donated the Institute building and its endowment to Harvard. Harvard soon instituted the Fellows program as the organizing principle. The original building was sold to real estate developers in 2024.

Rowland Fellows [ edit ] The flagship program at the Rowland Institute is the Fellows Program.

[ 3 ] The program supports early career experimental scientists.

[ 4 ] Rowland Fellows receive funding for salary and research expenses and are allocated their own laboratory space. The Rowland Institute also provides technical support from permanent expert staff. The Fellowship lasts for five years, with continuation past two years contingent on a favorable internal review.

[ 5 ] Notable members and alumni [ edit ] Howard Berg - biophysicist noted for his work on the motility of the bacterium Escherichia coli (E. coli) Steven Block - pioneered the use of optical tweezers to study step dynamics of kinesin and RNA polymerase on DNA templates Colleen Cavanaugh - microbiologist recognized for her studies of hydrothermal vent ecosystems Donald A. Glaser - physicist, neurobiologist, and winner of the 1960 Nobel Prize in Physics for inventing the bubble chamber Jene Golovchenko - physicist noted for his work on materials for whole genome sequencing Lene Hau - physicist noted for her work on Bose–Einstein condensate , and ultracold atomic system optics Winfield Hill - co-authored the popular text The Art of Electronics with Harvard Physicist Paul Horowitz Past directors [ edit ] Edwin H. Land : 1980 - 1992 Phil Dubois : 1992 - 1997 Michael Burns: 1998 - 2002 Frans Spaepen : 2002 - 2013 Cynthia Friend : 2013 - 2019 Andrew Murray : 2020–present References [ edit ] ^ "Rowland Institute merges with Harvard" .

harvard.edu . Harvard . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

^ "Rowland Institute celebrates new beginnings in a new space" .

harvard.edu . Harvard . Retrieved 17 March 2025 .

^ "Rowland Institute at Harvard - Sponsor Information on GrantForward | Search for federal grants, foundation grants, and limited submission opportunities" .

Grant Forward . 26 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 April 2017 .

^ von Bubnoff, Andreas (23 March 2007).

"Superpostdocs Reach for the Stars" .

Cell .

128 (6): 1023– 1026.

doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2007.03.005 .

PMID 17382872 .

^ "Rowland Fellows Program" .

Fellowships . Harvard . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons 42°21′49″N 71°04′40″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3637°N 71.0779°W ﻿ / 42.3637; -71.0779 Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Rowland_Institute_at_Harvard&oldid=1299848014 " Categories : Harvard University research institutes Multidisciplinary research institutes Science and technology studies associations Research institutes established in 1980 1980 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 19:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Rowland Institute at Harvard 1 language Add topic

