Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Members 2 Background and general ideas Toggle Background and general ideas subsection 2.1 I'll Take My Stand 2.2 Other publications 3 Chapel Hill Sociologists 4 Robert Penn Warren 5 Legacy 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Southern Agrarians 3 languages Italiano ქართული සිංහල Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Twelve authors of the Southern Agrarians manifesto This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Southern Agrarians were twelve American Southerners who wrote an agrarian literary manifesto in 1930. They and their essay collection, I’ll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition , contributed to the Southern Renaissance , the reinvigoration of Southern literature in the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 1 ] They were based at Vanderbilt University in Nashville.

John Crowe Ransom was their unofficial leader, though Robert Penn Warren became their most prominent member. The membership overlaps with The Fugitives .

Members [ edit ] The twelve authors of the Southern Agrarians manifesto, I'll Take My Stand , were: Donald Davidson , poet, essayist, reviewer and historian John Gould Fletcher , poet and historian Henry Blue Kline Lyle H. Lanier Andrew Nelson Lytle , poet, novelist and essayist Herman Clarence Nixon Frank Lawrence Owsley , historian John Crowe Ransom , poet, professor, essayist Allen Tate , poet John Donald Wade , biographer and essayist Robert Penn Warren , poet, novelist, essayist and critic, later first poet laureate of the United States Stark Young , novelist, drama and literary critic, playwright Other writers associated with the Agrarians include Richard M. Weaver , Caroline Gordon , Brainard Cheney and Herbert Agar .

Background and general ideas [ edit ] The Agrarians evolved from a philosophical discussion group known as the "Fugitives" or " Fugitive Poets ".  Many of the Southern Agrarians and Fugitive poets were connected to Vanderbilt University , either as students or as faculty members. Davidson, Lytle, Ransom, Tate, and Warren all attended the university; Davidson and Ransom later joined the faculty, along with Wade and Owsley.  They were known also as "Twelve Southerners", the "Vanderbilt Agrarians", the "Nashville Agrarians", the "Tennessee Agrarians", and the "Fugitive Agrarians".

They were offended by H. L. Mencken 's attacks on aspects of Southern culture that they valued, such as its agrarianism, conservatism, and religiosity.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] They sought to confront the widespread and rapidly increasing effects of modernity, urbanism, and industrialism on American (but especially Southern) culture and tradition. The Agrarians were influenced by the medievalism of Victorian writers Thomas Carlyle , John Ruskin and William Morris , as well as the French right-wing tradition that began with Counter-Enlightenment philosopher Joseph de Maistre , which they accessed through the writings of contemporaries T. E. Hulme , T. S. Eliot and Charles Maurras .

[ 4 ] The informal leader of the Fugitives and the Agrarians was John Crowe Ransom , but in a 1945 essay, he announced that he no longer believed in either the possibility or the desirability of an Agrarian restoration, which he declared a "fantasy".

[ 5 ] I'll Take My Stand [ edit ] I'll Take My Stand was criticized at the time, and since, as a reactionary and romanticized defense of the Old South and the Lost Cause of the Confederacy . It ignored slavery and denounced "progress", for example, and some critics considered it to be moved by nostalgia.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] A key quote from the "Introduction: A Statement of Principles" to their 1930 book I'll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition : All the articles bear in the same sense upon the book's title-subject: all tend to support a Southern way of life against what may be called the American or prevailing way; and all as much as agree that the best terms in which to represent the distinction are contained in the phrase, Agrarian versus Industrial.  ...Opposed to the industrial society is the agrarian, which does not stand in particular need of definition. An agrarian society is hardly one that has no use at all for industries, for professional vocations, for scholars and artists, and for the life of cities. Technically, perhaps, an agrarian society is one in which agriculture is the leading vocation, whether for wealth, for pleasure, or for prestige – a form of labor that is pursued with intelligence and leisure, and that becomes the model to which the other forms approach as well as they may. But an agrarian regime will be secured readily enough where the superfluous industries are not allowed to rise against it. The theory of agrarianism is that the culture of the soil is the best and most sensitive of vocations, and that therefore it should have the economic preference and enlist the maximum number of workers.

[ 9 ] Though the book was reviewed widely, it only sold about 2000 copies as of 1940.

[ 10 ] It has been reprinted several times. The current edition was published by Louisiana State University Press in 2006 to mark the book's 75th anniversary.

[ 11 ] Other publications [ edit ] Most of the Southern Agrarians contributed to a second collection of essays, Who Owns America?

(1936), which also included writings from English distributists .

[ 12 ] The Agrarians were the most prolific contributors to The American Review , edited by Seward Collins .

[ 10 ] Various Agrarians contributed as many as 70 articles, led by Donald Davidson with 21.

[ 13 ] Scholar Louis Menand has identified many of their contributions as influential in spreading the idea of New Criticism to the United States from Britain.

[ 14 ] Collins eventually became a public supporter of fascism. Several of the Agrarians came to regret (and renounce) their relationship with Collins, however, after his political views became better known.

[ 13 ] Agrarian Allen Tate wrote a rebuttal of fascism for the liberal The New Republic in 1936.

[ 13 ] Nevertheless, Tate remained in contact with Collins and continued to publish in The American Review until its demise, in 1937.

Chapel Hill Sociologists [ edit ] In the 1930s, the Agrarians were challenged by the modernizing social scientists (the "Chapel Hill Sociologists") based at the University of North Carolina (in Chapel Hill) and led by Howard W. Odum , on issues of urbanism, social progress, and the very nature and definition of the South. The sociologists produced Rupert Vance's The Human Geography of the South (1932), and Odum's Southern Regions of the United States (1936), as well as numerous articles in the journal Social Forces.

The sociologists argued that the problems in the South stemmed from traditionalism which ought to and could be cured by modernization, the opposite of the Agrarian viewpoint.

[ 15 ] Robert Penn Warren [ edit ] Robert Penn Warren emerged as the most accomplished of the Agrarians.  He became a major American poet and novelist, winning the Pulitzer Prize for his 1946 All the King's Men .

At a reunion of the Fugitive Poets in 1956, Warren confessed that for about a decade — from just before World War II to some years after — he had shut Agrarianism from his mind as irrelevant to the cataclysmic social and political events then playing out in the world.  Now, however, he believed that, rather than being irrelevant, his old Agrarian enthusiasms were tied into the major problems of the age.  In the modern world, the individual had been marginalized, stripped of any sense of responsibility, or of past or place.  "In this context," writes Paul V. Murphy, "the Agrarian image of a better antebellum South came to represent for Warren a potential source of spiritual revitalization.  The past recalled, not as a mythical 'golden age' but 'imaginatively conceived and historically conceived in the strictest readings of the researchers', could be a 'rebuke to the present'." [ 16 ] It was Warren's concern with democracy, regionalism, personal liberty and individual responsibility that led him to support the civil rights movement , which he depicted in his nonfiction works Segregation (1956) and Who Speaks for the Negro?

(1965) as a struggle for identity and individualism.  As Hugh Ruppersburg, among others, has argued, Warren's support for the civil rights movement paradoxically stemmed from Agrarianism, which by the 1950s, meant for him something very different from the Agrarianism of I'll Take My Stand .

[ 17 ] As Warren's political and social views evolved, his notion of Agrarianism evolved with them.  He came to support more progressive ideas and racial integration [ 18 ] and was a close friend of the eminent African-American author Ralph Ellison .

[ 19 ] While Donald Davidson took a leading role in the attempt to preserve the system of segregation , Warren took his stand against it.  As Paul V. Murphy writes, "Loyalty to the southern past and the ambiguous lessons of Agrarianism led both men in very different directions." [ 16 ] Legacy [ edit ] Louis D. Rubin Jr.

assessed the Agrarians in 1979: In retrospect the importance of I'll Take My Stand lay in its vigorous reaffirmation of religious humanism and its farseeing critique of the abuses of unchecked industrial exploitation. In certain crucial respects it is far closer in spirit and intent to works such as Henry David Thoreau 's Walden , Edward Bellamy 's Looking Backward , and T. S. Eliot's " The Waste Land " in its rebuke to an acquisitive business society. This, and not its topical prescriptions for the southern economy of the day, largely accounts for its continuing importance.

[ 12 ] In 1981, University of Georgia Press published Why the South Will Survive: Fifteen Southerners Look at Their Region a Half Century after I'll Take My Stand, with contributions from Donald L. Anderson (1932–2004), [ 20 ] M. E. Bradford , Cleanth Brooks , Thomas Fleming , Samuel T. Francis , George Garrett , William C. Havard , Hamilton C. Horton Jr.

, Thomas H. Landess , Marion Montgomery , John Shelton Reed , George C. Rogers Jr.

, David B. Sentelle , and Clyde N. Wilson , with an afterword by Lytle.

[ 21 ] In recent decades, some American traditional conservatives such as Allan C. Carlson , Joseph Scotchie , and Eugene Genovese have praised the Agrarian themes in light of what they see as the failures of highly urbanized and industrialized modern societies.

[ 22 ] [ failed verification ] Today, the Southern Agrarians are regularly lauded in neo-Confederate media such as the Southern Partisan .

[ citation needed ] Some of their social, economic, and political ideas have been refined and updated by writers such as Allan C. Carlson and Wendell Berry .

[ citation needed ] The Intercollegiate Studies Institute has published books which further explore the ideas of the Agrarians.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Agrarianism Tennessee literature References [ edit ] ^ Davidson et al. 2006 .

^ Shapiro, Edward S. (1972).

Southern Agrarians, H. L. Mencken, and the Quest for Southern Identityrticle/view/2401/2360 "" , American Studies 13: 75-92.

^ Shapiro, Edward S. (Fall 1972).

"The Southern Agrarians, H. L. Mencken, and the Quest for Southern Identity" .

American Studies .

13 (2): 75– 92.

JSTOR 40641078 .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-20 . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ Karanikas, Alexander (1966).

Tillers of a Myth: Southern Agrarians as Social and Literary Critics . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. p. 81.

^ Ransom, John Crowe (1945). "Art and the Human Economy", Kenyon Review 7: 686.

^ Rubin, Louis (1962), "Introduction", I'll take my stand: the South and the agrarian tradition , p. xxiii ^ Johnson, Bethany L, ed. (2001), The Southern Agrarian and the New Deal: Essays after "I'll Take My Stand" , p. 3 .

^ Simpson, Lewis P (2003), "1", The Fable of the Southern Writer .

^ Davidson et al. 1930 .

^ a b Tucker, Michael Jay (2006).

And Then They Loved Him: Seward Collins & the Chimera of an American Fascism . Peter Lang. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-8204-7910-1 .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-19 . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ "I'll Take My Stand" .

LSU Press .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ a b Rubin 1979 .

^ a b c Winchell, Mark Royden (2000).

Where No Flag Flies: Donald Davidson and the Southern Resistance . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 9780826212740 .

Where No Flag Flies: Donald Davidson and the Southern Resistance.

^ Menand, Louis (2021).

The Free World: Art and Thought in the Cold War . New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. p. 466.

ISBN 9780374158453 .

^ Holladay, Robert ‘Bob’ (Dec 2005), "The Gods That Failed: Agrarianism, Regionalism, and the Nashville-Chapel Hill Highway", Tennessee Historical Quarterly , 64 (4): 284– 307 .

^ a b Murphy, Paul V. (2001).

The Rebuke of History : Introduction Archived 2012-01-19 at the Wayback Machine , University of North Carolina Press.

^ Ruppenburg, Hugh (1990).

Robert Penn Warren and the American Imagination , University of Georgia Press.

^ Smith, Sandy (2008).

"Voices from the Past" ^ Ealy, Steven D. (2006).

"'A Friendship That Has Meant So Much': Robert Penn Warren and Ralph W. Ellison" , The South Carolina Review Vol. 38, No. 2: 162-172.

^ "Donald L. Anderson" .

Schumacher Center for New Economics .

Archived from the original on 2022-07-23 . Retrieved 2022-07-23 .

^ "Why the South Will Survive" .

Georgia Press .

Archived from the original on 2022-10-02 . Retrieved 2022-07-23 .

^ Young, Thomas Daniel (2010), Waking Their Neighbors Up: The Nashville Agrarians Rediscovered , U. of Georgia Press .

Bibliography [ edit ] Davidson, Donald ; Fletcher, John Gould ; Kline, Henry Blue ; Lanier, Lyle H ; Lytle, Andrew Nelson ; Nixon, Herman Clarence ; Owsley, Frank Lawrence ; Ransom, John Crowe ; Tate, Allen ; Wade, John Donald ; Warren, Robert Penn ; Young, Stark (2006), I'll Take My Stand: The South and the Agrarian Tradition (75th anniversary ed.), Louisiana State Univ. Press, ISBN 0-8071-3208-X .

———; Fletcher, John Gould ; Kline, Henry Blue ; Lanier, Lyle H ; Lytle, Andrew Nelson ; Nixon, Herman Clarence ; Owsley, Frank Lawrence ; Ransom, John Crowe ; Tate, Allen ; Wade, John Donald ; Warren, Robert Penn ; Young, Stark (1930), "Introduction: a statement of principles" , I'll Take My Stand .

Rubin, Louis D. Jr. (1979). "I'll Take My Stand". In Roller, David C.; Twyman, Robert W. (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Southern History . Baton Rouge and London: Louisiana State University Press. p. 618.

ISBN 978-0-8071-0575-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bingham, Emily; Underwood, Thomas A, eds. (2001), The Southern Agrarians and the New Deal: Essays After I'll Take My Stand .

Carlson, Allan (2004), The New Agrarian Mind: The Movement Toward Decentralist Thought in Twentieth-Century America .

Genovese, Eugene (1994), The Southern Tradition: The Achievement and Limitations of an American Conservatism Langdale, John (2012), Superfluous Southerners: Cultural Conservatism and the South, 1920–1990 .

Malvasi, Mark G. (1997), The Unregenerate South: Agrarian Thought of John Crowe Ransom, Allen Tate and Donald Davidson .

Murphy, Paul V (2001), The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American Conservative Thought .

Scotchie, Joseph, "Agrarian Valhalla: The Vanderbilt 12 and Beyond", Southern Events , archived from the original on 2006-12-29 .

v t e Southern Agrarians Associated writers Herbert Agar Brainard Cheney Donald Davidson John Gould Fletcher Caroline Gordon Henry Blue Kline Lyle H. Lanier Andrew Nelson Lytle Herman Clarence Nixon Frank Lawrence Owsley John Crowe Ransom Allen Tate John Donald Wade Robert Penn Warren Richard M. Weaver Stark Young Key works " Ode to the Confederate Dead " (1928) " Lee in the Mountains " (1934) Related The American Review Fugitives New Criticism Plain Folk of the Old South The Unregenerate South Vanderbilt University v t e Schools of poetry Acmeism Akhmatova's Orphans Angry Penguins Auden Group The Beats Black Arts Movement Black Mountain poets British Poetry Revival Cairo poets Castalian Band Cavalier poets Chhayavaad Churchyard poets Conceptismo Confessionalists Créolité Cubo-Futurism Culteranismo Cyclic Poets Dada Deep image Della Cruscans Dolce Stil Novo Dymock poets Ecopoetry Ego-Futurism The poets of Elan Flarf Fugitives Garip Gay Saber Generation of '27 Generation of the '30s Generation of '98 Georgian poets Goliard The Group Harlem Renaissance Harvard Aesthetes Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Informationist poetry İkinci Yeni Jindyworobaks Lake Poets Language poets Marinism Martian poetry Metaphysical poets Misty Poets Modernist poetry The Movement Négritude Neotericism New American Poetry New Apocalyptics New Formalism New York School Oberiu Objectivists Others Parnassian poets La Pléiade Précieuses Rhymers' Club San Francisco Renaissance Scottish Renaissance Sicilian School Sons of Ben Southern Agrarians Spasmodic poets Sung poetry Surrealism Symbolism Uranian poetry Zutiste Poetry portal v t e Allen Tate Poems " Ode to the Confederate Dead " (1928) " The Mediterranean " (1933) Prose books Stonewall Jackson: The Good Soldier (1928) The Fathers (1938) Essays of Four Decades (1967) Works about The Unregenerate South (1997 book) Allen Tate: Orphan of the South (2000 book) Miscellaneous Caroline Gordon (wife) Riverview (retreat) Fugitives Southern Agrarians v t e Vanderbilt University Located in Nashville, Tennessee – Founded 1873 Schools and colleges Undergraduate Blair School of Music College of Arts and Science Peabody College School of Engineering Graduate Divinity School Graduate School Law School Owen Graduate School of Management School of Medicine School of Nursing People Cornelius Vanderbilt Holland McTyeire Bruce R. Evans Southern Agrarians Fugitives Vanderbilt alumni Vanderbilt athletes Vanderbilt chancellors Spirit of Gold Greek life Bachelor of Ugliness Athletics Teams Basketball Men's Women's Baseball Football Men's soccer (defunct) Venues FirstBank Stadium Hawkins Field Memorial Gymnasium Traditions "Dynamite" Places Alumni Hall Disciples Divinity House Dyer Observatory First Amendment Center Jean and Alexander Heard Library Institute for Space and Defense Electronics Home Economics Building Mayborn Building Memorial Hall Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital Old Gym Thomas W. Phillips Memorial Television News Archive Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center Vanderbilt University Medical Center Vanderbilt University Press Publications The Vanderbilt Hustler Vanderbilt Orbis The Slant Vanderbilt Law Review Affiliations Association of American Universities Southeastern Conference American Lacrosse Conference Category Authority control databases : National Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Southern_Agrarians&oldid=1296721063 " Categories : Southern Agrarians Political theories Agrarian politics Southern United States literature Old Right (United States) Republicanism in the United States Vanderbilt University 20th-century American literature Allen Tate Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from September 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Southern Agrarians 3 languages Add topic

