Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical Analysis Toggle Historical Analysis subsection 1.1 Prehistory to Early History 1.2 Pre-Industrial Era into the Industrial Era 1.3 Advocacy in the 20th Century 2 Threats to birds Toggle Threats to birds subsection 2.1 Habitat Loss 2.2 Climate Change 2.2.1 Direct impacts 2.2.2 Indirect impacts 2.3 Pollution 2.4 Introduced species 2.5 Hunting and exploitation 2.5.1 Pet trade 2.5.2 Plume trade 2.6 Hybridization 2.7 Other threats 3 Conservation techniques Toggle Conservation techniques subsection 3.1 Captive breeding 3.2 Reintroduction and translocations 3.3 Habitat protection 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bird conservation 14 languages Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field in the science of conservation biology related to threatened birds The extinction of the dusky seaside sparrow ( Ammospiza maritima nigrescens ) was caused by habitat loss.

Bird conservation is a field in the science of conservation biology related to threatened birds . Bird conservation efforts aim to protect species and mitigate the decline of threatened bird population numbers .

According to Worldwatch Institute , many bird populations are currently declining worldwide, with 1,200 species facing extinction in the next century.

[ 1 ] Current estimates imply a total of nearly 11,000 extant species, suggesting that 11.6% of all bird species, a near ratio of one in nine birds, have gone extinct over the last 126,000 years of human history.

[ 2 ] The biggest cited reason surrounds habitat loss .

[ 3 ] Other threats include overhunting, accidental mortality due to structural collisions , long-line fishing bycatch , pollution, [ 4 ] competition and predation by pet cats , [ 5 ] oil spills and pesticide use and climate change . Governments, along with numerous conservation charities , work to protect birds in various ways, including legislation, preserving and restoring bird habitat , and establishing captive populations for reintroductions.

See Late Quaternary prehistoric birds for birds which disappeared in prehistoric and early historic times, usually due to human activity (i.e., starting with the Upper Paleolithic Revolution ). For birds having gone extinct in modern times (since 1500), see List of extinct birds .

Historical Analysis [ edit ] Prehistory to Early History [ edit ] Since the Late Pleistocene period, it is estimated that 1,430 (95% credible interval: 1327–1544) bird extinctions have occurred.

Human activity has been directly attributed to almost all bird species extinctions, specifically prehistoric and early historical species.

[ 2 ] During the Upper Paleolithic period, human societies began spreading across the globe, leading to the overhunting of species and the introduction of invasive species to new environments. A particularly significant period of extinction occurred when humans colonized the islands of Melanesia , Polynesia , and Micronesia around 4,000 years ago.

[ 6 ] According to a study published in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , early Polynesian settlers are often credited with contributing to the extinction of over 1,000 bird species during this time, majority of which were non-passerine land birds.

[ 7 ] Pre-Industrial Era into the Industrial Era [ edit ] Before the Industrial Revolution (1750-1850), most bird species were not yet heavily impacted by habitat loss or climate change.

[ 8 ] However, overexploitation through hunting, bird collecting, as well as the introduction of invasive species became significant threats. Industrialization marked a turning point in the relationship between humans and birds. The technological growth, urban expansion, and increased emissions from industrial activity caused widespread habitat destruction and altered ecosystems.

[ 9 ] In the United Kingdom , species such as the white-tailed eagle ( Haliaeetus albicilla ) and cranes , for example, were recognized as more abundant before industrialization began.

[ 10 ] By the 19th century, the advent of industrial-scale hunting and urban sprawl had put pressure on many bird populations.

Illustration of Carolina parakeets ( Conuropsis carolinensis ) by John James Audubon In North America, the Carolina parakeet ( Conuropsis carolinensis ) one of the few parrots indigenous to the United States, suffered from Industrial era deforestation and hunting (both for its colorful feathers, and because the birds were thought to feed on crops) [ 11 ] , which helped destroy wild populations. The species' final extinction came in the early 20th century, though causes remain unclear.

[ 12 ] Similarly, the passenger pigeon ( Ectopistes migratorius ) once one of the most populous bird species in North America, was driven to extinction in the early 20th century due to relentless hunting and habitat loss. This extinction served as a stark reminder of the fragility of bird populations in the face of human intervention. The loss of such a previously abundant species helped catalyze the first major bird conservation efforts in the United States.

[ 13 ] Following the assumed extinction of passenger pigeons, Theodore Roosevelt claimed to have witnessed a small flock of the birds at his family name’s rural cabin in Virginia some 25 years after their extinction (March 24, 1900). Following this sighting, Theodore recognized the severity of the loss of this once abundant species and initiated strengthened bird advocacy legislation during his presidency in 1907.

[ 14 ] The establishment of the first Federal Bird Reserve on Pelican Island in Florida can be attributed to this sighting made by President Roosevelt.

[ 15 ] Advocacy in the 20th Century [ edit ] The early 20th century saw the rise of formal conservation efforts.

The National Audubon Society , founded in 1905, played a key role in raising awareness about the rapid decline of bird populations, specifically in response to the exploitation of birds for the feather trade. The organization's efforts were influential in propelling early legal protections for birds.

[ 16 ] A significant achievement in favor of bird protection was the passage of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 . This act provided international protection for migratory bird species between the United States , Canada , Mexico , Japan , and Russia .

[ 17 ] From the 1920s to 1950s, bird advocacy gained further strength. In 1934, the Duck Stamp Act was passed. It sought to fund the protection of wetlands using hunter fees.

[ 18 ] Additionally, during the Great Depression , New Deal programs including the Civilian Conservation Corps preserved wildlife refuges, providing birds a thriving environment for bird species.

[ 19 ] Birdwatching gained popularity within this timeframe, too, in large part thanks to Roger Tory Peterson’s groundbreaking field guides.

[ 20 ] Finally, Rachel Carson's early works began to clarify the relationship between healthy bird populations and a healthy planet. All of these factors laid more solid groundwork for the continuation of advocacy for birds.

[ 21 ] The 1960s were a particularly pivotal era in favor of bird conservation. The publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring (1962) aided in exposing widespread dangers of pesticide use, particularly DDT , on bird populations. Her groundbreaking work demonstrated how DDT led to the thinning of eggshells in species like the bald eagle ( Haliaeetus leucocephalus ) and peregrine falcon ( Falco peregrinus ), resulting in reproductive failures. Carson’s book ignited a broader environmental movement, leading to significant policy changes, and the eventual DDT ban.

[ 21 ] The Environmental Protection Agency enforced a generalized ban on DDT pesticides in 1972. Bald eagles made a famous comeback during the “dirty sixties” thanks to this ban, along with the brown pelican ( Pelecanus occidentalis ) and peregrine falcon.

[ 22 ] By the 1980s, the global conservation movement gained further momentum. Organizations like BirdLife International played an increasingly vital role in establishing international frameworks for bird protection. This included efforts to protect critical habitats, such as wetland areas, and to monitor at-risk species. Additionally, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) developed the Red List of Threatened Species , which continues to serve as an important tool for identifying and tracking species at risk of extinction, including many bird species.

[ 23 ] Threats to birds [ edit ] Habitat Loss [ edit ] The most critical threat facing threatened birds is the destruction and fragmentation of habitat.

[ 24 ] The loss of forests, plains and other natural systems into agriculture, mines, and urban developments, the draining of swamps and other wetlands , and logging reduce potential habitat for many species. In addition the remaining patches of habitat are often too small or fragmented by the construction of roads or other such barriers that cause populations in these fragmented islands to become vulnerable to localized extinction. In addition many forest species show limited abilities to disperse and occupy new forest fragments (see island biogeography ).

[ 25 ] The loss of tropical rainforest is the most pressing problem, as these forests hold the highest number of species yet are being destroyed quickly. Habitat loss has been implicated in a number of extinctions, including the ivory-billed woodpecker ( Campephilus principalis ) (disputed because of "rediscovery"), Bachman's warbler ( Vermivora bachmanii ), and the dusky seaside sparrow ( Ammospiza maritima nigrescens ).

Climate Change [ edit ] Climate change is a catalyst for the worrying downward trend of bird populations globally. The speed of human-caused climate change is currently unprecedented, leading bird species into continuously unadaptable circumstances. The American Bird Conservancy states there is a clear and direct comparison between bird population decline and climate change, stating that “[w]arming temperatures are changing where birds live, the timing of their migration patterns and egg laying, and even the sizes and shapes of their bodies.” Direct impacts [ edit ] It has been observed that most North American bird species have been recognized over the prior few decades to have shifted their breeding ranges irregularly due to climate change. Migratory birds are more prone to the effects of climate change, leading to shifts in time migratory patterns. It is predicted in the coming years that mountainous birds will even lose suitable migratory habitats due to rising temperatures at higher elevations. On top of these migratory shifts, global warming has been predicted to be changing size and wing length proportionally in all bird species. It is presumed that with rising temperatures, smaller birds maintain better competitive fitness thanks to their easier heat dispersal compared to their larger counterparts within the same species.

Indirect impacts [ edit ] Indirect impacts of climate change on birds include increased drought and fires, rising-sea levels, increased disease, phenological mismatch, and uncommon interactions between species. Increase in drought leads to increased fires, destroying nesting ground and fragmenting specifically sagebrush ecosystems. Rise in sea-levels provides similar altercations for marsh-nesting birds. Nesting sites disappear as sea-levels rise, eliminating habitats for nesting parents and young to continue species. Phenological mismatch occurs due to rising temperatures shifting migratory timeframes but not quickly enough, altering the life cycle events in interacting species at different rates.

[ 26 ] Pollution [ edit ] Birds are afflicted by numerous pollutants including marine oil pollution, plastic pollution, light pollution, sound pollution, air pollution, and pesticides to name a major few. Plastic pollution serves a major detriment to birds, mainly marine birds.

[ 27 ] Many marine birds suffer from entanglement, nutritional deprivation, and gut damage due to ingested plastic litter.

[ 28 ] Introduced species [ edit ] Arctic foxes ( Vulpes lagopus ) introduced to the Aleutian Islands devastated populations of auks; here a least auklet ( Aethia pusilla ) has been taken.

Historically the threat posed by introduced species has probably caused the most extinctions of birds, particularly on islands. most prehistoric human caused extinctions were insular as well. Many island species evolved in the absence of predators and consequently lost many anti-predator behaviors .

[ 29 ] As humans traveled around the world they brought with them many foreign animals which disturbed these island species. Some of these were unfamiliar predators, like rats , feral cats , and pigs ; others were competitors, such as other bird species, or herbivores that degraded breeding habitat. Disease can also play a role; introduced avian malaria is thought to be a primary cause of many extinctions in Hawaii .

[ 30 ] The dodo ( Raphus cucullatus ) is the most famous example of a species that was probably driven to extinction by introduced species (although human hunting also played a role), other species that were victims of introduced species were the Lyall's wren ( Traversia lyalli ), poʻo-uli ( Melamprosops phaeosoma ), and the Laysan millerbird ( Acrocephalus familiaris familiaris ) . Many species currently threatened with extinction are vulnerable to introduced species, such as the kōkako ( Callaeas species), black robin (Petroica traversi) , Mariana crow ( Corvus kubaryi ), and the Hawaiian duck ( Anas wyvilliana ).

Hunting and exploitation [ edit ] Humans have exploited birds for a very long time, and sometimes this exploitation has resulted in extinction. Overhunting occurred in some instances with a naive species unfamiliar with humans, such as the moa of New Zealand , [ 31 ] in other cases it was an industrial level of hunting that led to extinction. The passenger pigeon was once the most numerous species of bird alive (possibly ever), overhunting reduced a species that once numbered in the billions to extinction.

[ 32 ] Hunting pressure can be for food, sport, feathers , or even come from scientists collecting museum specimens. Collection of great auks for museums pushed the already rare species to extinction.

Pet trade [ edit ] The harvesting of parrots for the pet trade has led to many species becoming endangered. Between 1986 and 1988, two million parrots were legally imported into the US alone. Parrots are also illegally smuggled between countries, and rarer species can command high prices.

Organized entrapment of birds takes place today across the globe, specifically in Latin America , Asia , and Africa . The demand for exotic pet birds in the United States drives capture in Bolivia and Mexico, with a supposed over 22,000 individuals of 31 parrot species illegally traded under Bolivian law every year and an estimated 65,000–78,500 parrots captured every year in Mexico. This poaching continues due to the potential profits, with rarer species selling for up to $1,000 each when caught illegally.

[ 33 ] Plume trade [ edit ] Plume hunting is the hunting of wild birds to harvest their decorative feathers . More decorative plumes , which were sold for use as ornamentation particularly in hat-making , were more sought after in the trade. While the plume trade is not necessarily an large ongoing threat to birds, it was in its height in the late 19th century into the early 20th century until protective efforts were instated.

[ 34 ] Hybridization [ edit ] Hybridization may also endanger birds, damaging the gene stock. For example, the American black duck ( Anas rubripes ) has been often reported hybridizing with the mallard ( Anas platyrhynchos ), starting a slow decline in the rarer A. rubripes .

Gamebird hybrids are particularly common and many breeders produce hybrids that may be accidentally or intentionally introduced into the wild.

Other threats [ edit ] Further information: Bird kill and Climate change and birds This black-browed albatross ( Thalassarche melanophris ) has been hooked on a long-line.

Birds face a number of other threats.

Pollution has led to serious declines in some species. Increasingly large volumes of plastic waste are being transported by wind and ocean currents throughout the planet, and mistaken ingestion by many species is eventually fatal.

[ 35 ] Seabirds are also vulnerable to oil spills , which destroy the plumage 's waterproofing, causing the birds to drown or die of hypothermia .

[ 36 ] Light pollution can also have a damaging effect on some species, particularly nocturnal seabirds such as petrels .

[ 37 ] The pesticide DDT was responsible for thinning egg shells in nesting birds, particularly seabirds and birds of prey that are high on the food chain.

[ 38 ] The use of pesticides continues to harm birds, especially insectivores like swallows that have lost a food source from the use of insecticides in agriculture.

[ 39 ] A particularly dangerous class of pesticides is the seed-coating neonicotinoids . Neonicotinoids include a neurotoxin that bioaccumulates in the tissue of birds and is associated with impairment of reproduction.

[ 39 ] Seabirds face another threat in the form of bycatch , where birds in the water become tangled in fishing nets or hooked on lines set out by long-line fisheries . As many as 100,000 albatrosses are hooked and drown each year on tuna lines set out by long-line fisheries.

[ 40 ] Birds are also threatened by high rise buildings , communications towers, and other human-related activities and structures; estimates vary from about 3.5 to 975 million birds a year in the North America alone.

[ 41 ] The largest source of human-related bird death is due to glass windows, which kill 100–900 million birds a year. The next largest sources of human-caused death are hunting (100+ million), house cats (100 million), cars and trucks (50 to 100 million), electric power lines (174 million), and pesticides (67 million).

[ 42 ] Birds are also killed in large quantities by flying into communication tower guidelines, usually after being attracted by tower lights. This phenomenon is called towerkill and is responsible for 5–50 million birds deaths a year.  Similarly, natural gas flaring can attract and kill large numbers of birds.   Approximately 7,500 migrating songbirds were attracted to and killed by the flare at the liquefied natural gas terminal in Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada on September 13, 2013.

[ 43 ] Similar incidents have occurred at flares on offshore oil and gas installations.

[ 44 ] U.S. President Donald Trump 's opposition to wind power involves repeated claims that " windmills " "kill the birds", [ 45 ] but cats in the U.S. actually kill on the order of 10,000 times as many birds as wind turbines .

[ 46 ] The recent growth in the renewable energy industry is also increasing the threat to birds farther away from dense human population centers. As of late 2019,  the capacity of wind power in the U.S. reached 100 GW ( gigawatt ).

[ 47 ] Studies conducted at a variety of farms found fewer than 14, and typically fewer than 4, direct bird deaths per year per installed megawatt ; suggesting cumulative mortality is approaching the order of a million individuals annually.

[ 48 ] Migrating songbirds appeared to be the most strongly impacted in some studies.   The primary impact of commercial solar farms – the majority utilizing photovoltaic collectors which are mounted near the ground – is from extensive land clearing and increases in long-distance power transmission infrastructure.   In 2015, biologists working for the state of California estimated that 3,500 birds died at the Ivanpah concentrated solar power demonstration plant in the span of a year; "many of them burned alive while flying near the tower collector where air temperatures reached up to 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit." [ 49 ] According to a 2018 Nature paper studying trends in global waterbird populations, ineffective governance is a major driver of biodiversity loss in wetlands, highlighting the importance of political and institutional factors in conservation outcomes.

[ 50 ] Conservation techniques [ edit ] Scientists and conservation professionals have developed a number of techniques to protect bird species. These techniques have had varying levels of success.

Captive breeding [ edit ] Captive breeding , or ex-situ conservation, has been used in a number of instances to save species from extinction. The principle is to create a viable population of a species in either zoos or breeding facilities, for later reintroduction back into the wild. A captive population can either serve as an insurance against the species going extinct in the wild or as a last-ditch effort in situations where conservation in the wild is impossible. Captive breeding has been used to save several species from extinction, the most famous example being the California condor , a species that declined to less than thirty birds. In order to save the California condor the decision was made to take every individual left in the wild into captivity. From these 22 individuals a breeding program began that brought the numbers up to 273 by 2005. An even more impressive recovery was that of the Mauritius kestrel ( Falco punctatus ), which by 1974 had dropped to only four individuals, yet by 2006 the population increased to 800.

[ 51 ] Reintroduction and translocations [ edit ] Reintroductions of captive bred populations can occur to replenish wild populations of an endangered species, to create new populations  or to restore a species after it has become extinct in the wild. Reintroductions helped bring the wild populations of Hawaiian geese (nene) ( Branta sandvicensis) from 30 birds to over 500. The Mauritius kestrel was successfully reintroduced into the wild after its captive breeding programme.

[ 51 ] Reintroductions can be very difficult and often fail if insufficient preparations are made, as species born in captivity may lack the skills and knowledge needed for life in the wild after living in captivity. Reintroductions can also fail if the causes of a birds decline have not been adequately addressed. Attempts to reintroduce the Bali starling ( Leucopsar rothschildi ) into the wild failed due to continued poaching of reintroduced birds.

[ 52 ] The introduction of captives of unknown pedigree can also pose a threat to native populations. Domestic fowl have threatened endemic species such as Gallus g. bankiva while pheasants such as the ring-necked pheasant ( Phasianus colchicus ) and captive cheer pheasants ( Catreus wallichii ) of uncertain origin have escaped into the wild or have been intentionally introduced.

Green peafowl ( Pavo muticus ) of similar mixed origins confiscated from local bird dealers have been released into areas with native wild birds.

[ 53 ] Bird conservation area , Green Lakes State Park , Manlius, New York Translocations involve moving populations of threatened species into areas of suitable habitat currently unused by the species. There are several reasons for doing this; the creation of secondary populations that act as an insurance against disaster, or in many cases threats faced by the original population in its current location. One famous translocation was of the kākāpō ( Strigops habroptilus ) of New Zealand . These large flightless parrots were unable to cope with introduced predators in their remaining habitat on Stewart Island , so were moved to smaller offshore islands that had been cleared of predators. From there a recovery program has managed to maintain and eventually increase their numbers.

Habitat protection [ edit ] As the loss and destruction of habitat is the most serious threat facing many bird species, conservation organizations and government agencies tasked with protecting birds work to protect areas of natural habitat. This can be achieved through purchasing land of conservation importance, setting aside land or gazetting it as a national park or other protected area , and passing legislation preventing landowners from undertaking damaging land use practices, or paying them not to undertake those activities. The goals of habitat protection for birds and other threatened animals and plants often conflicts with other stakeholders, such as landowners and businesses, who can face economically damaging restrictions on their activities. Plans to protect crucial habitat for the spotted owl ( Strix occidentalis ) of North America required the protection of large areas of old growth forest in the western United States; this was opposed by logging companies who claimed it would cause job losses and reduced profits.

[ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Avicide Berne Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats Bird Protection Quebec BirdLife International Bird-skyscraper collisions Climate change and birds Fundación ProAves Hawaiian honeycreeper conservation International Convention on the Protection of Birds Migratory Bird Treaty The Institute for Bird Populations Raptor conservation Royal Australasian Ornithologists Union SOS/BirdLife Slovakia References [ edit ] ^ "Worldwatch Paper #165: Winged Messengers: The Decline of Birds" . Worldwatch Institute. Archived from the original on 2006-07-17 . Retrieved 2006-07-21 .

^ a b "Humans may have caused the extinction of 1,430 species of birds | CREAF" .

www.creaf.cat . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Help Migratory Birds Reach Their Destinations" . Archived from the original on 2006-06-30 . Retrieved 2006-07-21 .

^ Vuong, Quan-Hoang (2022).

The Kingfisher Story Collection . AISDL.

ISBN 979-8353946595 .

^ "Protect Backyard Birds and Wildlife: Keep Pet Cats Indoors" . Archived from the original on 2006-10-04 . Retrieved 2006-07-21 .

^ Gochfeld, M. (2007-06-01).

"Extinction & Biogeography of Tropical Pacific Birds. David W. Steadman" .

Integrative and Comparative Biology .

47 (5): 790– 793.

doi : 10.1093/icb/icm013 .

ISSN 1540-7063 .

^ "Scientists Gauge Ancient Die-Off of Pacific Birds" .

www.science.org . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Pimm, Stuart; Raven, Peter; Peterson, Alan; Şekercioğlu, Çağan H.; Ehrlich, Paul R. (2006-07-18).

"Human impacts on the rates of recent, present, and future bird extinctions" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

103 (29): 10941– 10946.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0604181103 .

PMC 1544153 .

PMID 16829570 .

^ "23.3: Threats to Biodiversity" .

Biology LibreTexts . 2023-12-14 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "300 Years Before the Industrial Revolution, the UK's Wildlife Looked Strikingly Different" .

Inverse . 2023-07-23 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ BirdLife International (BirdLife International) (2021-01-28).

"IUCN Red List of Threatened Species: Conuropsis carolinensis" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Archived from the original on 2025-05-06.

^ Katz, Brigit.

"The Extinction of This U.S. Parrot Was Quick and Driven by Humans" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 2025-06-04 .

^ "Billions to none... the extinction of the Passenger Pigeon" .

John James Audubon Center at Mill Grove . 2015-12-22 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Theodore Roosevelt Signed Archive Passenger Pigeons | Raab Collection" .

The Raab Collection . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "History of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service | U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service" .

www.fws.gov . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "The History of Audubon and Bird Conservation | Audubon" .

www.audubon.org . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 | U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service" .

www.fws.gov . 2020-04-26 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Fedkiw, John (September 1989).

"The Evolving Use and Management of the Nation's Forests, Grasslands, Croplands, and Related Resources" (PDF) .

fs.usda.gov . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ com (2010-05-11).

"Civilian Conservation Corps" .

HISTORY . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Roger Tory Peterson Institute" .

rtpi.org . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ a b "Legacy of Rachel Carsons Silent Spring National Historic Chemical Landmark" .

American Chemical Society . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Nielsen, Clare (2017-02-15).

"Birds Need the EPA to Oversee Pesticides (and So Do We All)" .

American Bird Conservancy . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Protecting birds where they live and migrate" .

BirdLife International . 2021-03-22 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Gill, F. (1995).

Ornithology . W.H Freeman and Company, New York.

ISBN 0-7167-2415-4 .

^ Moore, R., Robinson, W., Lovette, I., & Robinson, T. (2008). Experimental evidence for extreme dispersal limitation in tropical forest birds. Ecology Letters, 11(9):960–968.

doi : 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2008.01196.x ^ Kathryn (2022-07-20).

"How Does Climate Change Impact Birds?" .

American Bird Conservancy . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Ornithology, British Trust for (2021-02-09).

"Birds and pollution" .

BTO - British Trust for Ornithology . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ Wang, Limin; Nabi, Ghulam; Yin, Liyun; Wang, Yanqin; Li, Shuxin; Hao, Zhuang; Li, Dongming (2021-11-02).

"Birds and plastic pollution: recent advances" .

Avian Research .

12 (1): 59.

doi : 10.1186/s40657-021-00293-2 .

ISSN 2053-7166 .

PMC 8561682 .

PMID 34745642 .

^ Blumstein, D., Daniel, J. (2005). "The loss of anti-predator behaviour following isolation on islands." Proceedings of the Royal Society of London Series B-Biological Sciences 272 : 1663–1668.

^ Atkinson, C., Dusek, R., Woods, K., Iko, W. (2000). "Pathogenicity of avian malaria in experimentally-infected Hawaii Amakihi." Journal of Wildlife Diseases 36 (2):197–204.

^ Holdaway, R., Jacomb, C. (2000). "Rapid Extinction of the Moas (Aves: Dinornithiformes): Model, Test, and Implications." Science 287 (5461): 2250 – 2254.

^ Eckert, Allan W. (1965).

The Silent Sky: The Incredible Extinction of the Passenger Pigeon . Lincoln NE: IUniverse.com.

ISBN 0-595-08963-1 .

^ "Tackling the illegal trade and trafficking of birds" .

BirdLife International . 2021-04-02 . Retrieved 2025-05-10 .

^ "Plume hunting" , Wikipedia , 2025-03-26 , retrieved 2025-05-10 ^ Chris Wilcox, Erik Van Sebille, and Britta Denise Hardesty (September 22, 2015).

"Threat of plastic pollution to seabirds is global, pervasive, and increasing" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

112 (38): 11899– 904.

Bibcode : 2015PNAS..11211899W .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1502108112 .

PMC 4586823 .

PMID 26324886 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dunnet, G., Crisp, D., Conan, G., Bourne, W. (1982). "Oil Pollution and Seabird Populations [and Discussion]." Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. B 297 (1087): 413–427.

^ Le Correa, M., Ollivier, A., Ribesc S., Jouventin, P., (2002). "Light-induced mortality of petrels: a 4-year study from Réunion Island (Indian Ocean)." Biological Conservation 105 : 93–102 [1] .

^ Grier, W., (1982). "Ban of DDT and subsequent recovery of Reproduction in bald eagles." Science 218 (4578): 1232–1235.

^ a b Stanton, R.L.; Morrissey, C.A.; Clark, R.G. (2018-02-15).

"Analysis of trends and agricultural drivers of farmland bird declines in North America: A review" .

Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment .

254 : 244– 254.

Bibcode : 2018AgEE..254..244S .

doi : 10.1016/j.agee.2017.11.028 .

^ Brothers NP. 1991. "Albatross mortality and associated bait loss in the Japanese longline fishery in the southern ocean." Biological Conservation 55 : 255–268.

^ Klem Jr., Daniel (1990).

"Collisions between birds and windows: mortality and prevention" (PDF) .

Journal of Field Ornithology .

61 (l): 120– 128. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2014-07-14.

^ "Top 13 Killers" . Fatal Light Awareness Program . Retrieved 2009-05-06 .

^ 7,500 songbirds killed at Canaport gas plant in Saint John (online CBC News, September 17, 2013).

^ Seabirds at Risk around Offshore Oil Platforms in the North-west Atlantic , Marine Pollution Bulletin, Vol. 42, No. 12, pp. 1,285–1,290, 2001.

^ Kaufman, Mark (17 August 2024).

"Trump won't stop making a deceptive bird claim. Experts debunk it" .

Mashable .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2025.

^ "Threats to Birds / Top Threats to Birds (U.S. only. Ordered by Median Estimate of Bird Mortality Annually. As of 2017.)" . U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2017.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2025.

^ Karl-Erik Stromsta (31 October 2013).

"US Cracks 100GW of Wind as Post-Subsidy Era Looms" . Green Tech Media.

^ "Wind Turbine Interactions with Birds, Bats, and their Habitats:A Summary of Research Results and Priority Questions" (PDF) . National Wind Coordinating Collaborative. 31 March 2010.

^ Sweet, Cassandra (12 June 2015).

"High-Tech Solar Projects Fail to Deliver" .

The Wall Street Journal .

In April, biologists working for the state estimated that 3,500 birds died at Ivanpah in the span of a year, many of them burned alive while flying through a part of the solar installment where air temperatures can reach 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit.

^ Amano, Tatsuya; Székely, Tamás; Sandel, Brody; Nagy, Szabolcs; Mundkur, Taej; Langendoen, Tom; Blanco, Daniel; Soykan, Candan U.; Sutherland, William J. (January 2018).

"Successful conservation of global waterbird populations depends on effective governance" .

Nature .

553 (7687): 199– 202.

Bibcode : 2018Natur.553..199A .

doi : 10.1038/nature25139 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 29258291 .

^ a b Jones, C.G.; Heck, W.; Lewis, R.E.; Mungroo, Y.; Slade, G.; Cade, T. (1995). " The restoration of the Mauritius kestrel Falco punctatus population." Ibis 137 (Suppl.1): 173–180.

^ Putra, M. & Prins, H. (2000). "Status and distribution of the endemic Bali starling Leucopsar rothschildi ." Oryx 34 (3): 188–197.

^ Philip J. K. McGowan, Peter J. Garson (1995).

Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan 1995–1999: Pheasants . Pheasant Specialist Group, IUCN. p. 7.

ISBN 2-8317-0299-2 .

^ Simberloff, D. (1987). "The Spotted Owl Fracas: Mixing Academic, Applied, and Political Ecology" Ecology 68 (4): 766–772.

External links [ edit ] The Worlds Rarest Birds Archived 2021-08-22 at the Wayback Machine Birding Weekends – a Kruger National Park (KNP) Birding Conservation Project Maharashtra Pakshimitra Pakistan Avicultural Foundation v t e Birds ( class : Aves) Outline Anatomy Beak Brain Crop milk Dactyly Eggs Feathers Flight Preen gland Plumage Vision Behaviour Singing Intelligence Migration Foraging Sexual selection Lek mating Seabird breeding Incubation Brood parasites Nesting Hybrids Colony Evolution Origin of birds Theropoda dinosaurs Origin of flight Evolution of birds Darwin's finches Seabirds Fossil birds Archaeopteryx Omnivoropterygiformes Jeholornithidae Confuciusornithiformes Enantiornithes Chaoyangiformes Patagopterygiformes Ambiortiformes Songlingornithiformes Hongshanornithidae Gansuiformes Ichthyornithiformes Hesperornithes Lithornithiformes Dinornithiformes Aepyornithiformes Gastornithiformes Human interaction Ringing Ornithology Ornithomancy Bird collections Birdwatching big year Bird feeding Conservation Aviculture Waterfowl hunting Cockfighting Pigeon racing Falconry Pheasantry Imping Egg collecting Lists Families and orders Genera Glossary of bird terms List by population Lists by region Extinct species since 1500 Late Quaternary prehistoric birds Notable birds individuals fictional Neornithes Palaeognathae Struthioniformes (ostriches) Rheiformes (rheas) Tinamiformes (tinamous) Apterygiformes (kiwis) Casuariiformes (emus and cassowaries) Neognathae Galloanserae ( fowls ) Anseriformes (waterfowls) Anatidae ( ducks ) Anatinae Aythyini Mergini Oxyurini Anserinae swans true geese Dendrocygninae Stictonettinae Tadorninae Anhimidae Anhima Chauna Anseranatidae Anseranas Galliformes ( landfowls - gamebirds ) Cracidae Cracinae Oreophasinae Penelopinae Megapodidae Aepypodius Alectura Eulipoa Leipoa Macrocephalon Megapodius Talegalla Numididae Acryllium Agelastes Guttera Numida Odontophoridae Callipepla Colinus Cyrtonyx Dactylortyx Dendrortyx Odontophorus Oreortyx Philortyx Rhynchortyx Phasianidae Meleagridinae (turkeys) Perdicinae Phasianinae (pheasants and relatives) Tetraoninae Neoaves Columbea Columbimorphae Columbiformes (doves and pigeons) Mesitornithiformes (mesites) Pterocliformes (sandgrouse) Mirandornithes Phoenicopteriformes (flamingos) Podicipediformes (grebes) Passerea Otidimorphae Cuculiformes (cuckoos) Musophagiformes (turacos) Otidiformes (bustards) Strisores Caprimulgiformes (nightjars and relatives) Steatornithiformes (oilbirds) Nyctibiiformes (potoos) Podargiformes (frogmouths) Aegotheliformes (owlet-nightjars) Apodiformes (swifts and hummingbirds) Opisthocomiformes Opisthocomiformes (hoatzins) Cursorimorphae Charadriiformes (gulls and relatives) Gruiformes (cranes and relatives) Phaethontimorphae Phaethontiformes (tropicbirds) Eurypygiformes (kagus and sunbitterns) Aequornithes Gaviiformes (loons or divers) Sphenisciformes (penguins) Procellariiformes (albatrosses and petrels) Ciconiiformes (storks) Suliformes (cormorants and relatives) Pelecaniformes (pelicans and relatives) Australaves Cariamiformes (seriemas and relatives) Falconiformes (falcons and relatives) Psittaciformes (parrots) Passeriformes (perching birds) Afroaves Accipitriformes (raptors) Strigiformes (owls) Coliiformes (mousebirds) Trogoniformes (trogons and quetzals) Leptosomiformes (cuckoo-rollers) Bucerotiformes (hornbills and hoopoes) Coraciiformes (kingfishers and rollers) Piciformes (woodpeckers and relatives) Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

v t e Human use of birds Activities Aviculture Birdwatching Bird hide Big year Bird conservation Fletching In sport Cockfighting Falconry Pigeon racing Vinkensport In science IP over Avian Carriers Model organism Ornithology In mythology and religion Augury Sacred ibis Sky burial In hunting Cormorant fishing Driven grouse shooting Plume hunting Wildfowling In war War pigeon Pigeon vest Project Pigeon Products Chicken Down Egg Feather Guano Poultry In the arts In art Bird-and-flower painting Feather tights In heraldry Avalerion Crow/Raven Eagle Gallic rooster Martlet Turul In poetry The Conference of the Birds Ode to a Nightingale To a Skylark Crow In prose A History of British Birds The Tale of Jemima Puddle-Duck The Ugly Duckling Jonathan Livingston Seagull In theatre and ballet The Birds Swan Lake The Firebird In film The Birds Kes The Big Year Animated films Chicken films Horror films In music In fashion Aigrette Feather boa Feather cloak In dance Cendrawasih Chicken dance Species Golden eagle Penguin Pigeon/Dove Raven of the Tower of London People Illustrators John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) Thomas Bewick John Gould Lars Jonsson John Gerrard Keulemans Edward Lear Richard Lewington Roger Tory Peterson Henry Constantine Richter Joseph Smit Archibald Thorburn Joseph Wolf Conservationists Niels Krabbe Peter Scott Organisations BirdLife International Royal Society for the Protection of Birds Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust Related Human–dinosaur coexistence Category:Birds and humans Zoomusicology Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bird_conservation&oldid=1306516706 " Category : Bird conservation Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 04:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bird conservation 14 languages Add topic

