Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Technique 2 Materials 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tinder 23 languages Aragonés Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Ирон ქართული Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Саха тыла Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the firemaking material. For the dating app, see Tinder (app) . For other uses, see Tinder (disambiguation) .

Combustible material used to ignite fire by rudimentary methods Birch bark being used as tinder in a campfire Tinder is easily combustible material used to start a fire . Tinder is a finely divided, open material which will begin to glow under a shower of sparks. Air is gently wafted over the glowing tinder until it bursts into flame. The flaming tinder is used to ignite kindling , which in turn is used to ignite the bulk material, to produce a fire.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Tinder can be made of any flammable substance, as long as it is finely divided and has an open structure.

Technique [ edit ] Any flammable material may be used as long as it is finely divided. As the tinder gets thinner, the surface area and edges increase, making it ignite more easily.

Wood tinder can be made by carefully shaving thin slivers off a larger piece. Another method is to make a feather stick , in which the slivers are kept together. The driest wood, which makes the best tinder, is that of dead branches that have not yet fallen to the ground.

If a fire is to be lit by sparks rather than matches, char cloth , punkwood, fungus or down are commonly used to catch the sparks. However, fungi should be selected with care as some release toxic fumes on combustion .

[ original research?

] Char cloth can be made by placing plant-based fabric (usually cotton ) in a tin box into a campfire; like charcoal , it is the product of anhydrous pyrolysis . It is very fragile, and should usually be prepared only in small quantities.

Pitchwood is the resinous wood which decays last from dead conifers . It can be found on the ground where conifer tree trunks have fallen and decayed. The parts of the deadwood that would form the knots in lumber, i.e. the places where branches entered the trunk, are impregnated with resin which has the combustibility of wood soaked in lighter fluid . Pitchwood can also be found in the stumps left in the ground when conifers die. These stumps contain spires of resin-impregnated wood, called fatwood , which can easily be lighted using only a single match or lighter. Pitchwood that has been shaved into small splinters is easy to ignite, and it does not absorb water, so it remains easy to ignite in any weather as long as the flame is sheltered from rain and wind. In the southeastern United States, pitchwood is known as "fat lighter" or "lighter'd" (a shortening of lighter-wood).

[ 3 ] Embers of burned paper, leaves and other sheetlike materials are easily carried off by air currents, where they can alight upon other objects and ignite them. In outdoor campfires, paper can be wadded up to reduce this hazard; wadded paper also burns more quickly.

Magnesium is sold in stores in shaved or bar form. Shavings burn white-hot, are impossible to smother with carbon dioxide or sand, and can ignite even wet kindling. Solid bars are impossible to ignite under normal conditions (and difficult even with a welding torch ), and are thus very safe to carry. Magnesium powder and shavings are pyrophoric (they oxidise rapidly when exposed to the air). It is dangerous to carry pre-shaved magnesium — at best, it loses potency, at worst, it can spontaneously ignite and is then nearly unquenchable. Magnesium bars are sometimes sold with a length of ferrocerium cast into one edge.

[ 4 ] The gathering of tinder, and perhaps more importantly, its dry storage is one of the most critical aspects of many survival situations.

Materials [ edit ] Materials used as tinder around the world include: [ 5 ] Small twigs (poor tinder but commonly available) [ 6 ] Paper , paper towels , toilet paper , etc.

Dry pine needles , leaves or grass [ 7 ] Birch bark Dead, standing (usually one season old) goldenrod Cloth , lint , or frayed rope (if made from plant fibers and not treated with fire retardant ) Char cloth Cotton balls , cotton swabs , tampons seed "fluff" from plants like milkweed , dandelions , Cottonwood , etc.

Some types of fungus , such as chaga , Daldinia concentrica (king alfred cakes) and amadou (or horse's hoof fungus) Dry bread or knäckebröd and shoe polish Punk wood (in the process of rotting) or charred wood Bird down abandoned bird nests Fatwood , also known as rich pine or pine knot Fine-grade soap-coated steel wool Shaved magnesium or other alkaline earth metals [ 4 ] Specially prepared stringybark , known as morthi , used by the Kaurna people of South Australia [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Tinderbox Firelighter The dictionary definition of tinder at Wiktionary References [ edit ] ^ "Wild Wood Survival" . Retrieved 2009-04-14 .

^ McCafferty, Keith (2008-09-30).

"Test Your Fire-Building IQ" .

Field & Stream . Archived from the original on 2008-09-19 . Retrieved 2025-01-26 .

^ Ratliff, Donald E. Sr., Map, Compass and Campfire , Binford & Mort, Publishers, 1964, page 45.

^ a b Cooper, Donald C. (2005).

Fundamentals of search and rescue . National Association for Search and Rescue (U.S.) (illustrated ed.). Jones & Bartlett Publishers. p. 341.

ISBN 0-7637-4807-2 . Retrieved 14 Apr 2009 .

^ "Char Mastery: Charred Tinder How-To" .

Real World Survivor . 19 March 2019. Archived from the original on 2020-10-22 . Retrieved 28 November 2020 .

^ "Billy Goat Mountain Adventures" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-12-22 . Retrieved 2009-04-14 .

^ "Whipperleys" . Archived from the original on 2022-03-05 . Retrieved 2009-04-14 .

^ Schultz, Chester (22 October 2018).

"Place Name Summary 6/23: Brukangga and Tindale's uses of the word bruki" (PDF) .

Adelaide Research & Scholarship .

University of Adelaide . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 November 2020 .

v t e Firelighting Campfire Bonfire Glossary Components Ember Fire triangle Firewood Spark Tinder Wood ash Wood fuel Topics Autoignition temperature Combustion Friction fire Minimum ignition energy Smouldering Early starters Burning glass Solar Spark Lighter Fire drill Bow drill Hand drill Pump drill Fire piston Fire plough Fire-saw Fire striker Flint Modern starters Blowtorch Ferrocerium Flame holder Lighter Match Black Electric Piezo ignition Other equipment Char cloth Chuckmuck Feather stick Fire pan Fire pit Fire ring Matchbook Matchbox Punk Tinderbox Torch Related articles Arson Control of fire by early humans Firem'n Chit Native American use of fire in ecosystems Outdoor cooking Pyrolysis Pyromania Survival skills Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tinder&oldid=1306215653 " Categories : Firelighting materials Fire making Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from August 2016 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tinder 23 languages Add topic

