Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organ and tissue systems 2 History 3 Cellular organelle systems 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Biological system 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Norsk nynorsk Scots سنڌي Slovenčina Sunda Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Complex network which connects several biologically relevant entities A biological system is a complex network which connects several biologically relevant entities. Biological organization spans several scales and are determined based different structures depending on what the system is.

[ 1 ] Examples of biological systems at the macro scale are populations of organisms . On the organ and tissue scale in mammals and other animals, examples include the circulatory system , the respiratory system , and the nervous system . On the micro to the nanoscopic scale, examples of biological systems are cells , organelles , macromolecular complexes and regulatory pathways. A biological system is not to be confused with a living system , such as a living organism .

Organ and tissue systems [ edit ] An example of a system: the brain , the cerebellum , the spinal cord , and the nerves are the four basic components of the nervous system .

Further information: Organ system and List of systems of the human body These specific systems are widely studied in human anatomy and are also present in many other animals.

Respiratory system : the organs used for breathing , the pharynx , larynx , bronchi , lungs and diaphragm .

Digestive system : digestion and processing food with salivary glands , oesophagus , stomach , liver , gallbladder , pancreas , intestines , rectum and anus .

Cardiovascular system ( heart and circulatory system ): pumping and channeling blood to and from the body and lungs with heart , blood and blood vessels .

Urinary system : kidneys , ureters , bladder and urethra involved in fluid balance, electrolyte balance and excretion of urine .

Integumentary system : skin , hair , fat , and nails .

Skeletal system : structural support and protection with bones , cartilage , ligaments and tendons .

Endocrine system : communication within the body using hormones made by endocrine glands such as the hypothalamus , pituitary gland, pineal body or pineal gland, thyroid , parathyroid and adrenals , i.e., adrenal glands.

Exocrine system : various functions including lubrication and protection by exocrine glands such sweat glands , mucous glands, lacrimal glands and mammary glands Lymphatic system : structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream ; includes the lymph and the nodes and vessels . The lymphatic system includes functions including immune responses and development of antibodies.

Immune system : protects the organism from foreign bodies.

Nervous system : collecting, transferring and processing information with brain , spinal cord , peripheral nervous system and sense organs .

Sensory systems : visual system , auditory system , olfactory system , gustatory system , somatosensory system , vestibular system .

Muscular system : allows for manipulation of the environment, provides locomotion, maintains posture, and produces heat. Includes skeletal muscles , smooth muscles and cardiac muscle .

Reproductive system : the sex organs , such as ovaries , fallopian tubes , uterus , vagina , mammary glands , testes , vas deferens , seminal vesicles and prostate .

History [ edit ] The notion of system (or apparatus) relies upon the concept of vital or organic function : [ 2 ] a system is a set of organs with a definite function. This idea was already present in Antiquity ( Galen , Aristotle ), but the application of the term "system" is more recent. For example, the nervous system was named by Monro (1783), but Rufus of Ephesus (c. 90–120), clearly viewed for the first time the brain, spinal cord, and craniospinal nerves as an anatomical unit, although he wrote little about its function, nor gave a name to this unit.

[ 3 ] The enumeration of the principal functions - and consequently of the systems - remained almost the same since Antiquity, but the classification of them has been very various, [ 2 ] e.g., compare Aristotle , Bichat , Cuvier .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The notion of physiological division of labor, introduced in the 1820s by the French physiologist Henri Milne-Edwards , allowed to "compare and study living things as if they were machines created by the industry of man." Inspired in the work of Adam Smith , Milne-Edwards wrote that the "body of all living beings, whether animal or plant, resembles a factory ... where the organs, comparable to workers, work incessantly to produce the phenomena that constitute the life of the individual." In more differentiated organisms, the functional labor could be apportioned between different instruments or systems (called by him as appareils ).

[ 6 ] Cellular organelle systems [ edit ] See also: Organelle Artist impression of cell components The exact components of a cell are determined by whether the cell is a eukaryote or prokaryote .

[ 7 ] Nucleus (eukaryotic only): storage of genetic material; control center of the cell.

Cytosol : component of the cytoplasm consisting of jelly-like fluid in which organelles are suspended within Cell membrane (plasma membrane): Endoplasmic reticulum : outer part of the nuclear envelope forming a continuous channel used for transportation; consists of the rough endoplasmic reticulum and the smooth endoplasmic reticulum Rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER): considered "rough" due to the ribosomes attached to the channeling; made up of cisternae that allow for protein production Smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER): storage and synthesis of lipids and steroid hormones as well as detoxification Ribosome : site of biological protein synthesis essential for internal activity and cannot be reproduced in other organs Mitochondrion (mitochondria): powerhouse of the cell; site of cellular respiration producing ATP ( adenosine triphosphate ) Lysosome : center of breakdown for unwanted/unneeded material within the cell Peroxisome : breaks down toxic materials from the contained digestive enzymes such as H 2 O 2 (hydrogen peroxide) Golgi apparatus (eukaryotic only): folded network involved in modification, transport, and secretion Chloroplast : site of photosynthesis; storage of chlorophyll See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Biological network Artificial life Biological systems engineering Evolutionary systems Organ system Systems biology Systems ecology Systems theory References [ edit ] ^ F. Muggianu; A. Benso; R. Bardini; E. Hu; G. Politano; S. Di Carlo (2018). "Modeling biological complexity using Biology System Description Language (BiSDL)".

2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM) . pp.

713– 717.

doi : 10.1109/BIBM.2018.8621533 .

ISBN 978-1-5386-5488-0 .

S2CID 59233194 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Fletcher, John (1837). "On the functions of organized beings, and their arrangement". In: Rudiments of physiology . Part 2. On life, as manifested in irritation. Edinburgh: John Carfrae & Son. pp. 1-15.

link .

^ Swanson, Larry (2014).

Neuroanatomical Terminology: A Lexicon of Classical Origins and Historical Foundations . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

link Archived 2023-09-28 at the Wayback Machine . p. 489.

^ Bichat, X. (1801).

Anatomie générale appliquée à la physiologie et à la médecine , 4 volumes in-8, Brosson, Gabon, Paris, link . (See pp. cvj-cxj).

^ Cuvier, Georges.

Lecons d'anatomie comparée 2. éd., cor. et augm. Paris: Crochard, 1835-1846.

link Archived 2009-03-02 at the Wayback Machine .

^ R. M. Brain.

The Pulse of Modernism: Physiological Aesthetics in Fin-de-Siècle Europe . Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2015. 384 pp., [1] Archived 2023-07-03 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Human Anatomy And Physiology" .

PressBooks . Archived from the original on 2020-10-20 . Retrieved 2019-02-19 .

Further reading [ edit ] "Systems Biology: An Overview" by Mario Jardon: A review from The Science Creative Quarterly , 2005.

"Synthesis and Analysis of a Biological System" by Hiroyuki Kurata, 1999.

Schmidt-Rhaesa, A. 2007.

The Evolution of Organ Systems . Oxford University Press, Oxford.

v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans v t e Hierarchy of life Biosphere > Biome > Ecosystem > Biocoenosis > Population > Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Macromolecule > Biomolecule v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Portals : Biology Medicine Authority control databases National Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐779wd
Cached time: 20250812004421
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.401 seconds
Real time usage: 0.507 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1148/1000000
Revision size: 10225/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 65735/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1560/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46062/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5723732/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  410.658      1 -total
 31.12%  127.781      1 Template:Reflist
 27.02%  110.979      6 Template:Navbox
 23.09%   94.830      1 Template:Organ_systems
 21.56%   88.528      1 Template:Cite_book
 15.15%   62.234      1 Template:Short_description
  8.78%   36.050      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.87%   32.335      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.55%   22.775      1 Template:Portal_bar
  4.52%   18.565      1 Template:Further Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5780599:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004421 and revision id 1305072371. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_system&oldid=1305072371 " Category : Biological systems Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 22:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological system 19 languages Add topic

