Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Original usage 2 Features Toggle Features subsection 2.1 Paradigm shifts and progress 2.2 Incommensurability 2.3 Gradualism vs. sudden change 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Natural sciences 3.2 Social sciences 3.3 Applied sciences 4 Other uses 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Paradigm shift 32 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fundamental change in ideas and practices within a scientific discipline For other uses, see Paradigm Shift (disambiguation) .

A paradigm shift is a fundamental change in the basic concepts and experimental practices of a scientific discipline . It is a concept in the philosophy of science that was introduced and brought into the common lexicon by the American physicist and philosopher Thomas Kuhn . Even though Kuhn restricted the use of the term to the natural sciences , the concept of a paradigm shift has also been used in numerous non-scientific contexts to describe a profound change in a fundamental model or perception of events.

Kuhn presented his notion of a paradigm shift in his influential book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962).

Kuhn contrasts paradigm shifts, which characterize a Scientific Revolution , to the activity of normal science , which he describes as scientific work done within a prevailing framework or paradigm . Paradigm shifts arise when the dominant paradigm under which normal science operates is rendered incompatible with new phenomena, facilitating the adoption of a new theory or paradigm.

[ 1 ] As one commentator summarizes: Kuhn acknowledges having used the term "paradigm" in two different meanings. In the first one, "paradigm" designates what the members of a certain scientific community have in common, that is to say, the whole of techniques, patents and values shared by the members of the community. In the second sense, the paradigm is a single element of a whole, say for instance Newton's Principia, which, acting as a common model or an example... stands for the explicit rules and thus defines a coherent tradition of investigation. Thus the question is for Kuhn to investigate by means of the paradigm what makes possible the constitution of what he calls "normal science". That is to say, the science which can decide if a certain problem will be considered scientific or not. Normal science does not mean at all a science guided by a coherent system of rules, on the contrary, the rules can be derived from the paradigms, but the paradigms can guide the investigation also in the absence of rules. This is precisely the second meaning of the term "paradigm", which Kuhn considered the most new and profound, though it is in truth the oldest.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The nature of scientific revolutions has been studied by modern philosophy since Immanuel Kant used the phrase in the preface to the second edition of his Critique of Pure Reason (1787). Kant used the phrase "revolution of the way of thinking" ( Revolution der Denkart ) to refer to Greek mathematics and Newtonian physics . In the 20th century, new developments in the basic concepts of mathematics , physics , and biology revitalized interest in the question among scholars.

Original usage [ edit ] Kuhn used the duck-rabbit ambiguous image , which Wittgenstein famously used to distinguish between the meaning of 'seeing as' and 'seeing that ,' to show how a paradigm shift could cause one to see the same information in an entirely different way.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In his 1962 book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Kuhn explains the development of paradigm shifts in science into four stages: Normal science – In this stage, which Kuhn sees as most prominent in science, a dominant paradigm is active. This paradigm is characterized by a set of theories and ideas that define what is possible and rational to do, giving scientists a clear set of tools to approach certain problems. Some examples of dominant paradigms that Kuhn gives are: Newtonian physics, caloric theory , and the theory of electromagnetism .

[ 5 ] Insofar as paradigms are useful, they expand both the scope and the tools with which scientists do research. Kuhn, in discussion of theory-ladenness , stresses that, rather than being monolithic, the paradigms that define normal science can be particular to different people.

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] A chemist and a physicist might operate with different paradigms of what a helium atom is.

[ 7 ] Under normal science, scientists encounter anomalies that cannot be explained by the universally accepted paradigm within which scientific progress has thereto been made.

Extraordinary research – When enough significant anomalies have accrued against a current paradigm, the scientific discipline is thrown into a state of crisis. To address the crisis, scientists push the boundaries of normal science in what Kuhn calls “extraordinary research”, which is characterized by its exploratory nature.

[ 8 ] Without the structures of the dominant paradigm to depend on, scientists engaging in extraordinary research must produce new theories, thought experiments, and experiments to explain the anomalies. Kuhn sees the practice of this stage – “the proliferation of competing articulations, the willingness to try anything, the expression of explicit discontent, the recourse to philosophy and to debate over fundamentals” – as even more important to science than paradigm shifts.

[ 9 ] Adoption of a new paradigm – Eventually a new paradigm is formed, which gains its own new followers. For Kuhn, this stage entails both resistance to the new paradigm, and reasons for why individual scientists adopt it. According to Max Planck , "a new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it." [ 10 ] Because scientists are committed to the dominant paradigm, and paradigm shifts involve gestalt-like changes, Kuhn stresses that paradigms are difficult to change. However, paradigms can gain influence by explaining or predicting phenomena much better than before (i.e., Bohr's model of the atom) or by being more subjectively pleasing. During this phase, proponents for competing paradigms address what Kuhn considers the core of a paradigm debate: whether a given paradigm will be a good guide for future problems – things that neither the proposed paradigm nor the dominant paradigm are capable of solving currently.

[ 11 ] Aftermath of the scientific revolution – In the long run, the new paradigm becomes institutionalized as the dominant one. Textbooks are written, obscuring the revolutionary process.

Features [ edit ] Paradigm shifts and progress [ edit ] A common misinterpretation of paradigms is the belief that the discovery of paradigm shifts and the dynamic nature of science (with its many opportunities for subjective judgments by scientists) are a case for relativism : [ 12 ] the view that all kinds of belief systems are equal. Kuhn vehemently denies this interpretation [ 13 ] and states that when a scientific paradigm is replaced by a new one, albeit through a complex social process, the new one is always better , not just different.

Incommensurability [ edit ] These claims of relativism are, however, tied to another claim that Kuhn does at least somewhat endorse: that the language and theories of different paradigms cannot be translated into one another or rationally evaluated against one another—that they are incommensurable . This gave rise to much talk of different peoples and cultures having radically different worldviews or conceptual schemes—so different that whether or not one was better, they could not be understood by one another.

Donald Davidson famously argued against this idea of conceptual relativism, claiming that the notion that any languages or theories could be incommensurable with one another was itself incoherent. If this is correct, Kuhn's claims must be taken in a weaker sense than they often are.

[ 14 ] Furthermore, the hold of the Kuhnian analysis on social science has long been tenuous, with the wide application of multi-paradigmatic approaches in order to understand complex human behaviour.

[ 15 ] Gradualism vs. sudden change [ edit ] Paradigm shifts tend to be most dramatic in sciences that appear to be stable and mature, as in physics at the end of the 19th century. At that time, physics seemed to be a discipline filling in the last few details of a largely worked-out system.

In The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , Kuhn wrote, "Successive transition from one paradigm to another via revolution is the usual developmental pattern of mature science" (p. 12). Kuhn's idea was itself revolutionary in its time as it caused a major change in the way that academics talk about science. Thus, it could be argued that it caused or was itself part of a "paradigm shift" in the history and sociology of science. However, Kuhn would not recognise such a paradigm shift. In the social sciences, people can still use earlier ideas to discuss the history of science.

Philosophers and historians of science, including Kuhn himself, ultimately accepted a modified version of Kuhn's model, which synthesizes his original view with the gradualist model that preceded it.

[ 16 ] Examples [ edit ] Natural sciences [ edit ] Some of the "classical cases" of Kuhnian paradigm shifts in science are: 1543 – The transition in cosmology from a Ptolemaic cosmology to a Copernican one.

[ 17 ] 1543 – The acceptance of the work of Andreas Vesalius , whose work De humani corporis fabrica corrected the numerous errors in the previously held system of human anatomy created by Galen .

[ 18 ] 1687 – The transition in mechanics from Aristotelian mechanics to classical mechanics .

[ 19 ] 1783 – The acceptance of Lavoisier 's theory of chemical reactions and combustion in place of phlogiston theory , known as the chemical revolution .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The transition in optics from geometrical optics to physical optics with Augustin-Jean Fresnel 's wave theory.

[ 22 ] 1826 – The discovery of hyperbolic geometry .

[ 23 ] 1830 to 1833 – Geologist Charles Lyell published Principles of Geology , which not only put forth the concept of uniformitarianism , which was in direct contrast to the popular geological theory, at the time, catastrophism , but also utilized geological proof to determine that the age of the Earth was older than 6,000 years , which was previously held to be true.

1859 – The revolution in evolution from goal-directed change to Charles Darwin 's natural selection .

[ 24 ] 1880 – The germ theory of disease began overtaking Galen's miasma theory .

1905 – The development of quantum mechanics , which replaced classical mechanics at microscopic scales.

[ 25 ] 1887 to 1905 – The transition from the luminiferous aether present in space to electromagnetic radiation in spacetime .

[ 26 ] 1919 – The transition between the worldview of Newtonian gravity and general relativity .

1920 – The emergence of the modern view of the Milky Way as just one of countless galaxies within an immeasurably vast universe following the results of the Smithsonian's Great Debate between astronomers Harlow Shapley and Heber Curtis .

1952 – Chemists Stanley Miller and Harold Urey perform an experiment which simulated the conditions on the early Earth that favored chemical reactions that synthesized more complex organic compounds from simpler inorganic precursors, kickstarting decades of research into the chemical origins of life .

1964 – The discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation leads to the Big Bang theory being accepted over the steady state theory in cosmology .

1965 – The acceptance of plate tectonics as the explanation for large-scale geologic changes.

1969 – Astronomer Victor Safronov , in his book Evolution of the protoplanetary cloud and formation of the Earth and the planets , developed the early version of the current accepted theory of planetary formation .

1974 – The November Revolution, with the discovery of the J/psi meson , and the acceptance of the existence of quarks and the Standard Model of particle physics.

1960 to 1985 – The acceptance of the ubiquity of nonlinear dynamical systems as promoted by chaos theory , instead of a laplacian world-view of deterministic predictability.

[ 27 ] Social sciences [ edit ] In Kuhn's view, the existence of a single reigning paradigm is characteristic of the natural sciences, while philosophy and much of social science were characterized by a "tradition of claims, counterclaims, and debates over fundamentals." [ 28 ] Others have applied Kuhn's concept of paradigm shift to the social sciences.

The movement known as the cognitive revolution moved away from behaviourist approaches to psychology and the acceptance of cognition as central to studying human behavior.

Anthropologist Franz Boas published The Mind of Primitive Man , which integrated his theories concerning the history and development of cultures and established a program that would dominate American anthropology in the following years. His research, along with that of his other colleagues, combatted and debunked the claims being made by scholars at the time, given scientific racism and eugenics were dominant in many universities and institutions that were dedicated to studying humans and society. Eventually anthropology would apply a holistic approach, utilizing four subcategories to study humans: archaeology , cultural , evolutionary , and linguistic anthropology .

At the turn of the 20th century, sociologists , along with other social scientists developed and adopted methodological antipositivism , which sought to uphold a subjective perspective when studying human activities pertaining to culture , society , and behavior . This was in stark contrast to positivism , which took its influence from the methodologies utilized within the natural sciences .

First proposed by Ferdinand de Saussure in 1879, the laryngeal theory in Indo-European linguistics postulated the existence of "laryngeal" consonants in the Proto-Indo-European language (PIE), a theory that was confirmed by the discovery of the Hittite language in the early 20th century. The theory has since been accepted by the vast majority of linguists, paving the way for the internal reconstruction of the syntax and grammatical rules of PIE and is considered one of the most significant developments in linguistics since the initial discovery of the Indo-European language family .

[ 29 ] The adoption of radiocarbon dating by archaeologists has been proposed as a paradigm shift because of how it greatly increased the time depth the archaeologists could reliably date objects from. Similarly the use of LIDAR for remote geospatial imaging of cultural landscapes, and the shift from processual to post-processual archaeology have both been claimed as paradigm shifts by archaeologists.

[ 30 ] The Marginal Revolution , a development of economic theory in the late 19th century led by William Stanley Jevons in England, Carl Menger in Austria, and Léon Walras in Switzerland and France which explained economic behavior in terms of marginal utility .

Applied sciences [ edit ] More recently, paradigm shifts are also recognisable in applied sciences: In medicine, the transition from "clinical judgment" to evidence-based medicine .

[ citation needed ] In Artificial Intelligence , the transition from a knowledge-based to a data-driven paradigm has been discussed from 2010.

[ 31 ] Other uses [ edit ] The term "paradigm shift" has found uses in other contexts, representing the notion of a major change in a certain thought pattern—a radical change in personal beliefs, complex systems or organizations, replacing the former way of thinking or organizing with a radically different way of thinking or organizing: M. L. Handa, a professor of sociology in education at O.I.S.E.

University of Toronto , Canada, developed the concept of a paradigm within the context of social sciences. He defines what he means by "paradigm" and introduces the idea of a "social paradigm". In addition, he identifies the basic component of any social paradigm. Like Kuhn, he addresses the issue of changing paradigms, the process popularly known as "paradigm shift". In this respect, he focuses on the social circumstances that precipitate such a shift. Relatedly, he addresses how that shift affects social institutions, including the institution of education.

[ 32 ] The concept has been developed for technology and economics in the identification of new techno-economic paradigms as changes in technological systems that have a major influence on the behaviour of the entire economy ( Carlota Perez ; earlier work only on technological paradigms by Giovanni Dosi ). This concept is linked to Joseph Schumpeter 's idea of creative destruction . Examples include the move to mass production and the introduction of microelectronics.

[ 33 ] Two photographs of the Earth from space, " Earthrise " (1968) and " The Blue Marble " (1972), are thought [ by whom?

] to have helped to usher in the environmentalist movement, which gained great prominence in the years immediately following distribution of those images.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Hans Küng applies Thomas Kuhn's theory of paradigm change to the entire history of Christian thought and theology. He identifies six historical "macromodels": 1) the apocalyptic paradigm of primitive Christianity, 2) the Hellenistic paradigm of the patristic period, 3) the medieval Roman Catholic paradigm, 4) the Protestant (Reformation) paradigm, 5) the modern Enlightenment paradigm, and 6) the emerging ecumenical paradigm. He also discusses five analogies between natural science and theology in relation to paradigm shifts. Küng addresses paradigm change in his books, Paradigm Change in Theology [ 36 ] and Theology for the Third Millennium: An Ecumenical View .

[ 37 ] In the later part of the 1990s, 'paradigm shift' emerged as a buzzword , popularized as marketing speak and appearing more frequently in print and publication.

[ 38 ] In his book Mind The Gaffe , author Larry Trask advises readers to refrain from using it, and to use caution when reading anything that contains the phrase. It is referred to in several articles and books [ 39 ] [ 40 ] as abused and overused to the point of becoming meaningless.

The concept of technological paradigms has been advanced, particularly by Giovanni Dosi .

Further information: Violation paradigm Criticism [ edit ] In a 2015 retrospective on Kuhn, [ 41 ] the philosopher Martin Cohen describes the notion of the paradigm shift as a kind of intellectual virus – spreading from hard science to social science and on to the arts and even everyday political rhetoric today. Cohen claims that Kuhn had only a very hazy idea of what it might mean and, in line with the Austrian philosopher of science Paul Feyerabend , accuses Kuhn of retreating from the more radical implications of his theory, which are that scientific facts are never really more than opinions whose popularity is transitory and far from conclusive. Cohen says scientific knowledge is less certain than it is usually portrayed, and that science and knowledge generally is not the 'very sensible and reassuringly solid sort of affair' that Kuhn describes, in which progress involves periodic paradigm shifts in which much of the old certainties are abandoned in order to open up new approaches to understanding that scientists would never have considered valid before. He argues that information cascades can distort rational, scientific debate. He has focused on health issues, including the example of highly mediatised ' pandemic ' alarms , and why they have turned out eventually to be little more than scares.

[ 42 ] One of the early critics of Kuhn, Norwood Russell Hanson criticized Kuhn's paradigm shift theory as being conceptually circular and therefore impossible to falsifiable.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] See also [ edit ] Accelerating change – Perceived increase in the rate of technological change throughout history Attitude polarization – Tendency of a group to make more extreme decisions than the inclinations of its members Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Belief perseverance – Maintenance of a belief despite new information that firmly contradicts it Buckminster Fuller – American philosopher, architect and inventor (1895–1983) Cognitive bias – Systematic pattern of deviation from norm or rationality in judgment Conceptual model – Theoretical framework Theory-ladenness – Degree to which an observation is affected by one's presuppositions Confirmation bias – Bias confirming existing attitudes Copernican Revolution – 16th- to 17th-century intellectual revolution Critical juncture theory – Theory of large, discontinuous changes Cultural bias – Interpretation and judgement of phenomena by the standards of one's culture Disruptive innovation – Technological change Don Tapscott (author of Paradigm Shift ) Epistemological break – Concept of knowledge theory Gaston Bachelard – French philosopher Globalization – Spread of world views, products, ideas, capital and labor Human history Infrastructure bias Innovation – Practical implementation of improvements Inquiry – Any process that has the aim of augmenting knowledge, resolving doubt, or solving a problem Kondratiev wave – Hypothesized cycle-like phenomena in the modern world economy Ludwik Fleck – Polish physician Modeling – Theoretical framework Mindset – Term in decision theory and general systems theory New world order (politics) – Period of history with a dramatic change in world political thought Planck's principle – Principle that scientific change is generational Scientific modelling – Scientific activity  that produces models Statistical model – Type of mathematical model Systemic bias – Inherent tendency of a process to support particular outcomes Teachable moment – Time at which learning a particular idea becomes possible or easiest World view – Fundamental cognitive orientation of an individual or society Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Zeitgeist – Philosophical concept meaning "spirit of the age" References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

54 .

^ Agamben, Giorgio .

"What is a Paradigm?" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 14, 2015 .

^ Kuhn, 1970, chap.8, pp.84–85, chap.10, pp.113–114 ^ a b Kindi, Vasso (25 June 2021). "Kuhn, the Duck, and the Rabbit: Perception, Theory-Ladenness, and Creativity in Science". In Wray, K. Brad (ed.).

Interpreting Kuhn: Critical Essays . Cambridge, UK; New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

169– 184.

doi : 10.1017/9781108653206.010 .

ISBN 9781108498296 .

OCLC 1223066673 .

S2CID 237739793 .

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

28 .

^ Bogen, Jim (2014): "Theory and Observation in Science" , In: Edward N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2014 Edition).

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

50 .

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

87 .

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

91 .

^ Quoted in Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1970 ed.): p. 150.

^ Kuhn, Thomas (1962).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . pp.

157 .

^ Sankey, Howard (1997) "Kuhn's ontological relativism," in Issues and Images in the Philosophy of Science: Scientific and Philosophical Essays in Honour of Azarya Polikarov , edited by Dimitri Ginev and Robert S. Cohen. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic, 1997. Boston studies in the philosophy of science, vol. 192, pp. 305–20.

ISBN 0792344448 ^ Thomas Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (3rd ed.): p. 199.

^ Davidson, D. (1974). On the Very Idea of a Conceptual Scheme.

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

47 (1): 5–20.

^ see e.g.

John Hassard (1993).

Sociology and Organization Theory: Positivism, Paradigm and Postmodernity . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521350344 .

^ Williams, Gene (2019).

Applied Qualitative Research Design . EDTECH. p. 103.

ISBN 978-1-83947-216-9 .

OCLC 1132359447 .

^ Kuhn, 1970, pp. 154 and passim ^ Joutsivuo, T (1997). "[Vesalius and De humani corporis fabrica: Galen's errors and the change of anatomy in the sixteenth century]".

Hippokrates (Helsinki) : 98– 112.

PMID 11625189 .

^ Kuhn, 1970, pp. 148 and passim ^ Paradigm Shifts: Technology & Culture ^ Kuhn, 1970, p. 157 ^ Kuhn, 1970, p. 155 ^ Trudeau, Richard J (1987).

The non-Euclidean revolution . Boston: Birkhäuser.

ISBN 978-0-8176-3311-0 .

^ Kuhn, 1970, pp. 151 and passim ^ Kuhn, 1970, pp. 83–84, 151 and passim ^ Kuhn, 1970, p. 107 ^ Gleick, James (1988). "Chapter 2:Revolution".

Chaos:making a new science . New York: Viking Penguin. pp.

35– 56.

ISBN 0-670-81178-5 .

^ Kuhn, Thomas N.

(1972) [1970].

"Logic of Discovery or Psychology of Research" . In Lakatos, Imre ; Musgrave, Alan (eds.).

Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge (second ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

6 .

ISBN 978-0-521-09623-2 .

^ James Clackson (2007).

Indo European Linguistics: An Introduction .

Cambridge University . p.

53 .

ISBN 9780521653671 .

^ Schmidt, Sophie C.; Marwick, Ben (28 January 2020).

"Tool-Driven Revolutions in Archaeological Science" .

Journal of Computer Applications in Archaeology .

3 (1): 18– 32.

doi : 10.5334/jcaa.29 .

^ Cristianini, Nello (2012). "On the Current Paradigm in Artificial Intelligence".

AI Communications .

27 : 37– 43.

doi : 10.3233/AIC-130582 .

^ Handa, M. L. (1986) "Peace Paradigm: Transcending Liberal and Marxian Paradigms". Paper presented in "International Symposium on Science, Technology and Development, New Delhi, India, March 20–25, 1987, Mimeographed at O.I.S.E., University of Toronto, Canada (1986) ^ Perez, Carlota (2009). "Technological revolutions and techno-economic paradigms", Cambridge Journal of Economics , Vol. 34, No.1, pp. 185–202 ^ "Christopher H. (2009). "Global Warming and the Problem of Policy Innovation: Lessons from the Early Environmental Movement" " .

^ See also Stewart Brand#NASA images of Earth ^ Kung, Hans & Tracy, David (ed).

Paradigm Change in Theology . New York: Crossroad, 1989.

^ Küng, Hans.

Theology for the Third Millennium: An Ecumenical View . New York: Anchor Books, 1990.

^ Robert Fulford, Globe and Mail (June 5, 1999).

http://www.robertfulford.com/Paradigm.html Archived 2011-01-28 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 2008-04-25.

^ "Cnet.com's Top 10 Buzzwords" . Archived from the original on 2009-10-04.

^ "The Complete Idiot's Guide to a Smart Vocabulary" pp. 142–43, author: Paul McFedries publisher: Alpha; 1st edition (May 7, 2001) Archived December 15, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-0-02-863997-0 ^ Cohen, Martin (2015).

Paradigm Shift: How Expert Opinions Keep Changing on Life, the Universe and Everything . Imprint Academic. p. 181.

^ "Martin Cohen" . 6 September 2017.

^ Lund, Matthew (2007).

"N.R. Hanson on the Relation Between Philosophy and History of Science" (PDF) .

PhilSci-Archive .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2024-07-09.

^ Lund, Matthew (2010).

N.R. Hanson: Observation, Discovery, and Scientific Change . Humanity Books.

ISBN 978-1-59102-772-0 .

Sources [ edit ] Kuhn, Thomas (1970).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (2nd, enlarged ed.). University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-45804-5 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of paradigm shift at Wiktionary MIT 6.933J – The Structure of Engineering Revolutions . From MIT OpenCourseWare, course materials (graduate level) for a course on the history of technology through a Kuhnian lens.

" "Scientific Change" " .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hmxfn
Cached time: 20250817212758
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.956 seconds
Real time usage: 1.235 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12680/1000000
Revision size: 32456/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 396388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11950/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 135094/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.529/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14635036/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  949.940      1 -total
 24.93%  236.780     17 Template:Navbox
 24.55%  233.187      1 Template:Reflist
 21.68%  205.981     32 Template:Annotated_link
 17.47%  165.998     15 Template:Cite_book
 16.32%  155.008      1 Template:Historiography
 16.04%  152.386      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.01%   95.094      1 Template:Lang
  9.73%   92.457     36 Template:Ill
  7.20%   68.437      1 Template:Science_and_technology_studies Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25081:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817212758 and revision id 1304314036. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paradigm_shift&oldid=1304314036 " Categories : Change Cognition Concepts in epistemology Concepts in the philosophy of science Consensus reality Critical thinking Epistemology of science Historiography of science Innovation Philosophical theories Reasoning Scientific Revolution Thomas Kuhn Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 08:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paradigm shift 32 languages Add topic

