Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and etymology 2 Prevalence 3 Process Toggle Process subsection 3.1 Austria 3.2 Brazil 3.3 France 3.4 Germany 3.5 Italy 3.5.1 Habilitations for associate and full professorships in universities 3.5.2 Professional qualifications 3.6 Portugal 4 Equivalent degrees 5 Debate Toggle Debate subsection 5.1 German habilitation debate 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Habilitation 38 languages Alemannisch العربية Беларуская Bosanski Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dr. phil. hab.

) Postdoctoral degree For other uses, see Habilitation (disambiguation) .

Habilitation is the highest university degree , or the procedure by which it is achieved, in Germany, France, Italy, Poland, Romania and some other European and non-English-speaking countries. The candidate fulfills a university's set criteria of excellence in research, teaching, and further education, which usually includes a dissertation.

The degree, sometimes abbreviated Dr. habil . ( Doctor habilitatus ), dr hab.

( doktor habilitowany ), or D.Sc.

( Doctor of Sciences in Russia and some CIS countries), is often a qualification for full professorship in those countries. In German-speaking countries it allows the degree holder to bear the title PD (for Privatdozent ). In a number of countries there exists an academic post of docent , appointment to which often requires such a qualification. The degree conferral is usually accompanied by a public oral defence event (a lecture or a colloquium) with one or more opponents. The habilitation thesis is intended to demonstrate that the author has mastered their field in its entirety. For this reason, it is usually written on a topic that is very different from the subject of the doctoral dissertation. Unlike doctoral theses, which must be published by law in Germany, many habilitation theses remain unpublished.

Habilitation is usually awarded 5–15 years after a PhD degree or its equivalent. Achieving this academic degree does not automatically give the scientist a paid position, though many people who apply for the degree already have steady university employment.

History and etymology [ edit ] The term habilitation is derived from the Medieval Latin habilitare , meaning "to make suitable, to fit", from Classical Latin habilis "fit, proper, skillful". The degree developed in the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation in the seventeenth century ( c.

1652 ).

[ 1 ] Initially, habilitation was synonymous with "doctoral qualification". The term became synonymous with "post-doctoral qualification" in Germany in the 19th century "when holding a doctorate seemed no longer sufficient to guarantee a proficient transfer of knowledge to the next generation".

[ 2 ] Afterwards, it became normal in the German university system to write two doctoral theses: the inaugural thesis ( Inauguraldissertation ), completing a course of study, and the habilitation thesis ( Habilitationsschrift ), which opens the road to a professorship.

[ 3 ] Since the early 21st century, the habilitation is no longer mandatory for appointment to a professorship in Germany. Since then, there have been major differences between the various disciplines. While the habilitation remains common in most humanities and in medical research, it has become the exception in many natural sciences.

Prevalence [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Habilitation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Habilitation qualifications exist or existed in: Algeria ( Habilitation à diriger des recherches , "accreditation to supervise research", abbreviated HDR) Armenia, Azerbaijan ( Habil. dr.

; currently abolished and no longer conferred, but those who have earned the degree earlier will use it for life) Austria (formerly Univ.-Doz.

, now Priv.-Doz.

) Belarus ( Доктар навук [ be ] , Łacinka : Doktar navuk ) Belgium (French-speaking part: Agrégation de l'enseignement supérieur , until 2010) Brazil ( Livre-docência [ pt ] ) Bulgaria ( Доцент , Docent ) Czech Republic ( doc.

, docent ) Denmark ( dr. med./scient./phil.

) Egypt ( العالمية Ālimiyya / Al-Azhar ) Finland ( Dosentti / Docent ) France ( Habilitation à diriger des recherches , "accreditation to supervise research", abbreviated HDR) Germany ( Priv.-Doz.

and/or Dr. habil.

) Greece ( υφηγεσία , υφηγητής ), abolished in 1983 Hungary ( Dr. habil.

) Italy ( Abilitazione scientifica nazionale , since 2012) Latvia ( Dr. habil.

), since 1995 no longer conferred, but those who have earned the degree earlier will use it for life Lithuania ( Dr. habil.

), since 2003 no longer conferred Luxembourg ( autorisation à diriger des recherches , "authorization to supervise research", or ADR) Moldova Poland ( dr hab.

, doktor habilitowany ) Portugal ( Agregação ) Romania ( abilitare ) Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Ukraine ( Доктор наук [ ru ] , Doktor nauk , "Doctor of Sciences") [ 4 ] Serbia ( Доцент , Docent ) Slovakia ( Docent ) Slovenia ( Docent ) Spain (Accreditation of research – Agregado ) Sweden ( Docent ) Switzerland ( PD and/or Dr. habil.

) Tunisia ( Habilitation à diriger des recherches , "accreditation to supervise research", abbreviated HDR) Process [ edit ] A habilitation thesis can be either cumulative (based on previous research, be it articles or monographs) or monographical, i.e., a specific, unpublished thesis, which then tends to be very long. While cumulative habilitations are predominant in some fields (such as medicine ), they have been, since about a century ago, almost unheard of in others (such as law ).

The level of scholarship of a habilitation is considerably higher than for a doctoral dissertation in the same academic tradition in terms of quality and quantity, and must be accomplished independently, without direction or guidance of a faculty supervisor.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the sciences , publication of numerous (sometimes ten or more) [ 7 ] research articles is required during the habilitation period of about four to ten years. In the humanities , a major book publication may be a prerequisite for defense.

[ citation needed ] It is possible to get a professorship without habilitation, if the search committee attests the candidate to have qualifications equaling those of a habilitation and the higher-ranking bodies (the university's senate and the country's ministry of education) approve. However, while some subjects make liberal use of this (e.g., the natural sciences in order to employ candidates from countries with different systems and the arts to employ active artists), in other subjects it is rarely done.

The habilitation is awarded after a public lecture, to be held after the thesis has been accepted, and after which the venia legendi (Latin: 'permission to read', i.e., to lecture) is bestowed. In some areas, such as law, philosophy, theology and sociology, the venia , and thus the habilitation, is given only for certain sub-fields (such as criminal law , civil law , or philosophy of science , practical philosophy , etc.); in others, for the entire field.

Although disciplines and countries vary in the typical number of years for obtaining habilitation after getting a doctorate, it usually takes longer than for the American academic tenure . For example, in Poland until 2018, the statutory time for getting a habilitation (traditionally, although not obligatorily, relying on a book publication) is eight years. Theoretically, if an assistant professor does not succeed in obtaining habilitation in this time, they should be moved to a position of a lecturer, with a much higher teaching load and no research obligations, or even be dismissed. In practice, however, on many occasions schools extend the deadlines for habilitation for most scholars if they do not make it in time, and there is evidence that they are able to finish it in the near future.

Austria [ edit ] In Austria, the procedure is currently regulated by national law (Austrian University Act UG2002 §103 [ 8 ] ). The graduation process includes additionally to the sub-commission of the senate (including students representatives for a hearing on the teaching capabilities of the candidate) an external reviewer. Holding a habilitation allows academics to do research and supervise (PhD, MSc, ...) on behalf of this university. As it is an academic degree, this is even valid if the person is not enrolled (or not enrolled anymore) at this institution ( Habilitation ad personam ). Appointment to a full professorship with an international finding commission includes a venia docendi (UG2002 §98(12)), which is restricted to the time of the appointment (UG2002 §98(13) – Habilitation ad positionem ).

While the habilitation ensures the rights of the independent research and the supervision, it is on behalf of the statute of the universities to give those rights also to, e.g., associate professors without habilitation. Currently the major Austrian universities do that only for master's level students, but not for PhD programs.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Brazil [ edit ] Livre-docência is a title (similar to Habilitation in Germany) granted to holders of doctorate degrees upon submission of a cumulative thesis followed by a viva voce examination . It has practically disappeared amongst Brazilian Federal HEIs . It is still required at a few institutions for admissions as a full professor ( professor titular ), most notably in the three state universities of the state of São Paulo , as well as at the Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP).

[ citation needed ] France [ edit ] See also: Agrégation § In higher education The degree of Docteur d'État (State Doctor) or Doctorat d'État (State Doctorate), called Doctorat ès lettres (Doctor of Letters) or Doctorat ès sciences (Doctor of Sciences) before the 1950s, [ 12 ] formerly awarded by universities in France had a somewhat similar purpose. In 1984, the Doctorat d'État was replaced by the Habilitation à diriger des recherches .

The award of the French habilitation is a general requirement for being the main supervisor of PhD students and to be eligible for full professor positions. The official eligibility named qualification is granted by the French Conseil National des Universités (CNU). Members of Directeur de Recherche corps who are assimilated to full professors by the CNU do not require the French habilitation to supervise PhD students.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Depending on the field, the French habilitation requires consistent research from five to ten years after appointment as an associate professor ( maître de conférences ), a substantial amount of significant publications, the supervision of at least one PhD student from start to graduation, and/or a successful track record securing extramural funding as a principal investigator, as well as a sound, ambitious, and feasible five-year research project. Outstanding postdoctoral researchers who are not yet appointed to a university could also obtain the habilitation if they meet the requirements. The French habilitation committee is constituted by a majority of external and sometimes foreign referees. The French habilitation entitles associate professors ( maîtres de conférences ) to apply for full professor positions ( professeur des universités ).

Germany [ edit ] See also: § History and etymology In order to hold the rank of a full professor ( W3 ) within the German university system, it is necessary to have obtained the habilitation (or "habilitation-equivalent achievements"). This can be demonstrated by leading a research group, being a junior professor , or other achievements in research and teaching as a post-doctoral researcher. The habilitation in Germany is usually earned after several years of independent research and teaching, either "internally" while working at a university or "externally" as a research and teaching-oriented practitioner. Once the habilitation thesis ( Habilitationsschrift , often simply Habilitation ) and all other requirements are completed, the candidate (called Habilitand/in in German) "has habilitated him- or herself" and receives an extension to his/her doctoral degree, namely Dr. habil.

(with the specification, such as Dr. rer. nat. habil.

). The habilitation is thus an additional qualification at a higher level than the German doctoral degree . Only those candidates receiving the highest (or second-highest) grade for their doctoral thesis are encouraged to proceed with a habilitation.

A typical procedure after completing the habilitation is that the successful researcher officially receives the so-called Venia legendi (Latin for "permission for lecturing") for a specific academic subject at universities (sometimes also referred to as Venia docendi , Latin for "right of teaching"). Someone in possession of the Venia legendi but not a professorship has the right to carry the title Privatdozent (for men) or Privatdozentin (for women), abbreviated PD or Priv.-Doz.

The status as a PD requires doing some (generally unpaid) teaching in order to keep the title ( Titellehre or titular teaching).

Italy [ edit ] In the Italian legal system, habilitations are different types of acts and authorizations.

Habilitations for associate and full professorships in universities [ edit ] Regarding university habilitations, the so-called Gelmini reform of the research and university teaching system (Italian Law 240 of year 2010 and subsequent modifications) has established the national scientific habilitation for the calls in the role of associate professor and full professor (called abilitazione scientifica nazionale , or ASN). This means that, as a prerequisite for being able to be selected by a university committee to fill these roles, it is necessary to have obtained the scientific qualification for the relative kind of teaching.
For STEM fields (so called "bibliometric fields"), the qualifications requires a two-step evaluation: first a quantitative assessment, as each candidate for and ASN as associate or full professor must have at least two out of these three requirements: having published more papers than most associate or full professors in Italian universities, having received more citations than most associate or full professors in Italian universities, having an h -index higher than most associate or full professors in Italian universities; then, a specific committee (one for each scientific sub-field) will qualitatively evaluate the scientific CV of the candidates, considering funding, mobility, autonomy of the research, awards won, and so on.

The successful candidate will then receive their ASN habilitation as associate or full professor (or, in some instances, for both) and may thus apply for those vacancies in Italian universities.

The ASN habilitation also allows to compete for three-year tenure-track assistant professorship positions (which were once called RTDb in the Italian system, for ricercatore a tempo determinato di tipo b , and now are labeled as RTT, "ricercatore in tenure-track"). At the end of the three-year contract the assistant professor must have a valid ASN habilitation in order to become a permanent associate professor; otherwise, he or she is permanently laid off.
To prevent this (which may be disastrous to already undermanned Italian departments), it is common practice to award RTDb positions to people already habilitated as associate or full professors, which is in practical contrast with the spirit of the Gelmini-reform.

If an ASN habilitation application fails, the candidate can apply again, but only after a 12-month hiatus.

The ASN habilitation was initially valid for four years only, but this validity term was extended many times. It was first extended to six years, then 9 years, then 11 years (2023). Currently (2025), due to extreme scarcity of tenure track positions in Italy, the ASN habilitation validity has been increased to 12 years by yet another government decree in order not to let the first awarded habilitations expire (with consequent protests and possible lawsuits).

Professional qualifications [ edit ] Example of Italian professional qualification: Diploma in Agriculture In the field of free regulated professions, protected by a professional body (architects, lawyers, engineers, doctors, pharmacists, journalists, etc.), it identifies the state examination, more properly called "state examination for the qualification for the exercise of professions" that allows already graduated students or those with the necessary titles to register on the list of professionals and work. Many state exams include the possession of a specific qualification among the requirements. For example, to take the habilitation exam for to become an architect or an engineer, one must have already graduated from a university. However, in order to actually practice the profession it is necessary to register with the relevant professional association and, if the profession is exercised independently, it is necessary to have a VAT number . These exams are usually organized by the professional orders with the collaboration of area universities.

In other cases, especially in the case of health professions or childcare professionals, not protected by a professional nature, the degree itself is a qualifying title.

Finally, some habilitations, since their activities cannot be done autonomously, need to be hired in a suitable structure in order to effectively carry out the profession in question. This is for example the case of the education sector: once the qualifying examination has been passed, a public competition must be won for recruitment in an upper or lower secondary school.

Portugal [ edit ] In the Portuguese legal system, there are two types of habilitation degree. The first is normally given to university professors and is named agregação or Decree of Law 239/2007 [ 15 ] while the second is named habilitação (Decree of Law 124/99) and is used by doctoral researchers working in institutes outside universities.

[ 16 ] Legally, they are equivalent and are required for a professor ( agregação ) or a researcher ( habilitação ) to reach the top of their specific careers (full professor or coordinator researcher). Both degrees aim to evaluate if the candidate has achieved significant outputs in terms of scientific activity, including activities in postgraduation supervision.

The process to obtain any of the degrees is very similar, with minor changes. Any PhD holder can submit a habilitation thesis to obtain the degree. For agregação , the thesis is composed by a detailed CV of the achievements obtained after concluding the PhD, a detailed report of an academic course taught at the university (or a proposed course to be taught), and the summary of a lesson to be given. For habilitação , the academic course report is replaced by a research proposal or a proposal for advanced PhD studies.

After the candidate submits the habilitation thesis, a jury composed of five to nine full professors or coordinator researchers first evaluates the submitted documents; the majority needs to approve the candidate's request. If approved, the candidate then needs to defend their thesis in a two-day public defense. The public defense lasts for two hours each day. On the first day, the curriculum of the candidate is discussed (for both degrees) and in the case of agregação , the candidate also needs to present the academic course selected. On the second day, the candidate needs to present a lecture ( agregação ) or a proposal of a research project ( habilitação ).

Equivalent degrees [ edit ] The Doctor of Science in Russia and some other countries formerly part of the Soviet Union or the Eastern bloc is equivalent to a habilitation. The cumulative form of the habilitation can be compared to the higher doctorates , such as the D.Sc. ( Doctor of Science ), Litt.D. (Doctor of Letters), LL.D. (Doctor of Laws) and D.D. (Doctor of Divinity) found in the UK, Ireland, and some Commonwealth countries, which are awarded on the basis of a career of published work. However, higher doctorates from these countries (except Russia) are often not recognized by any German state as being equivalent to the habilitation.

[ 17 ] In 1999, Russia and Germany signed a Statement on Mutual Academic Recognition of Russian Academic Degrees and German Academic Qualifications, including the equivalence of the Russian Doctor of Science and the German Habilitation qualification.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, the position or title of an associate professor (or higher) at a European Union–based university is systematically translated into or compared to titles such as Universitätsprofessor ( W2 ) (Germany), førsteamanuensis (Norway), or Doktor hab.

(Poland) by institutions such as the European Commission Directorate-General for Research, [ 18 ] and therefore usually implies the holder of such title has a degree equivalent to habilitation.

Debate [ edit ] German habilitation debate [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Habilitation" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) In 2004, the habilitation was the subject of a major political debate in Germany. The former Federal Minister for Education and Science, Edelgard Bulmahn , aimed to abolish the system of the habilitation and replace it with the alternative concept of the junior professor: a researcher should first be employed for up to six years as a "junior professor" (a non- tenured position roughly equivalent to assistant professor in the United States) and so prove his/her suitability for holding a tenured professorship.

Many, especially researchers in the natural sciences , as well as young researchers, have long demanded the abandonment of the habilitation as they think it to be an unnecessary and time-consuming obstacle in an academic career, contributing to the brain drain of talented young researchers who think their chances of getting a professorship at a reasonable age to be better abroad and hence move, for example, to the UK or the USA. Many feel overly dependent on their supervising principal investigators (the professor heading the research group) since superiors have power to delay the process of completing the habilitation. A further problem comes with funding support for those who wish to pursue a habilitation, where older candidates often feel discriminated against, for example under the DFG 's Emmy-Noether programme. Furthermore, internal "soft" money might only be budgeted to pay for younger postdoctoral scientists. Because of the need to chase short-term research contracts, many researchers in the natural sciences apply for more transparent career development opportunities in other countries. In summary, a peer-reviewed demonstration of a successful academic development and an international outlook is considered more than compensation for an habilitation where there is evidence of grant applications, well-cited publications, a network of collaborators, lecturing and organisational experience, and experience of having worked and published abroad.

On the other hand, amongst many senior researchers, especially in medicine , the humanities and the social sciences , the habilitation was—and still is—regarded as a valuable instrument of quality control before giving somebody a tenured position for life.

Bavaria, Saxony and Thuringia, three states with conservative governments, filed suit at the German Constitutional Court against the new law replacing the habilitation with the junior professor.

[ 19 ] The Court concurred with their argument that the Bundestag (the federal parliament) cannot pass such a law, because the German constitution explicitly states that affairs of education are the sole responsibility of the states and declared the law to be invalid in June 2004. In reaction, a new federal law was passed, giving the states more freedom regarding habilitations and junior professors. The junior professor has since been legally established in all states, but it is still possible—and encouraged—for an academic career in many subjects in Germany to pursue a habilitation.

See also [ edit ] Habilitation to Supervise Research Postdoctoral research References [ edit ] ^ Arguably one of the earliest German habilitation holders is Erhard Weigel (Dr. phil. hab., Leipzig, 1652, according to the Erhard Weigel Gesselschaft Archived 14 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine ).

^ Christian Fleck, Sociology in Austria , Palgrave Macmillan, 2015.

^ Carl Brockelmann, History of the Arabic Written Tradition , Volume 1, BRILL, 2016, p. vii.

^ a b "НИЦ АПМ Минобрнауки РФ" .

russianenic.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 2 March 2021 .

^ "Habilitationsordnung (Laws and regulations of the Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany)" (PDF) (in German). ruhr-uni-bochum.de. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 October 2009.

^ "PhD and Postdoc" .

fu-berlin.de . 30 August 2006.

^ "A guide to documentation on habilitation and professorship procedures at the Faculty of Medicine of Masaryk University in Brno" . Masaryk University in Brno. Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ "Bundesrecht konsolidiert: Gesamte Rechtsvorschrift für Universitätsgesetz 2002, Fassung vom 08.06.2019" .

bka.gv.at .

^ "Satzung der Universität Wien » Studienrecht" .

univie.ac.at .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 June 2014 . Retrieved 4 June 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Legal basis" .

Universität Innsbruck . Archived from the original on 6 June 2014.

^ Alan D. Schrift (2006), Twentieth-Century French Philosophy: Key Themes And Thinkers , Blackwell Publishing, p. 208.

^ "Arrêté du 7 août 2006 relatif à la formation doctorale. – Legifrance" .

legifrance.gouv.fr .

^ "Décret n°84-431 du 6 juin 1984 fixant les dispositions statutaires communes applicables aux enseignants-chercheurs et portant statut particulier du corps des professeurs des universités et du corps des maîtres de conférences. – Legifrance" .

legifrance.gouv.fr .

^ Decree of Law 239/2007 ^ https://dre.pt/application/conteudo/534996 [ bare URL ] ^ "Anabin database" .

Anabin database (in German, click on "Abschlusstypen", then select Länderauswahl "Großbritannien", then "Doctor of/in") . 24 July 2009 . Retrieved 13 September 2018 .

^ European Commission Directorate-General for Research on Seniority Grades of Academic Staff , pp. 129 and 133ff. Accessed 26 September 2017.

^ "WDR – Informationen und Nachrichten vom Westdeutschen Rundfunk" .

wdr.de . 27 February 2016 . Retrieved 12 October 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] A short description of PhD and Habilitation at the Free University of Berlin, Germany Education in Austria at the European Education Directory Germany tries to break its Habilitation Habit article in the science magazin of the AAAS Habilitation procedure at the Technical University of Munich, Germany Higher Education in Hungary at the Encyclopædia Britannica Habilitation in Romania Archived 21 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine v t e Levels of academic degree Undergraduate ISCED level 5 Associate degree Foundation degree Higher National Diploma / ​ Diploma of Higher Education / ​ Certificate of Higher Education ISCED level 6 Bachelor's degree Honours degree Postgraduate ISCED level 7 Master's degree Postgraduate diploma /​ certificate Diplom degree Engineer's degree ISCED level 8 Doctorate Candidate of Sciences Other Postdoctoral Higher doctorate Doctor of Sciences Habilitation Docent Tenure Fellow No dominant classification Academic certificate Artist diploma External degree Laurea Licentiate Magister degree Microdegree Professional degree Graduate diploma /​ certificate Higher diploma Specialist degree /​ diploma Terminal degree Unearned Honorary degree Ad eundem degree Master of Arts (Oxford, Cambridge and Dublin) Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐jx5qd
Cached time: 20250814220336
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.728 seconds
Real time usage: 0.896 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3262/1000000
Revision size: 31485/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 96015/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2617/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63064/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.506/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13122996/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  819.505      1 -total
 29.28%  239.971     91 Template:Lang
 19.42%  159.187      1 Template:Reflist
 16.97%  139.060      1 Template:Academic_degrees
 16.90%  138.503      4 Template:Navbox
 14.62%  119.810     12 Template:Cite_web
  9.04%   74.101      1 Template:Short_description
  6.68%   54.763      2 Template:Ambox
  6.18%   50.667      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  5.59%   45.805      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:363323:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220336 and revision id 1304470780. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Habilitation&oldid=1304470780 " Categories : Academic degrees Higher doctorates Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: archived copy as title All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2023 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Articles containing Belarusian-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Bulgarian-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latvian-language text Articles containing Romanian-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Serbian-language text Articles containing Slovak-language text Articles containing Slovene-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2013 Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles needing additional references from March 2021 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 06:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Habilitation 38 languages Add topic

