Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 NEH Nomination 3 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 Major articles 4 Sources 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mel Bradford 2 languages العربية Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American author and political commentator (1934–1993) Mel Bradford Born Melvin Eustace Bradford ( 1934-05-08 ) May 8, 1934 [ 1 ] Fort Worth, Texas , U.S.

Died March 3, 1993 (1993-03-03) (aged 58) Midland, Texas , U.S.

Occupation literary critic and legal scholar Alma mater University of Oklahoma ( BA , MA ) Vanderbilt University ( PhD ) Genre non-fiction Literary movement Southern Agrarians , paleoconservatism Notable works The Reactionary Imperative This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Melvin Eustace Bradford (May 8, 1934 – March 3, 1993) was an American conservative author, political commentator and professor of literature at the University of Dallas .

Bradford is seen as a leading figure of the paleoconservative wing of the conservative movement. He died just as the term paleoconservative was being coined and preferred the term traditional conservative . In his preface to The Reactionary Imperative , he wrote "Reaction is a necessary term in the intellectual context we inhabit in the twentieth century because merely to conserve is sometimes to perpetuate what is outrageous." Bradford's conservatism was rooted within the heritage and traditions of the American South . He studied at Vanderbilt University and wrote his doctoral thesis under the Southern Agrarian and Fugitive Poet Donald Davidson [ 2 ] (whose biography Bradford was wrapping up at the time of his sudden death at age 58), and thus was admitted to the succession of this movement to recover the Southern tradition.

Bradford was first and foremost a literary scholar and a student of rhetoric . He was known in literary circles for his work on William Faulkner , where Bradford stressed the importance of the Southern setting and the primacy of community in understanding the action of Faulkner's novels and stories. He "had no truck with critical efforts to portray Faulkner as alienated from the South. To the contrary, he saw the novelist as thoroughly embedded within his native region." [ 2 ] Outside of literature he wrote extensively on the subjects of history and culture. Bradford specialized in the history of the American founding and Southern history in the United States. Bradford also advocated the constitutional theory of strict constructionism . "The original understanding of the Constitution , Bradford maintained, conformed much more closely to the Southern position than to Lincoln 's acts of usurpation." [ 2 ] Bradford also frequently wrote for Modern Age , Chronicles magazine and Southern Partisan magazine.

Biography [ edit ] Bradford was born in Fort Worth , Texas and grew up there. He studied English at University of Oklahoma and completed his bachelor's and master's degrees. He then continued his education at Vanderbilt University and graduated with a Ph.D.

He stayed in academia and taught at several institutions of higher education , including United States Naval Academy , Northwestern State University of Louisiana, and, primarily, the University of Dallas from 1967 until his death.

[ 3 ] In U.S. presidential elections Bradford campaigned for Barry Goldwater in 1964 , George C. Wallace in 1972 , Ronald Reagan in 1976 and 1980 , and Pat Buchanan in 1992 .

[ 3 ] He was for a time the president of the Philadelphia Society .

[ 4 ] He died in 1993 after undergoing heart surgery .

[ 5 ] NEH Nomination [ edit ] In 1980, Bradford was initially tapped by President-elect Ronald Reagan for chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities . According to David Gordon , "Reagan's wish to elevate him to the prestigious post did not stem solely from Bradford's academic credentials. The president and he were acquaintances, and he had worked hard in Reagan's campaign for the Republican presidential nomination. Influential conservatives such as Russell Kirk and Sen.

Jesse Helms also knew and admired Bradford." [ 2 ] The selection met with intense objections from neoconservative figures, centering partly on Bradford's criticisms of President Abraham Lincoln . They circulated quotes of Bradford calling Lincoln "a dangerous man," and saying, "The image of Lincoln rose to be very dark" and "indeed almost sinister." [ 6 ] He was even accused of comparing Lincoln to Adolf Hitler .

[ 2 ] "Bradford rejected Lincoln because he saw him as a revolutionary, intent on replacing the American Republic established by the Constitution with a centralized and leveling despotism ." [ 2 ] Another issue was Bradford's support for the 1972 presidential campaign of George C. Wallace .

[ 7 ] The neoconservative choice, William Bennett , was substituted for Bradford on November 13, 1981.

[ 8 ] Author Keith Preston later described the successful effort to cancel Bradford's nomination as symbolic of the cosmopolitan neoconservatives descended from liberalism establishing hegemony over the Republican Party and American conservatism , displacing more traditionalist and regionalist thinkers with ideological roots in the Old Right .

[ 9 ] A letter supporting Bradford's nomination, sent to President Reagan during the controversy, was signed by John East , Jesse Helms , John Tower , Strom Thurmond , Orrin Hatch , Jeremiah Denton , Dan Quayle and James McClure and eight other Republican senators. Gerhart Niemeyer, Russell Kirk , Jeffrey Hart , William Buckley , M. Stanton Evans , Andrew Lytle , Harry Jaffa ("Bradford's principal intellectual antagonist"), [ 2 ] and "dozens of others" were also named as supporters.

[ 10 ] Norman Podhoretz , Irving Kristol , William Kristol , [ 2 ] Michael Joyce and William Simon were among Bennett's supporters.

[ 11 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Books [ edit ] A Better Guide than Reason: Studies in the American Revolution (1979) Worthy Company: Brief Lives of the Framers of the Constitution (1982) Generations of the Faithful Heart: On the Literature of the South (1983) Remembering Who We Are: Observations of a Southern Conservative (1985) The Reactionary Imperative: Essays Literary and Political (1989) From Eden to Babylon: The Social and Political Essays of Andrew Nelson Lytle (1990) Religion and the Framers: Biographical Evidence (1991) Against the Barbarians, and Other Reflections on Familiar Themes (1992) Original Intentions: On the Making and Ratification of the Constitution (1993) Major articles [ edit ] "A Fire Bell in the Night: The Southern Conservative View" ( Modern Age , 1973) "The Heresy of Equality" ( Modern Age , 1976) "Dividing The House: The Gnosticism of Lincoln's Political Rhetoric" ( Modern Age , 1979) "On Remembering Who We Are" ( Modern Age , 1982) "Rhetoric and Respectability" ( Modern Age , 1988) Sources [ edit ] A Defender of Southern Conservatism: M.E. Bradford and his Achievements (1999) by Clyde N. Wilson ( ISBN 0826212085 ) "Culture Clash on the Right" by David Frum, Wall Street Journal , June 2, 1989 "Southern Conservatism and its Discontents: Mel Bradford and the American Right" by John Langdale in Southern Character: Essays in Honor of Bertram Wyatt-Brown ( ISBN 0813036909 ) References [ edit ] ^ M. E. Bradford: Social Security Death Index (SSDI) Death Record ^ a b c d e f g h Gordon, David (2010-04-01) Southern Cross: The meaning of the Mel Bradford moment Archived 2010-12-12 at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative ^ a b Michael M. Jordan, Bradford, M. E.

Archived 2011-07-20 at the Wayback Machine , 03/10/10 ^ "Presidents of the Philadelphia Society" . Archived from the original on February 23, 2010 . Retrieved August 15, 2012 .

^ "Melvin Bradford, 58, Conservative Theorist" .

The New York Times . 9 March 1993.

^ Briefing, The New York Times , October 22, 1981.

^ "Melvin Bradford, 58, Conservative Theorist" , The New York Times , March 9, 1993.

^ Scholar Chosen as Humanities Chief, The New York Times , November 14, 1981.

^ Gottfried, Paul, ed. (2020-07-15).

The Vanishing Tradition .

doi : 10.7591/cornell/9781501749858.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-1501749858 .

S2CID 242603258 .

^ "Bradford's Boosters", The Washington Post , October 20, 1981.

^ "The Amazing Endowment Scramble", The Washington Post , December 13, 1981.

External links [ edit ] Mel Bradford, Old Indian Fighters, and the NEH , by Thomas H. Landess.

LewRockwell.com , April 25, 2003.

Southern Cross: The meaning of the Mel Bradford moment , by David Gordon .

The American Conservative , April 1, 2010.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Belgium Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mel_Bradford&oldid=1270999158 " Categories : 1934 births 1993 deaths 20th-century American non-fiction writers American academics of English literature American political writers Texas Republicans University of Dallas faculty University of Oklahoma alumni Vanderbilt University alumni 20th-century American male writers American male non-fiction writers Neo-Confederates Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mel Bradford 2 languages Add topic

