Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Development and expression Toggle Development and expression subsection 2.1 Significant works 2.2 Religion 2.3 Protest 2.4 Individual and community responses 2.5 Modern Development 3 Advertising 4 In Economic Theory Toggle In Economic Theory subsection 4.1 Austrian economics 4.2 Neoclassical synthesis 5 Criticism 6 In popular media 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-consumerism 23 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Македонски Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociopolitical ideology involving intentionally and meaningfully reducing consumption For anti-consumer business practices, see Unfair business practices and Anti-competitive practices .

Photograph of Times Square , showing the prevalence of advertisements Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Anti-consumerism is a sociopolitical ideology .

[ 1 ] It has been described as " intentionally and meaningfully excluding or cutting goods from one's consumption routine or reusing once-acquired goods with the goal of avoiding consumption".

[ 2 ] The ideology is opposed to consumerism , being a social and economic order in which the aspirations of many individuals include the acquisition of goods and services beyond those necessary for survival or traditional displays of status.

[ 3 ] Anti-consumerism is concerned with the actions of individuals, as well as businesses where they act in pursuit of financial and economic goals at the expense of the perceived public good . Commonly, anti-consumerism is connected with concern for environmental protection , anti-globalization , and animal-rights .

Post-consumerism , the prioritization of well-being over material prosperity, is a related ideology.

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] Anti-consumerism originated from criticism of consumption, arguably starting with Thorstein Veblen , who, in the book The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions (1899), suggested that consumerism dates from the cradle of civilization . The term consumerism also denotes economic policies associated with Keynesian economics , and the belief that the free choice of consumers should dictate the economic structure of a society (cf.

producerism ). Modern political anti-consumerism developed in the 2000s.

[ 2 ] Anti-consumerism can be seen as an extension of postmodern society, supporting a "decentralized culture", rejecting a hegemonic cultural imperialism of globalisation and consumption, and responding to negative impacts of consumption on the environment.

[ 5 ] Further, it has been observed that: "While almost all contemporary critics [of consumerism] and activists talk of the need for an environmentally sustainable mode of living, many also focus intently on how the consumerism driving overconsumption undermines our sense of well being and happiness; contributes to a culture of overwork, haste and instantaneous gratification; underscores a bland cultural homogenization of life; and fragments communities and social relationships." [ 6 ] Predictors of anti-consumerist attitudes and behaviors at an individual level include concerns about environmental pollution or disruption of ecological balance, a desire to live a simple life, and a belief that a search for happiness should come from internal factors.

[ 5 ] Development and expression [ edit ] Significant works [ edit ] An important contribution to the critique of consumerism has been made by French philosopher Bernard Stiegler , arguing modern capitalism is governed by consumption rather than production, and the advertising techniques used to create consumer behaviour amount to the destruction of psychic and collective individuation .

[ 7 ] The diversion of libidinal energy toward the consumption of consumer products, he argues, results in an addictive cycle of consumption, leading to hyper-consumption, the exhaustion of desire, and the reign of symbolic misery.

[ 8 ] Examples of anti-consumerist works include the book No Logo (2000) by Naomi Klein , and documentary films such as The Corporation (2003), by Mark Achbar and Jennifer Abbott , and Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers (2003), by Erik Gandini .

Religion [ edit ] Anti-consumerist beliefs are in some cases connected with religious beliefs. A religious criticism asserts that materialist consumerism interferes with the connection between the individual and God, and so is an inherently immoral style of life; thus the German historian Oswald Spengler (1880–1936) said that, "Life in America is exclusively economic in structure, and lacks depth." [ 3 ] From the Roman Catholic perspective, Thomas Aquinas said that, "Greed is a sin against God, just as all mortal sins, in as much as man condemns things eternal for the sake of temporal things"; [ 9 ] in that vein, Francis of Assisi , Ammon Hennacy , and Mohandas Gandhi said that spiritual inspiration guided them towards simple living .

Protest [ edit ] A Portuguese anti-consumerist stencil graffiti saying "Consuming consumes you" Anti-consumerist messages are often raised in protests , including in the broader context of environmentalism and anti-corporate activism . A notable anti-consumerist protest community is Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping .

In the context of protest art , Banksy , an influential British graffitist, painter, activist and filmmaker, [ 10 ] has created satirical and provocative works about the consumerist society. Examples include "Napalm", an attack on Walt Disney Pictures and McDonald's , and " Show Me the Monet ", among many others.

[ 11 ] In his 2004 book Cut It Out , Banksy writes, "You owe the companies nothing. Less than nothing, you especially don't owe them any courtesy. They owe you. They have re-arranged the world to put themselves in front of you. They never asked for your permission, don't even start asking for theirs." [ 12 ] Individual and community responses [ edit ] Practicing anti-consumerism can mean voluntarily simplifying and minimizing one's lifestyle; this can be in efforts to exist more sustainably in a consumer culture.

[ 13 ] These lifestyle changes, which include choosing paper bags over plastic bags when shopping, are also in line with anti-corporate activism and green consumerism—both large contributors to the ethical market.

[ 14 ] Degrowth , commoning and other movements aim to collectively address sustainability issues through practices and approaches that radically reduce consumption and replace consumer culture with new ethics and values.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Modern Development [ edit ] The modern development of anti-consumerism is closely tied to the global environmental crisis, particularly the urgency surrounding climate change. As the world faces environmental degradation and the depletion of natural resources, anti-consumerist movements have gained momentum. These movements advocate for reducing overconsumption, promoting conscious consumption, and addressing waste, especially the growing plastic problem.

A key argument for these movements is the need for both personal and systemic changes. Many activists, such as George Monbiot , emphasize that overconsumption is a root cause of global crises like climate change, biodiversity loss, and environmental degradation.

[ 17 ] Efforts like upcycling and reducing plastic waste are part of broader campaigns aimed at creating sustainable consumption patterns. Moreover, critics of unchecked consumerism argue that solving these issues requires more than individual action; it also necessitates economic restructuring to lessen dependence on constant consumer spending.

[ 17 ] One crucial aspect of this movement is the call for "voluntary simplicity," which advocates for reducing material needs to reduce environmental impact. This is reflected in policies from international bodies like the United Nations, which has highlighted the importance of sustainable consumption in its development goals.

[ 18 ] By embracing a mindset of reducing consumption, both individuals and institutions can significantly lower emissions and resource use, addressing environmental challenges more effectively than through green technologies alone.

[ 18 ] Advertising [ edit ] Anti-consumerists believe advertising plays a huge role in human life by informing values and assumptions of the cultural system, deeming what is acceptable, and determining social standards.

[ 19 ] They declare that ads create a hyper-real world where commodities appear as the key to securing happiness.  Anti-consumerists cite studies that find that individuals believe their quality of life improves in relation to social values that lie outside the capability of the marketplace.  Therefore, advertising attempts to equate the social with the material by utilizing images and slogans to link commodities with the real sources of human happiness, such as meaningful relationships.  Ads are then a detriment to society because they tell consumers that accumulating more and more possessions will bring them closer to self-actualization, or the concept of a complete and secure being.  "The underlying message is that owning these products will enhance our image and ensure our popularity with others." [ 20 ] And while advertising promises that a product will make the consumer happy, advertising simultaneously depends upon the consumer never being truly happy, as then the consumer would no longer feel the need to consume needless products.

Anti-consumerists claim that in a consumerist society, advertisement images disempower and objectify the consumer.

[ 21 ] By stressing individual power, choice and desire, advertising falsely implies the control lies with the consumer.  Because anti-consumerists believe commodities supply only short-term gratification, they detract from a sustainably happy society.  Further, advertisers have resorted to new techniques of capturing attention, such as the increased speed of ads and product placements .

[ 19 ] In this way, commercials infiltrate the consumerist society and become an inextricable part of the culture. In a review of research on materialistic values and goals, Tim Kasser (2016) argues that the pursuit of material possessions can lead to short-term gratification at the expense of long-term well-being.

[ 22 ] Anti-consumerists condemn advertising because it constructs a simulated world that offers fantastical escapism to consumers, rather than reflecting actual reality.  They further argue that ads depict the interests and lifestyles of the elite as natural; cultivating a deep sense of inadequacy among viewers.

[ 21 ] They denounce the use of beautiful models because they glamorize the commodity beyond the reach of the average individual.

In an opinion segment of New Scientist magazine published in August 2009, reporter Andy Coghlan cited William Rees of the University of British Columbia and epidemiologist Warren Hern of the University of Colorado at Boulder , saying that human beings, despite considering themselves civilized thinkers, are "subconsciously still driven by an impulse for survival, domination and expansion... an impulse which now finds expression in the idea that inexorable economic growth is the answer to everything, and, given time, will redress all the world's existing inequalities." He argues that consumerism is making these tendencies worse by encouraging consumption without limit.

[ 23 ] Supporters of anti-consumerism often accuse advertising of attention theft , i.e. they believe it unjustifiably invades public areas, thereby imposing itself on people who consider its presence unwanted. American graphic designer Sean Tejaratchi expresses his resentment of this " ad creep " in a 1999 issue of his clip art zine Crap Hound : "Advertising increasingly invades my environment instead of letting me come to it on my own terms when I need it... The most powerful and well-funded methods of mass communication in history have been used to create a one-way, unending flow of shit into my life... In the twenty-eight years since I was born, I've been subjected to a stunning amount of advertising, and I don't recall anyone ever asking me if I minded." [ 24 ] Anti-consumerism has paved the way for a " subvertising " (also known as culture jamming ) movement, which uses artistic and political strategies to protest modern forms of publicity; acts of "subvertising" include "removing advertising from public spaces, tweeting to inform the city's mayor of illicit advertising practices, recuperating posters from bus stop advertising panels, producing critical advertising guides, documentaries or organising public workshops." [ 25 ] In Economic Theory [ edit ] Austrian economics [ edit ] See also: Austrian school of economics , Austrian business cycle theory § Government policy error , and Subjective theory of value Austrian business cycle theory , formulated by Friedrich Hayek , before and during the Great Depression As a classical defence pertinent in this context, Austrian economic advocates focus on the entrepreneur, promoting a productive lifestyle rather than a materialistic one wherein the individual is defined by things and not their self.

[ 26 ] Certain economists have further rendered Keynesian notions of propagating increased consumption - in order to mitigate recessive impacts when the populace refuse to spend - as obsolete, [ 27 ] since numerous founding principles presume that minor adjustments are implemented via expansions and contractions , at least monetarily, are the reason behind business cycles, [ 28 ] given the distinct outcome from resulting interest rate changes on distinguished points within the structure of production, a theory Woods would endorse.

[ 29 ] Furthermore, this is emphasised by the trend that a nation is unable to obtain wealth via consumption, which inevitably translates to entire resource absorption ; Production is therefore what grants consumption as a possibility to begin with, given that a producer would not be working towards revenue, if not one's consumptive desires in their own expenditure discretion.

[ 30 ] Moreover, the Austrian School dictates that the determinative estimate of goods and services motivate the demand for these commodities in order for their prices to be influenced by consumers .

[ 31 ] Others have often hinted towards rivalry amongst consumers , in that all parties, producer and consumer alike, behave in an entrepreneurial manner; The latter's market process interpretation is assumed to have provided the entrepreneurial role only to the producer. This is further emphasised upon when the consumer's absence is highlighted, whereby the sparse knowledge available, likewise with the producer's ability to calculate in gathering information as opposed to the government doing so - a direct laissez-faire correlation - the consumer becomes indecisive , and thus astray. This was subject to heavy debate during the Interwar era , in what was known as the socialist-calculation debate. The status of the consumer has rarely been of any discussion in Austrian economics since. However, it has drawn attention to some limited degree in relation to production, with practitioners in the field having abused consumer rationality , as well as recognising their abstinence from market elucidation.

[ 32 ] Neoclassical synthesis [ edit ] See also: Neoclassical synthesis and New neoclassical synthesis Despite its revised instances of state interventionism , adherence to the consumer theory remained abundant via the supply and demand model of Keynesianism.

Paul Samuelson stated that neoclassical synthesis should have been utilised towards the extent of fiscal and monetary interventions in order for economic stabilisation and maintaining full employment, albeit emphasising that the market economy cannot solely ensure full employment. The IS-LM-Philips unit of analysis model correlated the IS-LM model with the Phillips curve , which placed sums on quantities such as the marginal propensity to consume , invest, if not the volatility of money demand towards interest rates, in order for macroeconomic predictions to be forecast or the stimulations of economic policy consolidations. These are often in similar bearing with the main fundamentals of NNE , a revised edition of Neoclassical synthesis.

Developments within consumption theory of the movement were published in specialized journals.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Most of the expenditures area was addressed by consumer choice adaptations within the markets field against Keynesianism. Incentives and prices were represented in playing a prevalent role that determined decision making, directly pointing against individual demand, discerning how prices as regards to costs and income affect demand quantity Labour markets are often focused upon two features, opportunity cost of leisure as well as wage rate ; When wage rate increases, it hints that labourers are willing to work more and it concludes with them entering the labour force . Irrespective of the presumed incentivisation, the contrary is entirely possible, whereby workers work less and consume further leisure. Because of these interrelations, it is reasonable to determine that wage rates and labour supply both relate positively, albeit negative for opportunity of leisure. Nevertheless, the theory argues for gradual wage increase over time within a competitive labour market.

[ 35 ] This is viewed by some as an early feature of new classical theory , since it has some relation to the real business-cycle theory in technological innovation , whereby implementing automation is often similar with becoming reliant over technology for economic output.

Criticism [ edit ] Critics of anti-consumerism have accused anti-consumerists of opposing modernity or utilitarianism , arguing that it can lead to elitism , primarily among libertarian viewpoints, who argue that every person should decide their level of consumption independent of outside influence.

[ 36 ] Right-wing critics see anti-consumerism as rooted in socialism. Consumerism tends to be associated with capitalism, so modern socialists tend to be anti-consumerist, with anti-consumerism described as having become "left wing common sense".

[ 37 ] In 1999, the libertarian magazine Reason attacked anti-consumerism, claiming Marxist academics were repackaging themselves as anti-consumerists.

James B. Twitchell , a professor at the University of Florida and popular writer, referred to anti-consumerist arguments as "Marxism Lite".

[ 38 ] There have also been socialist critics of anti-consumerism who see it as a form of anti-modern "reactionary socialism", and state that anti-consumerism has also been adopted by ultra-conservatives and fascists .

[ 39 ] [ 37 ] Anti-consumerist stances, which strictly focus on criticising the forceful expansion of unnecessary needs in place of genuine desires under capitalism, have been criticised by Marxists as being ignorant of the historical and social nature of needs and a deviation from Marx's own point of view concerning consumerism.

[ 40 ] Rather than being incompatible with left-wing political ideologies, it has been argued that "it is not the working class that needs to be liberated from consumerism, or in other words their own material desires, but that consumerism should be liberated from capitalism".

[ 37 ] In her book "Authenticity Guaranteed", Sally Robinson provides a feminist critique of anti-consumerism. She articulates that the stances of anti-consumerists reflect a hierarchical gendered framework which concerns preservation of masculinity in its purest form from the feminine social mechanisms of consumerism that curtails masculine agency and authenticity. Citations of films such as Fight Club as an often anti-consumerist exemplary, according to her, presents consumerism as a crisis of masculinity in general.

[ 41 ] An anti-consumerist critique relies on the assumption that consumer culture is inauthentic and de-individualizing; therefore, it must also identify and delineate what constitutes the authentic and the individual.

[ 42 ] In studies about whether anti-consumerism has been effective, it has been proven that for teenagers and young adults, the culture of media and their relationship often makes it difficult for them to reject consumerism.

Science Daily has a report on this, and states that it is either because they have little independence to develop their own agenda, or because they are dependent on their own consumer activities (e.g. bars, clubs and shops) to retain some independent income.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] In popular media [ edit ] In Fight Club , the protagonist finds himself participating in terroristic acts against corporate society and consumer culture. The film is widely regarded as the most widely recognizable piece of anti-consumerist media.

[ 45 ] The success of the book and the film comes despite the author Chuck Palahniuk publicly stating that the story is both anticonsumerist and anticommericialist.

[ 46 ] In the novel American Psycho by Bret Easton Ellis , the protagonist Patrick Bateman criticizes the consumerist society of America in the 1980s of which he is a personification. Later on he goes on a killing spree without any consequences, suggesting that the people around him are so self-absorbed and focused on consuming that they either do not see or do not care about his acts.

In the Pixar movie, WALL-E , Earth is depicted in an apocalyptic state caused by the negative effects of human consumerism.

[ 47 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-consumerists (category) Affluenza Anti-capitalism Brandalism Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Critical consumerism Conceptual detours of the shopping cart in art, design and consumerism Degrowth Détournement Downshifting (lifestyle) Ethical consumerism Freeganism Growth Fetish Mottainai Neoism Over-consumption Philosophy of futility Planned obsolescence Post-growth Slow movement (culture) Steady-state economy Waste picker The Zeitgeist Movement References [ edit ] ^ "Anticomsumerism movement" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-10-03 .

^ a b Makri, Katerina (February 28, 2020).

" What we know about anticonsumption: An attempt to nail jelly to the wall (Section 2.1: The concept of anticonsumption)" .

Wiley Online Library . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ a b Stearns, Peter (2001).

Consumerism in World History . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415244091 .

^ "Postconsumers" . Postconsumers. 2018-06-13 . Retrieved 2018-10-18 .

^ a b Yaldır, Hülya; Ashraf, Mirza Iqbal, eds. (2019). "Illusion and Awareness in Consumption Culture from the Perspective of Anti-Consumerism".

Human existence and identity in modern age: a socio-philosophical reflection . Berlin Bern Bruxelles New York Oxford Warszawa Wien: Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3-631-78260-6 .

^ Humphery, Kim (2010).

Excess: anti-consumerism in the West . Cambridge; Malden, MA: Polity.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4540-7 .

OCLC 320316172 .

^ Stiegler, B. (2011a) Interviewed by Lemmens, P. ‘”This System Does Not Produce PleasureAnymore”: An Interview with Bernard Stiegler’ in Krisis Journal, 1:33-42 ^ Stiegler, B. (2011) "Pharmacology of Desire Drive Based Capitalism And Libidinal Dis-Economy" https://research.gold.ac.uk/id/eprint/9114/1/s12.pdf ^ Aquinas, Saint Thomas (1981).

Summa Theologica: Complete English in Five Volumes . Vol. 3. Ave Maria Press. p. 1680.

ISBN 9780870610639 .

^ Kakutani, Michiko (2013-02-17).

" 'Banksy: The Man Behind the Wall,' by Will Ellsworth-Jones" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2018-03-16 .

^ "Graffiti, Consumerism and Capitalism - Banksy Explained" . 2021-06-20 . Retrieved 2024-05-19 .

^ "Banksy: Quotes" .

GoodReads . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ Seegebarth, Barbara (Spring 2016).

"The Sustainability Roots of Anti-Consumption Lifestyles and Initial Insights Regarding Their Effects on Consumers' Well-Being" (PDF) .

The Journal of Consumer Affairs .

50 : 68.

doi : 10.1111/joca.12077 .

^ Gunkel, Christian (December 23, 2014).

Politicizing consumer choice : ethical dimensions of consumerism in the United States . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3-631-65475-0 .

OCLC 919201704 .

^ Nelson, Anitra (2024-01-31).

"Degrowth as a Concept and Practice: Introduction" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2024-02-20 .

^ Smith, E. T. (2024-01-23).

"Practising Commoning" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2024-02-20 .

^ a b "Consumerism is global crisis" .

theecologist.org . 2021-05-17 . Retrieved 2024-12-13 .

^ a b "Anti-Consumption in a World in Crisis | AACSB" .

www.aacsb.edu . Retrieved 2024-12-13 .

^ a b [ Advertising and the End of the World. Dir. Sut Jhally. Perf.

Sut Jhally . DVD. Media Education Foundation, 1997.] ^ [Tim Kasser, "The High Price of Materialism", 2002, p.9, Achorn Graphic Services] ^ a b Rumbo, Joseph D. (February 2002). "Consumer Resistance in a World of Advertising Clutter: The Case of Adbusters".

Psychology and Marketing .

19 (2): 127– 148.

doi : 10.1002/mar.10006 .

^ Kasser, Tim (2016-01-04).

"Materialistic Values and Goals" .

Annual Review of Psychology .

67 (1): 489– 514.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-psych-122414-033344 .

ISSN 0066-4308 .

PMID 26273896 .

^ "Consumerism is 'eating the future' " .

New Scientist . 7 August 2009 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ Banksy and Tejaratchi on Advertising & Going Viral , 11 October 2018 , retrieved September 29, 2021 ^ Lekakis, Eleftheria J. (2021-11-02).

"Adversaries of advertising: anti-consumerism and subvertisers' critique and practice" .

Social Movement Studies .

20 (6): 740– 757.

doi : 10.1080/14742837.2020.1837102 .

ISSN 1474-2837 .

S2CID 226375476 .

^ kanopiadmin (27 October 2000).

"Consumerism: A Defense - Tibor R. Machan" .

^ "Austrian school of economics" .

Britannica . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ Wieser, F. (1891).

"The Austrian School and the Theory of Value" .

The Economic Journal .

1 (1): 108– 121.

doi : 10.2307/2955844 .

JSTOR 2955844 . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ "Austrian School of Economics" .

www.econlib.org . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ "Six lesson from the Austrian School of Economics" .

www.iea.org . 18 April 2024 . Retrieved 2 August 2024 .

^ McCallum, David (2022).

The Palgrave handbook of the history of human sciences .

Singapore : Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-981-16-7255-2 .

^ "The Consumer in Austrian Economics and the Austrian Perspective on Consumer Policy" .

www.researchgate.net . Retrieved 2024-05-17 .

^ Modigliani, Franco; Ando, Albert K. (1957).

"Tests of the Life Cycle Hypothesis of Savings: Comments and Suggestions†" .

Bulletin of the Oxford University Institute of Economics & Statistics .

19 (2): 99– 124.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0084.1957.mp19002002.x . Retrieved 2024-09-29 .

^ Modigliani, Franco; Brumberg, Richard (2 September 2005).

"1: Utility Analysis and the Consumption Function: An Interpretation of Cross-Section Data" .

www.direct.mit.edu .

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/1923.003.0004 . Retrieved 2024-09-29 .

^ 7 - The Macroeconomics of the Neoclassical Synthesis .

doi : 10.1017/9781108777766.007 .

ISBN 978-1-108-47844-1 . Retrieved 2024-12-31 .

^ "Anti-consumerism" .

[ dead link ] ^ a b c Leonard, Ralph (2019-08-18).

"A Marxist Defence of Consumerism" .

Medium . Retrieved 2024-05-22 .

^ "In Praise of Consumerism" . August 2000. Archived from the original on 2008-02-07.

^ Varul, Matthias Zick (May 2013).

"Towards a consumerist critique of capitalism: A socialist defence of consumer culture" .

Ephemera: Theory & Politics in Organization .

13 (2): 293– 315.

ISBN 9781906948177 .

ISSN 1473-2866 .

^ Landa, Ishay.

"The Left and the Masses : The Question of Consumerism" .

aninitiative.org .

^ Robinson, Sally (2018).

"Authenticity Guaranteed : Masculinity and the Rhetoric of Anti-Consumerism in American Culture" .

umasspress.com . University of Massachusetts Press.

^ Robinson, Sally (2018).

Authenticity Guaranteed: Masculinity and the Rhetoric of Anti-Consumerism in American Culture . University of Massachusetts Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv3s8tk8 .

ISBN 978-1-62534-352-9 .

JSTOR j.ctv3s8tk8 .

^ "Students' unions attempts to oppose consumerism are rarely successful, new research finds" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved 2025-07-21 .

^ Brooks, Rachel; Byford, Kate; Sela, Katherine (2016-11-16).

"Students' unions, consumerism and the neo-liberal university" .

British Journal of Sociology of Education .

37 (8): 1211– 1228.

doi : 10.1080/01425692.2015.1042150 .

ISSN 0142-5692 .

^ Russell, Calum (August 18, 2022).

"Edward Norton Discusses the Political Impact of 'Fight Club' " .

Far Out Magazine . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ "Palahniuk: Marketing 'Fight Club' is 'the ultimate absurd joke' " .

CNN . Archived from the original on June 29, 2012 . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ Van Oosterwjik, Iris; McCartney, William (17 March 2022).

"Once upon a Dystopian Time… the Portrayal and Perception of Environmentalism in Pixar's Finding Nemo and WALL-E" .

Quarterly Review of Film and Video .

40 (7): 848– 873.

doi : 10.1080/10509208.2022.2049181 .

S2CID 247545305 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

Sources [ edit ] Bakan, Joel (2004) The Corporation .

Elizabeth Chin (2001) Purchasing Power: Black Kids and American Consumer Culture University of Minnesota Press ISBN 978-0-8166-3511-5 Hertz, N (2002) Silent Takeover: Global Capitalism and the Death of Democracy . Arrow.

Klein, Naomi (2000).

No Logo . Vintage Canada.

ISBN 0-676-97282-9 .

Luedicke, Marius K, Craig J. Thompson and Markus Giesler. 2010.

"Consumer Identity Work as Moral Protagonism: How Myth and Ideology Animate a Brand-Mediated Moral Conflict".

Journal of Consumer Research.

36 (April).

Monbiot, G (2001) Captive State: The Corporate Takeover of Britain . Pan.

Schor, J. (2010) Plenitude [ usurped ] , Penguin Press HC.

Zehner, O (2012) Green Illusions , University of Nebraska Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-consumerism .

Fifty Possible Ways to Challenge Over-Commercialism by Albert J. Fritsch, SJ, PhD The Rebel Sell , This Magazine , By Joseph Heath and Andrew Potter 25 Years of Monitoring the Multinationals The Story of Stuff by Annie Leonard The Good Life: An International Perspective v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Sustainability Outline Index Principles Anthropocene Environmentalism Global governance Human impact on the environment Planetary boundaries Development Consumption Anthropization Anti-consumerism Circular economy Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological footprint Ethical Green consumption Micro-sustainability Over-consumption Product stewardship Simple living Social return on investment Steady-state economy Sustainability Advertising Brand Marketing myopia Sustainable Consumer behaviour Market Systemic change resistance Tragedy of the commons World population Control Demographic transition Dependency ratio List Family planning Intergenerational equity Population ageing Sustainable population Technology Appropriate Environmental technology Natural building Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable industries Sustainable packaging Biodiversity Biosecurity Biosphere Conservation biology Endangered species Holocene extinction Invasive species Energy Carbon footprint Renewable energy Sustainable energy Food Civic agriculture Climate-smart agriculture Community-supported agriculture Cultured meat Sustainable agriculture Sustainable diet Sustainable fishery Water Air well (condenser) Bioretention Bioswale Blue roof Catchwater Constructed wetland Detention basin Dew pond Footprint Hydroelectricity Hydropower Infiltration basin Irrigation tank Marine energy Micro hydro Ocean thermal energy conversion Pico hydro Rain garden Rainwater harvesting Rainwater tank Reclaimed water Retention basin Run-of-the-river hydroelectricity Scarcity Security Small hydro Sustainable drainage system Tidal power Tidal stream generator Tree box filter Water conservation Water heat recycling Water recycling shower Water-sensitive urban design Accountability Corporate environmental responsibility Corporate social responsibility Environmental accounting Environmental full-cost accounting Environmental planning Generational accounting Sustainability Accounting Measurement Metrics and indices Reporting Standards and certification Sustainable yield Economic Debt Sustainability Analysis Fiscal sustainability Applications Advertising Art Business City Cultural sustainability Climate finance Community Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco-cities Eco-investing Eco-socialism Ecovillage Environmental finance Green economy Construction Fashion Finance Gardening Geopark Green Development Infrastructure Marketing Green roof Greening Impact investing Landscape Livelihood Living Market Organic movement Organizations Procurement Refurbishment Socially responsible business Socially responsible marketing Sanitation Sourcing Space Sustainability organization Tourism Transport Urban drainage systems Urban infrastructure Sustainable management Environmental Fisheries Forest Humanistic capitalism Landscape Materials Natural resource Planetary Recycling Waste Agreements and conferences UN Conference on the Human Environment (Stockholm 1972) Brundtlandt Commission Report (1983) Our Common Future (1987) Earth Summit (1992) Rio Declaration on Environment and Development (1992) Agenda 21 (1992) Convention on Biological Diversity (1992) Lisbon Principles (1997) Earth Charter (2000) UN Millennium Declaration (2000) Earth Summit 2002 (Rio+10, Johannesburg) UN Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20, 2012) Sustainable Development Goals (2015) UNESCO MONDIACULT conferences Category Lists Science Studies Degrees v t e Consumerism the philosophy of and activism for consumer protection Concepts Consumerism Consumer Anti-consumerism Consumer capitalism Consumer privacy Consumer protection Consumer revolution Consumer welfare standard Ethical consumerism Informed consumer Activism Consumer activism Consumer Bill of Rights Consumer complaint Consumer education Consumer movement Collaborative consumption United Nations Guidelines for Consumer Protection Fields of study Consumer math Euthenics Home economics Key players Consumer organizations list Consumers' Association Ellen Swallow Richards Ralph Nader Esther Peterson v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-consumerism&oldid=1305199183 " Categories : Anti-consumerism Consumerism Anti-corporate activism Counterculture Ethical consumerism Social theories Sustainability Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-consumerism 23 languages Add topic

