Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 In fiction 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Doomsday device 16 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Construct which could destroy all life on a planet or a planet itself For the professional wrestling move, see Doomsday device (wrestling) .

Many hypothetical doomsday devices are based on salted hydrogen bombs creating large amounts of nuclear fallout . Above, the Castle Romeo nuclear test (yield 11 megatons ) at Bikini Atoll of the Marshall Islands , conducted on a barge moored in the middle of the crater created from the Castle Bravo test and the first nuclear test conducted on a vessel (March 26, 1954).

A doomsday device is a hypothetical construction – usually a weapon or weapons system – which could destroy all life on a planet, particularly Earth , or destroy the planet itself, bringing " doomsday ", a term used for the end of planet Earth. Most hypothetical constructions rely on hydrogen bombs being made arbitrarily large, assuming there are no concerns about delivering them to a target (see Teller–Ulam design ) or that they can be " salted " with materials designed to create long-lasting and hazardous fallout (e.g., a cobalt bomb ).

Doomsday devices and the nuclear holocaust they bring about have been present in literature and art especially in the 20th century, when advances in science and technology made world destruction (or at least the eradication of all human life) a credible scenario. Many classics in the genre of science fiction take up the theme in this respect. The term "doomsday machine" itself is attested from 1960, [ 1 ] but the alliterative "doomsday device" has since become the more popular phrase.

History [ edit ] Since the 1954 Castle Bravo thermonuclear weapon test demonstrated the feasibility of making arbitrarily large nuclear devices which could cover vast areas with radioactive fallout by rendering anything around them intensely radioactive, nuclear weapons theorists such as Leo Szilard conceived of a doomsday machine, a massive thermonuclear device surrounded by hundreds of tons of cobalt which, when detonated, would create massive amounts of Cobalt-60 , rendering most of the Earth too radioactive to support life.

RAND strategist Herman Kahn postulated that Soviet or US nuclear decision makers might choose to build a doomsday machine that would consist of a computer linked to a stockpile of hydrogen bombs, programmed to detonate them all and bathe the planet in nuclear fallout at the signal of an impending nuclear attack from another nation.

[ 2 ] The doomsday device's theoretical ability to deter a nuclear attack is that it would go off automatically without human aid and despite human intervention. Kahn conceded that some planners might see "doomsday machines" as providing a highly credible threat that would dissuade attackers and avoid the dangerous game of brinkmanship caused by the massive retaliation concept which governed US-Soviet nuclear relations in the mid-1950s. However, in his discussion of doomsday machines, Kahn raises the problem of a nuclear-armed N th country triggering a doomsday machine, and states that he didn't advocate that the US acquire a doomsday machine.

[ 3 ] The Dead Hand (or "Perimeter") system built by the Soviet Union during the Cold War has been called a "doomsday machine" due to its fail-deadly design and nuclear capabilities.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In fiction [ edit ] Doomsday devices started becoming more common in science fiction in the 1940s and 1950s , due to the invention of nuclear weapons and the constant fear of total destruction.

[ 6 ] A well-known example is in the film Dr. Strangelove (1964), where a doomsday device, based on Szilard and Kahn's ideas, is triggered by an incompletely aborted American attack and all life on Earth is extinguished.

[ 6 ] Another is in the Star Trek episode The Doomsday Machine (1967), where the crew of the Enterprise fights a powerful planet-killing alien machine. In Beneath the Planet of the Apes (1970), a cobalt device destroys life on earth. However, doomsday devices also expanded to encompass many other types of fictional technology, one of the most famous of which is the Death Star , a planet-destroying, moon-sized space station .

[ 6 ] Some works have also considered the erroneous activation of doomsday devices by external factors or chain reactions . An example of both is Virus (1980), where an earthquake is misdetected as a nuclear explosion and triggers a sequence of Automated Reaction Systems (ARS) . Various types of fictional doomsday devices have also been activated as part of an AI takeover .

[ 7 ] This includes the missile launch system in the movie WarGames (1983), control of which has been handed entirely to a computer, and Skynet 's nigh-destruction of the human race in The Terminator (1984).

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] 1983 Soviet nuclear false alarm incident Conflict escalation Doomsday Clock Fail-deadly Global catastrophic risks Mutual assured destruction Nuclear terrorism Sundial (weapon) Weapon of mass destruction Salted bomb References [ edit ] ^ Harper, Douglas.

"doomsday" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Kahn, H. (2011).

On Thermonuclear War . War and Peace Research. Transaction Publishers. p.

145 .

ISBN 978-1-4128-1559-8 .

^ Kahn, Herman (1960).

On Thermonuclear War . Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton University Press.

^ "Dr. Strangelove's 'Doomsday Machine': It's Real" .

NPR . September 26, 2009.

^ Thompson, Nicholas (2009-09-21).

"Inside the Apocalyptic Soviet Doomsday Machine" .

Wired . Vol. 17, no. 10. Archived from the original on 2009-09-27.

^ a b c Hamilton, John (15 August 2006). "Doomsday Devices".

Weapons of Science Fiction . New York: ABDO Digital. p. 14.

ISBN 1617843636 .

OCLC 1003840589 .

^ a b Pilkington, Ace G.; Brin, David (2017-03-05). "Doomsday Machine".

Science Fiction and Futurism: Their Terms and Ideas . Jefferson, North Carolina. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1476629551 .

OCLC 973481576 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] "The Return of the Doomsday Machine?", Ron Rosenbaum, Slate.com , Aug. 31, 2007 Doomsday device featured in The Bionic Woman episode Doomsday is Tomorrow Channel 7 Two (Australia) - Secrets of War , Series 1, Episode 19 v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doomsday_device&oldid=1298333721 " Categories : 1960 neologisms Doomsday scenarios Nuclear weapons Science fiction weapons Weapons of mass destruction in fiction Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 21:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doomsday device 16 languages Add topic

