Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Structure 3 Facilities 4 Ranks and rank insignia 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Russian Aerospace Defence Forces 14 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Français 한국어 עברית Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Former branch of the Russian Armed Forces Russian Aerospace Defence Forces Войска воздушно-космической обороны Voyska vozdushno-kosmicheskoy oborony Great emblem of the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces Active 1 December 2011–1 August 2015 Country Russian Federation Type Space force Anniversaries 4 October ( Space Forces Day ) Commanders Current commander Aleksandr Golovko Insignia Flag Middle emblem Insignia Military unit The Russian Aerospace Defence Forces ( VVKO ) [ 1 ] ( Russian : Войска воздушно-космической обороны (ВВКО) , romanized : Voyska vozdushno-kosmicheskoy oborony (VVKO) ) [ 2 ] was a branch of the Russian Armed Forces responsible for aerospace defence, operation of Russian military satellites and the Plesetsk Cosmodrome . It was established on 1 December 2011 and dissolved on 1 August 2015.

Russian Space Forces was reestablished on 1 August 2015 to replace it.

[ 3 ] The Aerospace Defence Forces was first commanded by former Space Forces commander Colonel General Oleg Ostapenko , who was promoted to Deputy Minister of Defence in November 2012.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In December 2012, Aleksandr Golovko was appointed the new commander.

[ 6 ] Although it is officially translated as aerospace in English, [ 7 ] some Russian writers translate it as "air and space" instead.

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] On 1 August 2015, the Russian Air Force and the Russian Aerospace Defence Forces were merged to form the Russian Aerospace Forces .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The Russian Aerospace Defence Forces duties for space defense are now with the Russian Space Forces under the umbrella of the new Russian Aerospace Forces. The RADF today only provides air defense responsibilities.

History [ edit ] Russian Armed Forces Ministry of Defence Staff General Staff of the Armed Forces Services ( vid ) Russian Ground Forces Russian Aerospace Forces Russian Navy Independent troops ( rod ) Strategic Rocket Forces Russian Airborne Forces Special operations force ( sof ) Special Operations Forces Other troops Logistical Support Military districts Leningrad Military District Moscow Military District Southern Military District Central Military District Eastern Military District History of the Russian military Military history of Russia History of Russian military ranks Military ranks of the Soviet Union v t e The Aerospace Defence Forces trace their heritage to the Space Operations Section, Strategic Operations Branch of the Supreme High Command Reserve Artillery, formed in 1955, and transformed into the Space Services Central Administration of the Strategic Rocket Forces in 1964 (and later the Chief Space Operations Directorate in 1972).

In 1967 the Anti-Missile and Space Defence Forces were formed ( Russian : войска противоракетной и противокосмической обороны [ПРО и ПКО] , romanized : Voyska Protivoraketnoy i Protivokosmicheskoy Oborony [PRO i PKO] ) under Artillery Lieutenant General Yu. Votintsev.

[ 11 ] They were reorganised as the Ministry of Defence Space Service Units in 1982, and were expanded to include the Chief Space Operations Directorate in 1986.

In 1991 the Soviet Union was broken up. The Russian Armed Forces were established on 7 May 1992, enabling the creation of Russian Space Forces later that year on 10 August. They were merged with the Strategic Missile Troops in 1996, but were reformed in 2001.

In 2006 President Vladimir Putin agreed with the idea of a new "Air and Space Defence Concept" from 2016, but without the implication that it would be a separate service. In 2008 Aleksandr Zelin argued that the missile defence and space defence forces should be merged into the Air Force .

[ 8 ] On 30 November 2010 President Dmitry Medvedev said that air and space defence services would be under a single strategic command and the General Staff and Ministry of Defence had decided it would be on the basis of the Space Forces . In April 2011 the then Space Forces commander Oleg Ostapenko said that concept for the future system had been approved. The service was created by the presidential decree "On changes to the composition of the Russian Armed Forces until January 1, 2016" which has not been published.

[ 8 ] Thus, on 1 December 2011, the Space Forces became the Aerospace Defence Forces, fusing all space and some air defence components into one joint service. On 1 August 2015, the ADF was merged with the Russian Air Force to form the Russian Aerospace Forces , by orders of President Putin, and upon the recommendation of the Minister of Defense Sergei Shoigu . It is today a service speciality corps within the Aerospace Forces with responsibility for the aerospace defense of Russian territory.

Structure [ edit ] The Lekhtusi Radar Station Until 12 August 2015 the Aerospace Defence Forces was organized into 2 commands: the Air and Space Defence Command; and the Space Command. The structure was as follows: [ 4 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Space Command ( Russian : Космическое командование (KK) ): 153rd Main Trial Centre for Testing and Control of Space Means named after G.S. Titov at Krasnoznamensk ( Russian : Главный испытательный центр испытаний и управления космическими средствами имени Германа Титова ) 820th Main Centre for Missile Attack Warning (SPRN) ( Russian : центр предупреждения о ракетном нападении (цпрн) ) in Solnechnogorsk 821st Main Space Surveillance Centre (SKKP) ( Russian : центр контроля космического пространства (цккп) ) in Noginsk -9, Moscow Oblast.

Dunay-3U radar Krona space object recognition station , Zelenchukskaya , Karachay-Cherkessia Krona-N , Nakhodka, Primorsky Krai Moment space surveillance complex , movable Okno , Tajikistan Okno-S , Primorsky Krai Air and Space Defence Command ( Russian : Командование противовоздушной и противоракетной обороны (К ПВО И ПРО) ): 9th Missile Defence Division ( ru:9-я дивизия ПРО , Military Unit Number 75555) ( A-135 anti-ballistic missile system ) in Pushkino [ 12 ] 4th Missile Defence Brigade in Dolgoprudny 5th Missile Defence Brigade in Vidnoye 6th Missile Defence Brigade in Rzhev State Testing Plesetsk Cosmodrome ( Russian : Государственный испытательный космодром «Плесецк» (ГИК «Плесецк») ) Kura Test Range In early March 2014, spokesman of the forces said the aerospace defences would include a space -and ground-based intelligence- gathering and missile early warning network, an air and space defence command, a VKO command-and-control structure, and a logistics support branch. Deputy Defence Minister Yury Borisov said on that month that the military would invest 2 trillion rubles ($55.3 billion) in building up its aerospace defence weapons over the next six years to ensure they are capable of thwarting existing and future types of air and space attacks.

Facilities [ edit ] The Aerospace Defence Forces had locations across Russia and bases in some Commonwealth of Independent States countries such as early warning radars in Azerbaijan (until December 2012), Kazakhstan and Belarus , and the Okno facility in Tajikistan . For a more detailed list of air bases now used by the Russian Aerospace Forces , see List of Soviet Air Force bases Until 2015 the VKO used the following facilities for aerospace defence operations, with the merger of the Air Force it also now handles the operations of Russia's hundreds of air defense bases and air defense units as well.

Early warning of missile attack: Voronezh radar at Lekhtusi , Armavir , Kaliningrad , Mileshevka , Yeniseysk , Barnaul [ 13 ] Daryal radar at Pechora Volga radar at Hantsavichy Dnepr radar at Balkhash , Irkutsk and Olenegorsk Oko early warning satellites Space surveillance: Okno in Tajikistan Krona in Zelenchukskaya and Nakhodka RT-70 in Yevpatoria (since its annexation by the Russian Federation , the status of Crimea , and thus of the city of Yevpatoria which is located on Crimea, is under dispute between Russia and Ukraine ; Ukraine and the majority of the international community considers Crimea and Yevpatoria an integral part of Ukraine, while Russia, on the other hand, considers Crimea and Yevpatoria an integral part of Russia [ 14 ] ) and Galenki (together with Roscosmos) Missile defence: Since 2015 - 1st Special Purpose Air and Missile Defense Army - A-135 anti-ballistic missile system Don-2N radar Satellite Systems: Liana space reconnaissance and target designation system (2 satellites of electronic reconnaissance 14F145 "Lotus-C1") [ citation needed ] Ranks and rank insignia [ edit ] Officer ranks Rank group General / flag officers Senior officers Junior officers Russian Aerospace Defence Forces (2011–2015) v t e (2013–2015) (2011–2013) Генера́л а́рмии Generál ármii Генера́л-полко́вник Generál-polkóvnik Генера́л-лейтена́нт Generál-leytenánt Генера́л-майо́р Generál-mayór Полко́вник Polkóvnik Подполко́вник Podpolkóvnik Майо́р Majór Kапита́н Kapitán Старший лейтена́нт Stárshiy leytenánt Лейтенант Leytenant Mла́дший лейтена́нт Mládshiy leytenánt Курсант Kursant Other ranks Rank group General / flag officers Senior officers Junior officers Russian Aerospace Defence Forces (2011–2015) v t e Ста́рший пра́порщик Stárshiy práporshchik Пра́порщик Práporshchyk Старшина́ Starshyná Ста́рший сержа́нт Stárshiy serzhánt Сержа́нт Serzhánt Мла́дший сержа́нт Mládshiy serzhánt Ефре́йтор Efréĭtor Рядово́й Ryadovóy See also [ edit ] Air Force Space Command Zhukov Air and Space Defense Academy Main Centre for Missile Attack Warning References [ edit ] ^ Войска воздушно-космической обороны (in Russian). Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation. n.d. Archived from the original on 17 February 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2012 .

^ Войска Воздушно-космической обороны заступают на боевое дежурство в РФ .

РИА Новости (in Russian). RIA Novosti. 1 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 29 December 2011 . Retrieved 25 December 2011 .

^ "Russia's Aerospace Defense Forces go on duty to stave off missile threats" . RIA Novosti. 1 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2012 . Retrieved 25 December 2011 .

^ a b c Podvig, Pavel (1 December 2011).

"Russia creates Air and Space Defense Forces" .

Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces . russianforces.org.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2012 . Retrieved 25 December 2011 .

^ "Oleg Ostapenko" . Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation. n.d.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2011 . Retrieved 4 February 2012 .

^ Podvig, Pavel (24 December 2012).

"New commander of the Air and Space Defense Forces" .

Russian Strategic Nuclear Forces .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 December 2012 .

^ a b "Structure" . Ministry of Defence of the Russian Federation. n.d.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2011 . Retrieved 6 February 2012 .

^ a b c d Stukalin, Alexander (May 2012).

"Russian Air and Space Defense Troops: Gaping Holes" .

Moscow Defense Brief .

2012 (2). Centre for Analysis of Strategies and Technologies.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2012 . Retrieved 18 June 2012 .

^ "Aerospace Forces" .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2015 . Retrieved 18 September 2015 .

^ "Шойгу объявил о создании нового вида ВС - Воздушно-космических сил" . 3 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2015 . Retrieved 3 August 2015 .

^ "4 октября - День военно-космических сил России" [4 October - Day of Military Space Forces in Russia] (in Russian). Prazdnuem. n.d.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2012 . Retrieved 13 April 2012 .

^ See also Michael Holm, http://www.ww2.dk/new/pvo/9okpro.htm Archived 29 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine , accessed August 2012.

^ "Герасимов: Приоритет в 2015 году — развитие стратегических ядерных сил" .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ UKRAINE REPORTS RUSSIAN MILITARY ACTIVITY ON CRIMEA BORDER Archived 18 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Newsweek (8 August 2016) Gutterman, Steve (18 March 2014).

"Putin signs Crimea treaty, will not seize other Ukraine regions" . Reuters.com.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2014 . Retrieved 26 March 2014 .

Ukraine crisis timeline Archived 4 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News UN General Assembly adopts resolution affirming Ukraine's territorial integrity Archived 4 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine , China Central Television (28 March 2014) v t e Russian Armed Forces Leadership President of Russia as Supreme Commander-in-Chief Minister of Defence Ministry of Defence Chief of the General Staff and First Deputy Minister of Defence General Staff Commander-in-Chief of the Ground Forces Commander-in-Chief of the Navy Commander-in-Chief of the Aerospace Forces Commander of the Air Force Commander of the Missile Defence Forces Commander of the Space Forces General Military History Doctrine Military deception Bases Bases abroad Budget Bands Banner Military reform 1997 2001 2008 Weapons of mass destruction Awards and emblems General Staff Building Main Building of the Ministry of Defense Defense industry Military-Industrial Commission War crimes Uniforms EMR camouflage Conscription laws Women Culture Honorary weapons Military districts Previous Volga–Ural ( Volga Ural ) Northern North Caucasus Siberian Far Eastern Kaliningrad Special Region Western Current Moscow HQ: Moscow Leningrad HQ: Saint Petersburg Southern HQ: Rostov-on-Don Central HQ: Yekaterinburg Eastern HQ: Khabarovsk Fleets of the Navy Baltic Black Sea Caspian Northern Arctic Ocean Flotilla Pacific Kamchatka Flotilla Military ranks and insignia Ground Forces Air Force Navy Armed Forces 1994–2010 Services Ground Forces troops Air Defence Missile Troops and Artillery‎ Engineer Signal Tank NBC Protection Topographic Navy Ensign Coastal Troops Infantry Commando Frogmen Aviation Hydrography Aerospace Forces Air Force Long Range Aviation Air and Missile Defense Forces Space Forces Aerospace Defence Forces Radio-Technical Troops Special Forces Special Operations Forces Special Forces of the Main Directorate Reserve of the Supreme High Command BARS Independent Airborne Forces ( Commander ) Strategic Rocket Forces ( Commander ) Logistical Support troops Road Railway Departments in the Ministry of Defence and General Staff Main Directorate Automobiles and Tanks Combat Training and Service of Troops General Staff (GRU) Military Medical Military Police Military-Political Missile and Artillery (GRAU) Operational Organizational-Mobilizational 12th Deep-Sea Research National Defense Management Center Military Band Service Military Representatives Krasnaya Zvezda Central Television and Radio Studio Rear of the Russian Armed Forces Equipment Ground Forces' equipment Air Forces' equipment Navy ships Future of the Russian Navy Military education Previous Page Corps Cadet Corps Naval Cadet Corps Military academies in the Soviet Union Military departments of civilian universities Current Adjunctura Military Academy of the General Staff of the Russian Armed Forces Military academies in Russia Military commissioning schools Military training centers of civilian universities Military-focused secondary schools Suvorov Military School Nakhimov Naval School v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Russian_Aerospace_Defence_Forces&oldid=1295270211 " Categories : 2011 establishments in Russia Russian Aerospace Forces Military units and formations established in 2011 Space warfare Hidden categories: CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Use British English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Russian Aerospace Defence Forces 14 languages Add topic

