Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ages of the Dharma Toggle Ages of the Dharma subsection 1.1 Cakkavatti Sutta 1.2 Theravada sources 1.3 Abhidharma 1.4 In Mahayana sources 1.5 Three ages in East Asian Buddhism 1.6 In Tibetan Buddhism 2 Causes 3 Responses to the age of decline Toggle Responses to the age of decline subsection 3.1 Chinese Buddhism 3.2 Japanese Buddhism 4 Saviors of the degenerate age 5 In other religions 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Decline of the Dharma 4 languages Deutsch Norsk bokmål Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Three Ages of Buddhism ) Three divisions of time following Buddha's passing For other meanings of "Latter Days", see Latter Days (disambiguation) . For other uses of Three Ages, see Three Ages (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e The Decline of the Dharma or Ages of the Dharma , refers to traditional Buddhist accounts of how the Buddhist religion and the Buddha's teaching ( Dharma ) is believed to decline throughout history . It constitutes a key aspect of Buddhist eschatology and provides a cyclical model of history , beginning with a virtuous age where spiritual practice is very fruitful and ending with an age of strife, in which Buddhism is eventually totally forgotten. Buddhist accounts of this process culminate in the eventual arrival of a new Buddha , Maitreya .

There are various accounts of this process of Dharma decline, which begins with Shakyamuni Buddha 's death and continues throughout the generations as society and its knowledge of the Buddha's teachings decline over the centuries.

Ages of the Dharma [ edit ] Further information: Dharma § Buddhism There are different accounts of the decline of the Buddha's teaching (Buddha Dharma ), i.e.

Buddhism . These Buddhist accounts of longue durée history and temporal cosmology always assume a cyclical pattern of virtue and decline. In degenerate times, the current Buddha's teachings fall into disregard and are forgotten. In virtuous times a new Buddha will at some point be born to teach Dharma (usually considered to be millions of years in the future).

[ 1 ] The teaching of the decline of the Dharma is found in early Buddhist sources.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] References to the decline of the Dharma over time can also be found in Mahayana sutras , including the Diamond Sutra and the Lotus Sutra .

Mahayanist and Nikaya (non-Mahayanist) sources all agree that our current time period is now on the downward slope of societal degeneration and that only after a period of strife and disaster will the cycle reverse to a period of gradual improvements.

[ 4 ] Different authors and traditions offer varying accounts of the timeline of decline.

[ 5 ] Cakkavatti Sutta [ edit ] Detail of a sculpted railing at Phanigiri depicting a Chakravartin.

One of the earliest sources which contain a Buddhist discussion of historical decline is found in the Cakkavatti-Sīhanāda Sutta ( Dīgha Nikāya 26) of the Pāli Canon (as well as in various parallel sources in other canons, like Dīrghāgama sutra number 6).

[ 1 ] The sutra recounts the story of a legendary universal monarch ( Chakravarti ) who lived far in the past. This king governed righteously and upheld the Dharma, ensuring peace and prosperity. Over time, successive kings neglect the Dharmic principles and fail to uphold the Dharma. They become greedy, unjust, and self-serving. Over time, societal values erode, leading to widespread poverty, crime, and moral decay. With each generation, human lifespan diminishes, reflecting the decline of moral and spiritual qualities. The sutra also describes how lifespan decreases from 80,000 years (when the "wheel turning" king ruled) to as little as 10 years during the peak of societal degeneration. In this bleak period, violence and lawlessness prevail, and society becomes increasingly fragmented and chaotic and people take refuge in caves to escape the fighting.

[ 1 ] The sutra then describes a turning point in history. A few individuals retreat from the chaos, renouncing violence and embracing moral conduct. Their example inspires others to change, gradually restoring societal harmony. As moral conduct improves, human lifespan begins to increase again, and the conditions for prosperity and peace are reestablished by a new "wheel turning" king called Sankha. Eventually, the Buddha Metteyya ( Maitreya ) arrives. He is the next Buddha after Shakyamuni, who will teach the Dharma during a time of renewal. Under Metteyya’s guidance, people will again follow the path of virtue and wisdom, achieving liberation.

[ 1 ] Theravada sources [ edit ] The Vinaya (Monastic Rule) of the Theravada school ( Cullavagga X, 1,6.) claims that the true Dharma will only last for 500 years. It states that the true Dharma (saddhamma) would have lasted longer (1000 years) if not for the admission of women into the monastic Sangha as bhikkunis .

[ 6 ] This claim also appears in the texts belonging to other Sthavira schools, including the Dharmaguptaka , Sarvastivada , and Mahisasaka schools but it does not appear in any single text surviving from the Mahasamghika school.

[ 7 ] As Nattier writers "Modern scholars have generally been reluctant to accept this pronouncement as representing the words of the Buddha, finding it more reasonable to assume that it emerged in misogynist circles sometime well after the Buddha's death." [ 8 ] She also argues that since the claim is not found in any Mahasamghika works, this suggests the claim developed somewhat after the first schism .

[ 8 ] The now standard view in the Theravada school is a timetable of decline lasting five thousand years.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] This schema was first taught in the works of the fifth century commentator Buddhaghosa .

[ 12 ] This time table is divided into five one thousand year periods. In each period, there is the disappearance of certain elements of the Dharma: [ 13 ] Disappearance of attainments (Pali: adhigama): In the first one thousand years, people gradually lose the ability to attain all the four stages of enlightenment .

Disappearance of the method ( patipatti ): In this period people gradually stop practicing meditation and keeping precepts properly.

Disappearance of learning ( pariyatti ): Gradually, the scriptures begin to be lost until all are lost at the end of this period.

Disappearance of signs ( nimitta ): monks abandon the robe and enter into secular life.

Disappearance of relics ( dhatu ): gradually the relics of the Buddha stop being worshiped and are lost.

Abhidharma [ edit ] The Buddhist scholastic literature of the Abhidharma traditions provide more elaborate accounts of the various historical ages of the Dharma. The most influential such Abhidharma account in the northern tradition is found in Vasubandhu's Abhidharmakośabhāṣya .

The text divides the cosmological history of the universe into four kalpas (a huge span of time), which is further divided into twenty antarakalpas (sub-eons). Each antarakalpa during the last kalpa of the universe is said to oscillate between periods of social and ethical growth and decline.

[ 14 ] The zenith of goodness is a time when human beings live 80,000 years and during the nadir, lifespans have shrunk to 10 years. During the zenith of moral progress, there is peace and abundance, while the at the end, there is only war. This then oscillates back to a time of gradual improvement until a new Buddha arrives, and the cycle begins again.

[ 14 ] In Mahayana sources [ edit ] Part of a series on Mahāyāna Buddhism Teachings Bodhisattva Buddhahood Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Skillful Means Transcendent Wisdom Transcendent Virtues Emptiness Two truths Consciousness-only Three bodies Three vehicles Non-abiding Nirvana One Vehicle Bodhisattva Precepts Bodhisattva vow Bodhisattva stages Pure Lands Luminous mind Dharani Three Turnings Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Shakyamuni Amitabha Adi-Buddha Akshobhya Prajñāpāramitā Devī Bhaiṣajyaguru Vairocana Mañjuśrī Avalokiteśvara Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Maitreya Kṣitigarbha Ākāśagarbha Samantabhadra Tara Wrathful deities Mahayana sutras Prajñāpāramitā sūtras Lotus Sūtra Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra Mahāsaṃnipāta Sūtra Vimalakirtinirdeśa Pure Land Sutras Lalitavistara Sūtra Samādhirāja Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Tathāgatagarbha sūtras Śrīmālādevī Sūtra Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Ghanavyūha sūtra Golden Light Sutra Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra Main traditions Mādhyamaka Yogācāra Tiantai Tendai Huayan Zen (Chan) Shingon Pure Land Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Nichiren Trúc Lâm Vajrayāna Newar Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Dzogchen Bon Shugendō Humanistic Buddhism Key figures Nāgārjuna Aśvaghoṣa Āryadeva Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Asanga Vasubandhu Sthiramati Buddhapālita Dignāga Bhāvaviveka Dharmakīrti Candrakīrti Sengzhao Jizang Zhiyi Shandao Bodhidharma Huineng Xuanzang Fazang Amoghavajra Zhanran Chengguan Zongmi Saichō Kūkai Shāntideva Shāntarakshita Wohnyo Mazu Daoyi Linji Siming Zhili Jinul Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Śaṅkaranandana Virūpa Ratnākaraśānti Abhayākaragupta Nāropā Atisha Sakya Pandita Dolpopa Rangjung Dorje Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Hakuin Hanshan Ouyi Zhuhong Taixu D. T. Suzuki Sheng-yen 14th Dalai Lama Thích Nhất Hạnh Regional traditions China Han Chinese Taiwan Japan Korea North Korea South Korea Vietnam Tibet Nepal Newar Bhutan Mongolia Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Malaysia Indonesia West v t e Various Mahayana sutras contain different accounts of the ages of the Dharma and the periods of Dharma decline. Both the Diamond Sutra and the Lotus Sutra contain mentions of a period of decline in the future, though these sutras do not provide explicit accounts of this idea. In one passage from the Diamond Sutra , Subhuti asks the Buddha if there will be any beings who will understand the teaching of the sutra "in the future time, in the latter age, in the latter period, in the latter five hundred years, when the True Dharma is in the process of decay." [ 15 ] Similarly, the Lotus Sutra also mentions a period "after the Tathagata's parinirvana , in the latter age, in the latter period, in the latter five hundred years." [ 15 ] According to Edward Conze , the term "the last five hundred years" ( paścimāyāṃ pañcaśatyām in Sanskrit ) seems to assume a series of five-hundred-year periods, of which the "last five hundred years" is an age of decline. However, Nattier argues that this term was likely just referring to the five hundred years after the Buddha's parinirvana (physical death).

[ 16 ] Some sutras contain different time tables however, the Mahayana Nirvana Sutra for example, mentions a period of seven hundred years, not five hundred. The passage states: "After seven hundred years have passed since my death, the True Dharma will be broken, decayed, and brought to ruin by sinful Mara." [ 17 ] The sutra goes on to explain how even in the time of decline and decandence, the Buddhist community will continue to exist for some time, even if many monks won't be living in the traditional way. The real danger of this period, according to the Nirvana Sutra, is that many people will reject the Mahayana sutras and the eternity of the Buddha, teaching that his death was final and that he was a mere mortal.

[ 18 ] Other sutras mention a time of one thousand years. The Bhadrakalpika Sutra for example, states "The true Dharma (saddharma) will last for five hundred years, and likewise the semblace of the true Dharma (saddharma-pratirūpaka)." [ 19 ] This one thousand year timetable is also found in other sources like the Dazhidulun .

[ 19 ] Still other sutras, like the Candragarbha Sutra of the Great Collection , have a timetable of 1,500 years, with the true Dharma lasting for 500 years and the age of the "semblance of the true dharma" (saddharma-pratirupaka) lasting for a thousand years.

[ 20 ] The Candragarbha Sutra (Ch: Yuezangfen 月藏分, "Moon Treasury Section") of the Mahāsaṃnipāta Sūtra is a key source for the doctrine of Dharma decline. There are different editions of this text. One of these provides a different schema of five five-hundred year periods ( 五五百歳 , Chinese: wǔ wǔ bǎi sùi ; Japanese: go no gohyaku sai ), each of which is less ideal for practicing Buddhism than the last.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] This schema, which covers a span of 2,500 years was also very influential in East Asian Buddhism and it was widely quoted and relied upon by Chinese and Japanese authors.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] These five ages are: [ 22 ] [ 24 ] The true Dharma age, in which Buddhist believers resolutely cultivate wisdom and achieve liberation.

The age in which Buddhists can resolutely practice meditation.

The age in which Buddhists resolutely study, recite, listen to and learn the teachings.

The age in which Buddhists focus on building temples, stupas and undertake repentance.

The age of decline, in which the Dharma has diminished and believers quarrel with each other.

The fifth and last age of decline is one in which the people would be incapable of practicing the Buddha's Dharma. Eventually the Buddhist teachings would be totally lost, leading to the need for a new Buddha to be born in the world. This time period would also be characterized by unrest, strife, famine, and natural disasters.

[ 21 ] Three ages in East Asian Buddhism [ edit ] In East Asian Buddhism , the most influential schema used to explain the decline of the Dharma is one of three ages of Dharma. This schema was formulated by Chinese authors out of the various different accounts found in the sutras and is not found in any specific Mahayana sutra in a systematic fashion.

[ 25 ] These three divisions of time following Buddha's passing are: [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 25 ] Age of the Right Dharma ( Chinese : 正法 ; pinyin : zhèng fǎ ; Japanese: shōbō , Sanskrit: saddharma-kāla ), also known as Former Period of the Dharma. This refers to the first thousand years (or 500 years depending on the source) during which the Buddha's disciples are able to uphold the Buddha's teachings and it is possible to attain enlightenment.

Age of the Semblance Dharma ( Chinese : 像法 ; pinyin : xiàng fǎ ; Japanese: zōhō , Sanskrit: saddharma-pratirūpaka-kāla ), also known as Middle Period of the Dharma. This is the second thousand years (or 500 years), which only "resembles" true Dharma. It is a "reflection" ( pratirūpaka ) of the right Dharma. A few people might be able to attain enlightenment during this time, but most people just follow the forms of the religion.

Last Age of the Dharma ( Chinese : 末法 ; pinyin : mò fǎ ; Japanese: mappō ) or Final Age (末世 mòshì , Sanskrit: paścima-kāla ), which is to last for 10,000 years during which the Dharma declines. At this time, the spiritual capacities of human beings is at a low point and traditional religious practices lose their effectiveness, while the teaching and the scriptures slowly disappear.

There is a passage from the Mahayana Abhisamaya Sutra (Taisho no. 839) which contains the idea of three ages used together in one passage which states: "The Tathagata manifests himself and descends from the Tusita Heaven to uphold the entire True Dharma ( zhèng fǎ ), the entire Semblance Dharma ( xiàng fǎ ), and the entire Final Dharma ( mò fǎ )." [ 30 ] However, as Nattier notes, this sutra was translated after the concept of the three ages was already adopted into Chinese Buddhism, so it cannot be the main source of the idea.

[ 30 ] Nanyue Huisi (515-577), the third Patriarch of the Tiantai school, was the first Chinese author to present the three ages schema.

[ 31 ] The theory first appears in his Lì Shì Yuàn Wén (立誓願文, T. 46).

[ 32 ] Soon, the idea was adopted by numerous scholars.

Jizang (549–622 CE), an author of the Chinese Madhyamaka school, writes in his commentary on the Lotus Sutra ( Fahua yishu 法華義疏): Generally speaking, Dharma can be divided into four periods. First is when the Buddha was in the world. Second is when the Buddha died; during this time, Dharma’s prestige did not change, so this period is called zhengfa. Third is a long time after the Buddha had died. Dharma was replaced by misconceptions, and this period is called the xiangfa. The fourth period is when Dharma has been distorted and only a sliver of it remains; this period is called the mofa.

[ 33 ] In Tibetan Buddhism [ edit ] Tibetan Buddhism generally follows a four age model, similar to the Hindu concept of the four yugas . The first is a virtuous age, and the following ages progressively decline in terms of the five degenerations (kaṣāya): lifespans decrease, defilements increase, beings (physical and intellectual capacities of people decrease), times (wars and famines and other disasters increase), views (false beliefs proliferate).

[ 34 ] The four ages in this schema (which match the Hindu theory of four yugas ) are: [ 35 ] [ 36 ] The age of completeness (Sanskrit: kṛta-yuga ), a time of mostly virtue and goodness.

The age of three-quarters ( tretā-yuga ), in which the degenerations begin The age of two-quarters ( dvāpara-yuga ), in which the degenerations increase further.

The age of strife or the degenerate age (Sanskrit: kali-yuga , Tibetan: nyigme dü ), a time in which the degenerations become the worst, and murder and other forms of evil become very common.

Tibetan Buddhist views are also informed by the Buddhist tantric literature . The Kalacakra Tantra is an influential Buddhist tantra which contains an extensive prophecy of the future decline and revival of the Dharma.

[ 37 ] The view of the four eras and the idea that we are currently in the fourth degenerate era but must preserve and maintain the teachings of the kṛta-yuga was used by various Tibetan authors to promote their own tradition as upholding the kṛta teachings of the past. One example is Dolpopa , who saw himself as upholding the complete kṛta Dharma during the current degenerate age.

[ 38 ] Causes [ edit ] Bhikkhus, there are two main reasons for the destruction and disappearance of the Buddha Sāsana in future. The first is to use the incorrect and inappropriate words in those respective languages to deliver the teachings. The second is to use wrong meanings and incorrect clarifications.

— Buddha , in AN 2.1.2.10 [ 39 ] Buddhist sources contain numerous accounts of the reasons and causes for the degeneration of the Dharma. Some of these causes are caused by external forces, such as invasions and persecution by non-buddhists. Other accounts place the blame on Buddhists, who weaken the religion from within either due to having heretical views, or due to laxity in conduct and meditation, carelessness or other moral failings.

[ 40 ] A classic passage comes from the Saṃyutta Nikāya , which states: There are five dharmas of decline that are conducive to the corruption and disappearance of the True Dharma. Which five? It is when monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen are irreverent and unruly toward the teacher (sat-thar, i.e., the Buddha), are irreverent and unruly toward the Dharma, are irreverent and unruly toward the sangha, are irreverent and unruly toward the training (sikkha), and are irreverent and unruly toward meditational absorption (samadhi).

[ 41 ] Other passages mention quarrels and sectarian divisions within the Sangha as a major element of Dharma decline, as well as the development of a false or "counterfeit" Dharma.

[ 42 ] Regarding actions of non-Buddhists, most sources mention foreign invaders and also the actions of powerful states as causes for the decline of the Dharma.

[ 43 ] As to the issue of state regulation, the Humane Kings Sutra mentions that state restrictions on monastic ordinations, stupa building and the crafting of images will lead to further decline.

[ 44 ] Responses to the age of decline [ edit ] While the teaching of the decline of the Dharma is found in all Buddhist traditions, they don't all agree on what to do about it. Different traditions interpret and respond to this teaching in various ways.

Jan Nattier and Mark Blum write that there were two main types of responses to the challenge of Dharma decline: [ 45 ] [ 46 ] A conservative approach which focuses on redoubling our efforts to preserve the teachings and to try harder to follow the traditional Buddhist practices. This approach is the standard one in Theravada Buddhism and in Indo-Tibetan Buddhism . It was also adopted by some East Asian traditions and authors, who emphasized strict monastic discipline (following the Vinaya ) and strict ascetic practices in mountain or forest monasteries far away from society. In its most extreme form, this approach may even completely reject the idea of Dharma decline, interpreting the sutras' statements on it as mere motivational talk.

The opposite response, which sees most or all traditional Buddhist practices as unsuitable for the current age of decline. This approach often entails a kind of Buddhist " dispensationalism " which argues that since we find ourselves in an unprecedented age, one should focus on special practices which are specifically useful for this time. This view also de-emphasizes or even abandons traditional practices like the monastic rule (Vinaya). This is the position of Chinese Pure Land authors like Daochuo and Japanese figures like Hōnen and Nichiren .

Chinese Buddhism [ edit ] The Interior of the Yunju Temple Caves (Zhili Fangshan) contain hundreds of stone carved scriptures, one of the treasures of Chinese epigraphy . Since the time of Jingwan, numerous monks from Sui, Tang, and Liao dynasties dedicated their efforts to this work as a way to preserve the teachings during the time of Dharma decline.

The ages of Dharma is an important teaching in East Asian Mahayana.

The teaching of Dharma decline became quite influential in China during the Northern Dynasties period and its influence continued well into the Sui and Tang eras. The attitude that the final age was near was influenced by the persecutions of Buddhism by Emperor Taiwu and Emperor Wu , as well as news of the invasions of the Hepthalites into India and their destruction of Buddhist sites.

[ 33 ] The idea that China had entered the era of Dharma decline soon became a key teaching for several forms of early Chinese Buddhism, such as for the now defunct Three Stages school .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Another early conservative figure was Daoxuan (596-667), who held that the best response to the era of decline was closely following the Vinaya.

[ 49 ] The idea of Dharma decline or mofa also led the monk Jingwan (540–639) to begin the project of carving numerous sutras on rock. Jingwan's followers continued this project for generations, creating the Fangshan stone sutras .

[ 33 ] The teaching of Dharma decline was also important in the Lotus Sutra schools who believe that different Buddhist teachings are skillful and useful in each period due to the different capacities of the people living in different ages. Since the time of Nanyue Huisi (515-577), the idea of Dharma decline has been a part of the Tiantai school.

[ 31 ] The doctrine of Dharma decline also became central to Pure Land Buddhism . Pure Land Buddhist authors held that we had entered the degenerate age, which means that the "path of sages" which relies on discipline and meditation, was no longer effective. Pure Land Buddhist therefore attempt to attain rebirth into the Pure Land of Amitābha , where they can practice the Dharma more readily.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] The first figure to teach the Pure Land view of the age of Dharma decline was patriarch Daochuo (562–645), who writes: [ 55 ] That is why it is stated in the Yuezang section of the Ta-chi Ching (大集月藏經) : ‘In our age of Dharma decline, even though countless sentient beings may cultivate the path through practice, not one will attain it.’ This age now is the era of Dharma decline, and a corrupted world of the five defilements is now manifest. The gate to the Pure Land is the only path by which people may reach [enlightenment].

Following Daochuo, other Pure Land authors like Shandao , adopted this idea, arguing that in this final age, only the Pure Land Dharma Gate was efficacious, since it relied on the other-power of Buddha Amitabha's past vows.

[ 23 ] Other paths relied on self-power, and thus could no longer be effective in the age of degeneration.

Japanese Buddhism [ edit ] Saichō , the Japanese founder of Tendai (the Japanese branch of Tiantai), wrote about the idea of Dharma decline (Jp: mappō ), explaining how certain Tendai teachings were well suited for this time. In particular, Saichō argued that monks should retreat to the mountains to meditate.

[ 56 ] Drawing on passages in the Lotus Sutra which mention how it will be taught during the time of decline, Saichō also argued that his time (which he held was close to the arrival of the age of decline) was just the right time for the Tendai Lotus teaching. As he writes in his Shugo kokkaisho : Now men's faculties have all changed. There is no one with Hinayana faculties. The Period of the True and of the Imitated Dharma have almost passed, and the age of mappō is extremely near. Now is the time for those with faculties suitable for the Lotus Ekayana teaching.

[ 57 ] Saichō also argued that during this time it would become more and more difficult to keep the monastic Vinaya precepts and eventually the monastic precepts would disappear. He saw the corruption of the monks at the capital of Nara as an example of the degeneration of the Dharma.

[ 56 ] As such, he focused on the bodhisattva precepts instead of on the Vinaya.

[ 58 ] Saichō also criticized the state bureaucracy which controlled the Buddhist schools in Japan at the time as another contributor to Dharma decline.

[ 59 ] Other Japanese figures also adopted these idea. The Tendai scholar Genshin for example, writes in the preface to his influential Ōjōyōshū (Essentials for Birth [in the Pure Land]) how he composed the work to help common people attain birth in the Pure Land: Teachings and practices in order to be born in the Pure Land are the most important things in this Final Age of defilements (jokuse matsudai 獨世末代). Who, either among monks or laymen, noblemen or commoners, is not going to follow this way? But many are the Buddhist teachings, esoteric and exoteric, which aren’t necessarily the same. Many are the practical and the theoretical ways of meditation on Buddha and on his Pure Land. Wise people, excellent people, earnest in their devotion, won’t find any difficulty to undertake these practices, but for a foolish being like myself, how is it possible to bear them? Therefore I assembled important passages from holy scriptures and Buddhist treatises elucidating the practice of nenbutsu .

[ 32 ] Japanese illustration of Mongol soldiers. The Mongol threat and their attempted invasions of Japan had an effect on the public consciousness of the Kamakura period. A sense of chaos and decline was palpable.

Genshin's writing helped popularize the idea that the world had entered the age of Dharma decline.

[ 23 ] By the Kamakura Period (1185 to 1333), numerous Japanese Buddhist figures saw the strife and corruption of this historical period as a sign of the age of decline.

[ 60 ] Indeed, much of Japanese Buddhism during this era is concerned with the question of how to be a Buddhist in the time of decline.

[ 61 ] The Kamakura period saw the rise of the new Pure Land Buddhist schools like Jōdo-shū and Jōdo Shinshū founded by Hōnen and Shinran respectively. These new traditions stressed a total reliance on Amitabha Buddha's grace as the only possible solution to the age of decline.

[ 61 ] Hōnen 's Pure Land teaching differentiates itself from its Chinese predecessors due its exclusivism. According to Hōnen , with the exception of the nembutsu (the "easy" path of simply reciting the Buddha's name), all other Buddhist practices are incapable of leading to awakening in this age. This is because the faculties of people in this age of decline are too inferior for other practices.

[ 62 ] The simple practice of saying the Buddha's name meanwhile, is easy and is universally accessible to all people.

[ 62 ] Nichiren Buddhism , founded by Nichiren at around the same time, similarly uses the Dharma decline teaching in an exclusive sense to argue that only its own teaching of Lotus Sutra devotion (through the chanting of the sutra's title, the daimoku ) is effective during this era.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] For Nichiren, the only solution to Dharma decline was for the Imperial government to embrace the Lotus Sutra and ban all other Buddhist sects. Only when this was done would Japan become a beacon of Dharma for the world, spreading the true Dharma and reversing the age of decline throughout the whole world.

[ 61 ] In contrast to these figures, some Japanese authors like Myōe and Jōkei argued that it was precisely the abandonment of traditional buddhist practice and monastic discipline which caused the age of decline. As such, they advocated strict monastic discipline and adherence to traditional practices as a way to stem the tide of decline.

[ 62 ] The Zen schools had different attitudes to the idea, though they all promoted zazen as the main solution.

Eisai (1141–1215), founder of Rinzai Zen, wrote that zazen could be practiced by all people, even those of lesser faculties. He argued that those who single mindedly practiced zazen would all attain the way, even those "ignorant people of the last age". He also wrote: The Prajñā, Lotus and Nirvana Sutras all teach the meditational practice of zazen for the last age. If it did not suit the people’s capacity in these latter days, the Buddha would not have taught this. For this reason, the people of the great Sung [Dynasty] nation avidly practice Zen. They err, who, in ignorance of zazen, hold that Buddhism has fallen into decline.

[ 65 ] Dōgen (1200-1253) meanwhile fully rejects the theory of Dharma decline, adamantly promoting the practice of zazen as useful at all times and writing: The doctrinal schools emphasizing names and appearances distinguish between the True, Counterfeit, and Final Dharma Ages, but in True Mahayana [Zen] we find no such distinction. It teaches that all who practice will attain the Way.

[ 65 ] As such, his teaching was in sharp contrast to other Kamakura era Buddhists who promoted the theory of decline.

[ 66 ] Saviors of the degenerate age [ edit ] While the coming of the decline of Dharma and the age of strife is certainly a time which Buddhists looked upon with trepidation, the various narratives also provided some hope. This came in the shape of Buddhist savior figures which could help people through these difficult times.

Relief of Maitreya surrounded by devotees, Kushan or Kidarite , Hadda , Afghanistan .

Traditionally, the most important figure who is held to herald the end of the degenerate age is the future Buddha Maitreya (Pali: Metteya).

[ 1 ] In both Mahayana and Theravada Buddhism, devotion to Maitreya and cultivation of meritorious actions is said to help a person be reborn in a place and time that would allow them to meet Maitreya. This could refer to Maitreya's current abode in Maitreya's inner court in Tushita or to the time in the future when Maitreya arrives on earth. In Chinese Buddhism, Maitreya was also a major figure. While traditionally it is held that Maitreya's arrival is far in the future, when the Dharma has all but disappeared, some Chinese millenarian figures and sects claimed that Maitreya's arrival was immanent.

[ 67 ] Apart from Maitreya, there are also kingly figures associated with the future Chakravartin king who will usher in the future golden age. In some sources, this king is named Sankha and he is seen as someone who will unite the world, rule virtuously and promote virtue. This occurs just before the descent of Maitreya.

Tibetan Buddhism , influenced by the Kalacakra Tantra , has a more elaborate lore, which teaches about a future king named Kalki, who rules a virtuous Buddhist kingdom called Shambala . He is also seen as someone who will defeat non-Buddhist barbaric invaders ( mlecchas ) in a great war. This myth is likely borrowed from Hindu myths of the Kalki avatar.

[ 68 ] In Mahayana , certain other figures are also venerated as saviors who offer guidance, protection, and liberation during the degenerate age. One prominent savior figure is Amitābha , central to Pure Land Buddhism . Amitābha vowed to create a pure peaceful realm, Sukhāvatī , where beings could be reborn through faith in him. This provides an accessible path to liberation for all, bypassing the challenges of the degenerate age by allowing them to escape this world and be reborn in the pure land.

[ 69 ] Avalokiteśvara Bodhisattva is also seen as a savior figure, offering immediate assistance to those in distress and physical danger.

Kṣitigarbha (Ch: Dizang) is also known for his vow to take responsibility for the instruction of all beings in the six worlds, in the era between the death of Gautama and the rise of Maitreya .

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Various sutras which focus on Kṣitigarbha , such as the Ten Wheels Sutra , mention the bodhisattva Dizang in connection to the era of Dharma decline. The Ten Wheels Sutra (T. 410) hails Dizang as a savior of the "vile age of the five turbulences [in] the world without a Buddha".

[ 70 ] This scripture was central to the Three Stages Sect in China.

[ 72 ] In the Lotus Sutra , Viśiṣṭacāritra is entrusted to spread Buddhist dharma in the age of Dharma decline and save mankind and the earth. He and countless other bodhisattvas , specifically called Bodhisattvas of the Earth (of which he is the leader), vow to be reborn in a latter day to re-create Buddhist dharma, thus turning the degenerate age into a flourishing paradise. Gautama Buddha entrusts them instead of his more commonly known major disciples with this task since the Bodhisattvas of the Earth have had a karmic connection with Gautama Buddha since the beginning of time, meaning that they are aware of the Superior Practice which is the essence of Buddhism or the Dharma in its original, pure form.

In other religions [ edit ] Some Chinese folk religions borrow the idea of the final age of Dharma from Buddhism. Some Chinese religions even teach that the three ages were associated with Buddhist figures like Dīpankara , Gautama Buddha, and Maitreya.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Chinese salvationist religions are particularly focused on this idea, and they often promote themselves as teachings which are just right for the current age of decline since they can provide a path to salvation.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Nattier 1991, pp. 13–15.

^ "初期大乘佛教之起源與開展20" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-13 . Retrieved 2012-10-17 .

^ 中國末法思想探微 .

^ Nattier 1991, p. 25.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 28.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 28.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 29–32.

^ a b Nattier 1991, p. 30.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 58.

^ Dicks, Andrew (May 2015).

Enlightening the Bats: Sound and Place Making in Burmese Buddhist Practice . pp. 25–26 and 32–33.

Pages 25-26: Many of the Burmese Buddhists I spoke with referenced a five thousand year period of decline noting that the current Sāsana of the Buddha Sakyamuni who lived in India during the 5th century BC, is already half way towards its complete disintegration. As time passes after the death of a Buddha, the Sāsana becomes increasingly opaque until it finally disappears. There may be a period with no Buddha, and then a future Buddha descends from the celestial abodes, is born, and restores the Sāsana on earth once again. Burmese Buddhist historian, Alicia Turner, has identified multiple chronologies for the decline of the Sāsana that range from one hundred to five thousand years. In the time of decay, also known as the Kaliyuga, all traces of the Tipitaka and their supporting practices eventually vanish destabilizing the Sāsana and triggering its dissolution. Pages 32-33: The Angata Vamsa (dating to roughly 13th century) specifically depicts five stages in the decline of the Sāsana. The first stage articulates the loss of the ability for monks to reach the four stages of enlightenment: sotapanna (stream-enterer), sakadagami (once-returner), anagami (non-returner), and arahant (fully awakened). The second stage relates the loss of patipatti (practice). In this stage, monks lose the ability to meditate and maintain their precepts. The loss of pariyatti (textual study) is the third stage and depicts the disappearance of the Tipitaka. The fourth stage illustrates the loss of maintaining even appearances of piousness i.e. respectful speech, attire, work, and morals. In this stage, monks no longer behave as monks. They are illustrated as married and working people. The final stage illustrates the disappearance of the Buddha's relics as they are returned to the location of the Buddha's enlightenment and engulfed in flames.

^ By contrast, refer to The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha: A Complete Translation of the Anguttara Nikaya . Translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi. 2012. p. 1805.

Note 1747: And this expression "a thousand years" is said with reference to arahants who have attained the analytic knowledges. Following this, for another thousand years, there appear dry-insight arahants; for another thousand years, non-returners; for another thousand years, once-returners; for another thousand years, stream-enterers. Thus the good Dhamma of penetration will last five thousand years. The Dhamma of learning will also last this long. For without learning, there is no penetration, and as long as there is learning, there is penetration.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 56.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 57.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 15–16.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 35–37.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 34.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 37–38.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 39.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 46–47.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 48–49.

^ a b Marra, Michele (1988).

The Development of Mappō Thought in Japan (I) , Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 15 (1), pp. 26–27.

^ a b c Nattier 1991, pp. 54–55.

^ a b c Stone, Jacqueline I. (1985).

Seeking Enlightenment in the Last Age: "Mappō" Thought in Kamakura Buddhism: (I) , The Eastern Buddhist New Series, 18, (1), pp. 28–56.

^ Rhodes, Robert F. (2017).

Genshin's Ōjōyōshū and the Construction of Pure Land Discourse in Heian Japan, p. 30. (Pure Land Buddhist Studies). University of Hawaii Press. ISBN 978-0824872489.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 65–97.

^ Tzu, Chuang (2012).

Fa Xiang: A Buddhist Practitioner's Encyclopedia . Buddha's Light Publishing. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 978-1-932293-55-5 .

^ Marra, Michele (1988).

The Development of Mappō Thought in Japan (I) , Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 15 (1), p. 25.

^ Blum, Mark L.

The Origins and Development of Pure Land Buddhism: A Study and Translation of Gyonen's Jodo Homon Genrusho , pp. 77–79. Oxford University Press, March 21, 2002.

^ Hattori 2000 , pp. 15–16.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 98–100.

^ a b Nattier 1991, pp. 110–111.

^ a b Marra, Michele (1988). " The Development of Mappō Thought in Japan (I) ", Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 15 (1), pp. 25–54.

^ a b c Liu, Yi (2018-07-03).

"After the Buddha's Nirvāṇa: The Mofa Concepts of Chinese Buddhism and Its Rise to Prominence" .

Studies in Chinese Religions .

4 (3): 277– 306.

doi : 10.1080/23729988.2018.1554382 .

ISSN 2372-9988 .

^ Lehner, Hans-Christian (editor).

The End(s) of Time(s): Apocalypticism, Messianism, and Utopianism Through the Ages , p. 98. BRILL, May 25, 2021.

^ Jamgön Kongtrul.

The Treasury of Knowledge: Book One: Myriad Worlds , p. 134. Ithaca: Snow Lion, 1995.

^ Kapstein, Matthew T.

The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism: Conversion, Contestation, and Memory pp. 112–115. Oxford University Press, February 7, 2002.

^ Nattier 1991, p. 60.

^ Kapstein, Matthew T.

The Tibetan Assimilation of Buddhism: Conversion, Contestation, and Memory pp. 112–117. Oxford University Press, February 7, 2002.

^ Anōmadassi Thero 2019 , p. 8.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 119–121.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 121-122.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 123–124.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 126–127.

^ Nattier 1991, pp. 128–129 ^ Nattier 1991, pp. 137–138.

^ Blum, Mark L.

The Origins and Development of Pure Land Buddhism: A Study and Translation of Gyonen's Jodo Homon Genrusho , pp. 79–80. Oxford University Press, March 21, 2002.

^ "佛教末法觀之我思" . Archived from the original on 2016-05-13 . Retrieved 2019-04-25 .

^ 再論三階教的歷史定位 .

^ Blum, Mark L.

The Origins and Development of Pure Land Buddhism: A Study and Translation of Gyonen's Jodo Homon Genrusho , p. 80. Oxford University Press, March 21, 2002.

^ "道綽的末法觀念與淨土門的創立" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-10-15 . Retrieved 2012-10-17 .

^ 溫金柯 (2006-04-18).

"「末法」與「淨土念佛得度」考--由道綽《安樂集》衍生的重要觀念之檢討" (in Chinese (Taiwan)).

^ 仏教の「末法」キリスト教の「終末」 .

^ Asano, Kyoshin, The Idea of the Last Dharma-Age in Shinran's Thought (Part 1) , Pacific World, Third Series Number 3, pp. 53–70, 2001.

^ Asano, Kyoshin, The Idea of the Last Dharma-Age in Shinran's Thought (Part 2) , Pacific World, Third Series Number 4, pp. 197–216, 2002.

^ Blum, Mark L.

The Origins and Development of Pure Land Buddhism: A Study and Translation of Gyonen's Jodo Homon Genrusho , p. 79. Oxford University Press, March 21, 2002.

^ a b Groner, Paul.

Saicho: The Establishment of the Japanese Tendai School , pp. 171–173. University of Hawaii Press, September 1, 2000.

^ Groner, Paul.

Saicho: The Establishment of the Japanese Tendai School , pp. 181–182. University of Hawaii Press, September 1, 2000.

^ Kawamura, Leslie (ed.).

The Bodhisattva Doctrine in Buddhism, pp. 167–168. Wilfrid Laurier University Press, October 30, 2010.

^ Groner, Paul.

Saicho: The Establishment of the Japanese Tendai School , p. 178. University of Hawaii Press, September 1, 2000.

^ Williams, Paul, Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations, p. 163. Routledge, 2008.

^ a b c Williams, Paul, Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations, p. 165. Routledge, 2008.

^ a b c Stone, Jacqueline I. (1985).

"Seeking Enlightenment in the Last Age: "Mappō" Thought in Kamakura Buddhism: Part I" .

The Eastern Buddhist .

18 (1): 28– 56.

ISSN 0012-8708 .

JSTOR 44361743 .

^ 日莲心目中的《法华经》 .

^ Asai, Endo (1999).

Nichiren Shonin's View of Humanity: The Final Dharma Age and the Three Thousand Realms in One Thought-Moment , Japanese Journal of Religious Studies 26 (3-4), pp. 239–240.

^ a b Stone, Jacqueline I. (1985).

"Seeking Enlightenment in the Last Age: Mappō Thought in Kamakura Buddhism: Part II" .

The Eastern Buddhist .

18 (2): 35– 64.

ISSN 0012-8708 .

JSTOR 44346128 .

^ Heine, Steven.

Dogen: Japan's Original Zen Teacher, p. 54. Shambhala Publications, 2021.

^ Nadeau 1987.

^ Donald S. Lopez Jr. (2015).

Buddhism in Practice . Princeton University Press. pp.

202– 204.

ISBN 978-1-4008-8007-2 .

^ Jones, Charles B. (2019) Chinese Pure Land Buddhism, Understanding a Tradition of Practice, pp. 18–19. University of Hawai‘i Press / Honolulu.

^ a b Shi Zhiru.

The Making of a Savior Bodhisattva: Dizang in Medieval China , pp. 47–49. University of Hawaii Press, August 14, 2007.

^ "City of 10,000 Buddhas - The Earth Store Bodhisattva Sutra" .

www.cttbusa.org . Retrieved 2025-06-11 .

^ Shi Zhiru.

The Making of a Savior Bodhisattva: Dizang in Medieval China , p. 50. University of Hawaii Press, Aug 14, 2007 ^ "清代教门惑众手法" . Archived from the original on 2011-07-25 . Retrieved 2010-01-31 .

^ "清代"邪教"与清朝政府- 正气网 清代"邪教"与清朝政府" . Archived from the original on 2008-10-13 . Retrieved 2010-01-31 .

Sources [ edit ] Anōmadassi Thero, Alawwe (November 2019).

"The Three Characteristics of Existence To be realised through Wisdom" .

anomadassi.lk (Booklet). Translated by Jayawardena, Anura. Renaketuwagala Aranya Senasana Bharaya, Ettapolawatta, Wademada, Ovilikanda, Matale, Sri Lanka . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Buswell, Robert E.

(2004).

ed. Encyclopedia of Buddhism ("Decline of the Dharma") (Booklet). New-York: MacMillan Reference Library. pp.

210– 213.

ISBN 0-02-865718-7 .

Chappell, David Wellington (1980).

"Early Forebodings of the Death of Buddhism" .

Numen (Booklet).

27 (1). Brill: 122– 154.

doi : 10.2307/3269985 .

eISSN 1568-5276 .

ISSN 0029-5973 .

JSTOR 3269985 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Hattori, Shōon (2000).

A Raft from the Other Shore: Honen and the Way of Pure Land Buddhism (Booklet). Tokyo: Jodu Shu Press.

ISBN 978-4-88363-329-6 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Lamotte, Étienne ; Webb-Boin, Sara (1988).

"trans. History of Indian Buddhism: From the Origins to the Śaka era" (PDF) .

Indo-Iranian Journal (Booklet).

34 (2). Louvain Paris: Peters Press: 191– 202.

ISSN 0019-7246 .

JSTOR 24655322 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Liu, Yi (2018-07-03).

"After the Buddha's Nirvāṇa: the Mofa concept of Chinese Buddhism and its rise to prominence" .

Studies in Chinese Religions (Original article).

4 (3): 277– 306.

doi : 10.1080/23729988.2018.1554382 .

ISSN 2372-9988 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Marra, Michele (1988a).

"The Development of Mappō Thought in Japan (I)" (PDF) .

Japanese Journal of Religious Studies (Booklet).

15 (1). Nanzan University: 25– 54.

ISSN 0304-1042 .

JSTOR 30234100 .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2013 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Marra, Michele (1988b).

"The Development of Mappō Thought in Japan (II)" (PDF) .

Japanese Journal of Religious Studies (Booklet).

15 (4). Nanzan University: 287– 305.

ISSN 0304-1042 .

JSTOR 30234113 .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2013 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Nadeau, Randall L. (1987).

"The 'Decline of the Dharma' in Early Chinese Buddhism (transl. of the "Scripture Preached by the Buddha on the Total Extinction of the Dharma")" .

Asian Review (Review).

1 . Translated by UBC Department of Asian Studies .

Archived from the original on 2013-01-25 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Nattier, Jan (1991).

"Once Upon a Future Time: Studies in a Buddhist Prophecy of Decline" .

The Journal of Asian Studies (Review).

52 (1). Asian Humanities Press: 120– 121.

doi : 10.2307/2059154 .

ISSN 0021-9118 .

JSTOR 2059154 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Stone, Jackie (1985a).

"Seeking Enlightenment in the Last Age: Mappō Thought in Kamakura Buddhism: PART I" .

The Eastern Buddhist (Booklet). New Series.

18 (1). Eastern Buddhist Society: 28– 56.

ISSN 0012-8708 .

JSTOR 44361743 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Stone, Jackie (1985b).

"Seeking Enlightenment in the Last Age: Mappō Thought in Kamakura Buddhism: PART II" .

The Eastern Buddhist (Booklet). New Series.

18 (2). Eastern Buddhist Society: 35– 64.

ISSN 0012-8708 .

JSTOR 44346128 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

Zürcher, Erik (1982).

" "Prince Moonlight". Messianism and Eschatology in Early Medieval Chinese Buddhism (Leiden: Leyden Studies in Sinology)" .

T'oung Pao (Booklet).

68 (1/3). Brill: 1– 75.

doi : 10.1163/156853282X00073 .

eISSN 1568-5322 .

ISSN 0082-5433 .

JSTOR 4528252 . Retrieved 2025-01-01 .

External links [ edit ] The Buddha Speaks the Ultimate Extinction of the Dharma Sutra , The Buddhist Text Translation Society v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dgrm8
Cached time: 20250814224156
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.841 seconds
Real time usage: 0.993 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3413/1000000
Revision size: 53366/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 177780/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1519/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 144454/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.499/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25822849/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  756.150      1 -total
 28.33%  214.221      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 26.17%  197.885      1 Template:Reflist
 16.32%  123.395      1 Template:MahayanaBuddhism
 14.94%  112.982      8 Template:Cite_web
 14.59%  110.329     10 Template:Transliteration
 14.13%  106.823      5 Template:IAST
 12.97%   98.079     13 Template:Cite_journal
 12.69%   95.974      1 Template:Buddhism
  9.78%   73.982      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10696211:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224156 and revision id 1300803332. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decline_of_the_Dharma&oldid=1300803332 " Categories : Buddhist cosmology Buddhist eschatology Buddhist philosophical concepts History of Buddhism Nichiren Buddhism Tiantai Time in Buddhism Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese (Taiwan)-language sources (zh-tw) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decline of the Dharma 4 languages Add topic

