Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Government-operated Mission Control Centers 2 Privately-operated Mission Control Centers 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Mission control center 18 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch 日本語 Português Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mission Control Center ) Facility that manages aerospace vehicle flights "Mission control" redirects here. For other uses, see Mission control (disambiguation) .

International Space Station control rooms in Russia and in the United States.

A mission control center ( MCC , sometimes called a flight control center or operations center ) is a facility that manages space flights , usually from the point of launch until landing or the end of the mission. It is part of the ground segment of spacecraft operations. A staff of flight controllers and other support personnel monitor all aspects of the mission using telemetry , and send commands to the vehicle using ground stations . Personnel supporting the mission from an MCC can include representatives of the attitude control system , power , propulsion , thermal, attitude dynamics , orbital operations and other subsystem disciplines. The training for these missions usually falls under the responsibility of the flight controllers, typically including extensive rehearsals in the MCC.

Government-operated Mission Control Centers [ edit ] America NASA Launch Control Center controls NASA launch missions prior to liftoff from facilities located at NASA 's Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island, Florida .

[ 1 ] Responsibility for the booster and spacecraft remains with the Launch Control Center until the booster has cleared the launch tower.

Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center assumes responsibility for crewed missions after liftoff. The facility (abbreviated MCC-H, full name Christopher C. Kraft Jr. Mission Control Center ) is located in Houston Texas at the Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center . NASA's Mission Control Center in Houston also manages the U.S. portions of the International Space Station (ISS).

Mercury Control Center was located on the Cape Canaveral Air Force Station and was used during Project Mercury . One of its still standing buildings now serves as a makeshift bunker for the media if a rocket explodes near the ground.

Multi-Mission Operations Center at the Ames Research Center [ 2 ] The Space Flight Operations Facility is operated by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) in Pasadena, California and manages all of NASA's uncrewed spacecraft outside Earth's orbit and several research probes within along with the Deep Space Network .

[ 3 ] Space Telescope Operations Control Center (STOCC) is located at Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland and provides mission control for the Hubble Space Telescope .

[ 4 ] Payload Operations and Integration Center at the Marshall Spaceflight Center in Huntsville, Alabama where science activities aboard the International Space Station are monitored around the clock.

The Multimission Operations Center at the Applied Physics Laboratory near Baltimore, Maryland controls spacecraft including the MESSENGER and New Horizons missions.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] NOAA operates its constellation of satellites from the Satellite Operations Control Center (SOCC) at Suitland, Maryland and Command and Data Acquisition (CDA) facilities at Wallops, Virginia and Fairbanks, Alaska . Satellites controlled include JPSS and GOES .

[ 7 ] The Canadian Space Agency Robotics Mission Control Centre in Longueuil, Quebec plans and conducts Canadarm and Dextre operations at the International Space Station .

[ 8 ] The Centro de Operações Espaciais (COPE) is operated by the Brazilian Armed Forces to support government satellites in orbit. Two Space Operations Centers (COPEs) are part of its structure: the main center (COPE-P) in Brasília and the secondary center (COPE-S) in Rio de Janeiro .

[ 9 ] Asia Beijing Aerospace Command and Control Center is a command center for the Chinese space program which includes the Shenzhou missions. The building is inside a complex nicknamed Aerospace City.  The city is located in a suburb northwest of Beijing.

The Master Control Facility of the Indian Space Research Organisation is located at Satish Dhawan Space Centre , Sriharikota, India.

JEM Control Center and the HTV Control Center at the Tsukuba Space Center (TKSC) in Tsukuba , Japan manages operations aboard JAXA 's Kibo ISS research laboratory and the resupply flights of the H-II Transfer Vehicle . JAXAs satellite operations are also based here.

Europe European Space Operations Centre (ESOC) is responsible for ESA 's satellites and space probes. It is located in Darmstadt , Germany .

[ 10 ] German Space Operations Center (GSOC) is responsible for DLR 's satellites and other customers' missions. It is located in Oberpfaffenhofen near Munich , Germany .

The Columbus Control Centre (Col-CC) at the German Aerospace Center (DLR) in Oberpfaffenhofen , Germany. It is the mission control center for the European Columbus research laboratory at the International Space Station .

[ 11 ] Europe's Galileo global navigation satellite system (GNSS) is operated by two Galileo Control Centres (GCC) situated in Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany and Fucino, Italy.

[ 12 ] The French National Centre for Space Studies (CNES) ATV Control Centre (ATV-CC) is located at the Toulouse Space Centre (CST) in Toulouse, France. It is the mission control center for the European Automated Transfer Vehicles, that regularly resupply ISS.

[ 13 ] The Rover Operations Control Centre (ROCC) is located in Turin , Italy. It will be the mission control center for the ExoMars rover Rosalind Franklin .

[ 14 ] Russia The Mission Control Center of the Russian Federal Space Agency ( Russian : Центр управления полётами ), also known by its acronym ЦУП ("TsUP") is located in Korolyov , near the RKK Energia plant. It contains an active control room for the ISS. It also houses a memorial control room for the Mir where the last few orbits of Mir before it burned up in the atmosphere are shown on the display screens.

Titov Main Test and Space Systems Control Centre , mission control center in Krasnoznamensk , Russia.

Privately-operated Mission Control Centers [ edit ] Axiom Space Mission Control Center (MCC-A) in Houston, Texas.

[ 15 ] Boeing Satellite Development Center (SDC) Mission Control Center [ 16 ] in El Segundo, California, US. In charge of several military satellites.

The Kongsberg Satellite Services (KSAT) space operations center in Tromsø, Norway performs command and control for 13 satellites.

[ 17 ] Lockheed Martin A2100 Space Operations Center (ASOC) [ 18 ] in Newtown, Pennsylvania, US. In charge of several military satellites.

Parsons Corporation operates the Parsons Space Operations Center (PSOC) in Colorado Springs, Colorado [ 19 ] to support command and control for the NOAA POES [ 20 ] and DARPA Blackjack satellite programs.

[ 21 ] Satellite operator SES controls its fleet of more than 50 satellites from operations centers in both Princeton, New Jersey and Luxembourg .

[ 22 ] Space Systems/Loral Mission Control Center in Palo Alto, California, US.

[ 23 ] SpaceX Mission Control Center (MCC-X) in Hawthorne, California is the primary launch control facility for the company's Falcon rockets.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Control room Ground segment Launch status check References [ edit ] ^ "Launch Control Center" .

NASA . Retrieved 7 September 2011 .

^ "Multi-Mission Operations Center - NASA's Mission Control in Silicon Valley" .

NASA . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ Harry A. Butowsky (15 May 1984).

"National Register of Historic Places Inventory-Nomination: Space Flight Operations Facility" (pdf) . National Park Service.

and Accompanying photos, exterior and interior, from 1976, 1981, and 1983 (32 KB) ^ "Hubble Space Telescope - Mission Operations" (PDF) .

NASA . April 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "Space Labs and Facilities" .

JHAPL . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ "Pluto Flyby Success! NASA Probe Phones Home After Epic Encounter" .

Space.com .

^ "Satellite Operations" .

NOAA . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "Robotics Mission Control Centre" .

Canadian Space Agency . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ Brett Anderson (14 January 2025).

"Brazil hosts the Global Sentinel 25 Mid-Planning Conference" . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ "About ESOC" .

ESA . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "Columbus Control Centre, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany" . ESA . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "Galileo System" .

European GNSS Service Centre . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ "Automated Transfer Vehicle Control Centre" . ESA . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "A European mission control for the martian rover" .

ESA . Retrieved 3 June 2019 .

^ "NSSDCA Spacecraft Axiom 1" .

NASA . Retrieved 9 March 2025 .

^ "Satellite Mission Control Center" . Archived from the original on 30 December 2008 . Retrieved 17 December 2008 .

^ Debra Werner (5 February 2025).

"KSAT expands role in satellite operations" . Space News . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "World Class Satellites and Facilities" . Archived from the original on 25 December 2008 . Retrieved 17 December 2008 .

^ Loren Blinde (15 February 2023).

"Parsons launches space ops center" . Intelligence Community News . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ Arthur McMiler (30 November 2023).

"Parsons Takes Over 3 NOAA Satellites' Operations Under GSaaS Contract" .

Potomac Officers Club . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ Sandra Erwin (11 December 2021).

"Parsons to develop ground operations center for DARPA's Blackjack satellites" . Space News . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "SES Unveils New Satellite Operations Center" .

SES . 31 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ "Space Systems/Loral Overview" . Archived from the original on 13 March 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2008 .

^ David W. Brown (17 January 2023).

"31 hours inside SpaceX Mission Control" . New York Times . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Space exploration control rooms .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mission_control_center&oldid=1280293459 " Categories : Spaceflight Rooms Spaceflight technology Command and control Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from July 2020 Articles containing Russian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Use American English from January 2014 This page was last edited on 13 March 2025, at 18:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mission control center 18 languages Add topic

