Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Notable phalerists 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Phaleristics 36 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of awards Soviet and Ukrainian medals from the Historical Museum of the Donetsk police Phaleristics , from the Greek mythological hero Phalerus (Greek: Φάληρος , Phaleros ) via the Latin phalera ('heroics'), sometimes spelled faleristics , is an auxiliary science of history and numismatics which studies orders , fraternities , and award items , such as medals , ribbons , and other decorations.

Definition [ edit ] The subject includes orders of chivalry (including military orders ), orders of merit , and fraternal orders . These may all in turn be official, national, state entities, or civil, religious, or academic-related ones. The field of study also comprises comparative honour systems , and thus in a broader sense also history ( art history ), sociology , and anthropology .

In terms of objects, these include award items such as medals and their accessories, ribbon bars , badges , pins , award certificate documentation, etc., and phaleristics may also designate the field of collecting related items.

[ 1 ] Although established as a scientific sub-discipline of history, phaleristics usually studies orders and decorations "detached from their bodies".

[ 2 ] Notable phalerists [ edit ] King George VI loved the study of phaleristics, going to the extent of personally overseeing his uniform designs and ribbon placements. He is known to have designed a few British military decorations for the Royal Navy ; [ 3 ] he also designed the ribbons of each WWII campaign star and the Defence Medal .

[ 4 ] The Russian phalerist Julius Iversen studied orders and medals in the 19th century.

References [ edit ] ^ José Vicente de Bragança.

"Phaleristics" . Phaleristics Academy of Portugal . Retrieved 16 November 2012 .

^ Ralph Winkle (2007).

Der Dank des Vaterlandes: eine Symbolgeschichte des Eisernen Kreuzes 1914 bis 1936 (in German) (1. Aufl ed.). Essen. p. 18.

ISBN 978-3-89861-610-2 .

^ Bradford, Sarah (1990).

The Reluctant King: The Life & Reign of George VI, 1895–1952 . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312043377 .

OCLC 1036822389 .

^ "The Official 1945 Statement regarding the British WW2 Campaign Stars and Defence Medal" .

www.northeastmedals.co.uk . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Laslo, Alexander J. (1995).

A Glossary of Terms Used in Phaleristics: The Science, Study, and Collecting of the Insignia of Orders, Decorations, and Medals . Albuquerque: Dorado Pub.

ISBN 0-9617320-2-4 .

External links [ edit ] Phaleristics at GlobalSecurity.org v t e Phaleristics Auxiliary science of history and numismatics about orders , decorations , and medals Distinctions ( Lists ) By conferee Founts of honour * States and their national/public/official authorities Dynasties heads of currently or formerly sovereign royal families Private Ecclesiastical Organisations Commercial ( Self-styled order ) By type Orders Order of chivalry Military order Order of merit Royal family order Titles ( Styles , Post-nominal ) By function Grand master Chancellor Treasurer Assessor Bailiff Prior Chaplain Master of ceremonies Grand Cross / Grand Cordon Commander Officer Hospitaller Knight / Dame Postulant Squire Page Jurisdictions Charter Bailiwick Chapter Commandery Obedience Grand Lodge Lodge Others, by field Military ( List ) List of highest Campaign medal Law enforcement Civilian ( List ) Society Peace Intellectual freedom Human rights Law Humanitarianism Politics Volunteer Culture Architecture Art Film History Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Theatre Science Religion-related Ecclesiastical Sports Scouting Beauty By insignia ( Named after people ) For wearing (decorations) Formal Chelengk Collar Livery collar Grand Cross / Grand Cordon with sash Medal Necklet Medal bar Medal ribbon Robe of honour Tiraz Other Rosette Award pin Lapel pin Collar pin Tie pin Badge Heraldic Pilgrim Championship belt Embroidered patch Epaulette Ribbon Ring Championship ring Button Campaign Service Shoulder mark Tie clip Prizes Booby prize Wooden spoon Deal toy Plaquette Prize book Prize money Prize of war War trophy Human trophy Rosette Trophy Acrylic Participation Prizes known as the Nobel of a field Ceremonies and events Accolade Vigil Feoffment Passage fee Festival Vow Collar day Related organisations Family history society Fraternity Confraternity Fraternal order Fraternities and sororities Secret society Guild Syndicate Learned society Fellowship Honor society Hereditary society Club Gentlemen's club International Commission for Orders of Chivalry Magical organization Religious order Related concepts Chivalry Numismatics Heraldry Vexillology Service flag Battle honour Campaign streamer Nobility Order of precedence Taonga Honorary degree Devotional medal Awareness ribbon Code of conduct Code of honor High society * = Direct or indirect reference to fount of honour is the accepted criterion for official distinctions Category:Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Orders, decorations, and medals Wikipedia:WikiProject Awards Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phaleristics&oldid=1277320723 " Category : Phaleristics Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 23:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phaleristics 36 languages Add topic

