Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Sources 3 User tracking 4 References Toggle the table of contents Reference.com 7 languages অসমীয়া 한국어 नेपाली Português Русский Simple English Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Online encyclopedia This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2018 ) Reference.com Type of site Online encyclopedia dictionary thesaurus Available in English Spanish Owner IAC URL www .reference .com Launched February 1997 ; 28 years ago ( 1997-02 ) Reference.com is an online encyclopedia that organizes content that uses a question-and-answer format. Articles are organized into hierarchical categories.

Before IAC restructured the site following an acquisition in 2008, Reference.com comprised multiple reference works, and disclosed its sources.

History [ edit ] The old version of the Reference.com logo Reference.com was launched by InReference, Inc in February 1997.

[ 1 ] The site was later acquired by Lexico Publishing Group, LLC. In 2005, Lexico announced that Reference.com would begin offering searches of Wikipedia content.

[ 2 ] The popularity of Dictionary.com had been greatly boosted by Google 's practice of offering a link at the top of their search results that goes to the Dictionary.com definition.

[ citation needed ] This exclusive relationship was terminated without explanation to the public when the Google links were redirected to definitions at Answers.com . (In December 2009, the Answers.com links were replaced with Google's own dictionary.) Google added a Dictionary.com definition link for certain search words in a non-exclusive relationship (along with links to definitions from a few other commercial reference websites). On 3 July 2008, IAC acquired Lexico Publishing Group, LLC and its three properties: Thesaurus.com, Reference.com, and Dictionary.com.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Sources [ edit ] Reference.com reproduced content from external sources.

[ 5 ] The site's sources included other online dictionaries, encyclopedias, and a search of terms found on other websites such as Wikipedia and the CIA World Factbook . The site could also search Usenet groups and other mailing lists .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The encyclopedia had articles from such sources as the 2004 Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia , the Crystal Reference Encyclopedia , and later the English Wikipedia . Its online dictionary indexed the American Heritage Dictionary , Easton's 1897 Bible Dictionary , the Jargon File , the Kernerman English Multilingual Dictionary , Acronym Finder , Stedman's Medical Dictionary , Merriam-Webster's Medical Dictionary , the On-line Medical Dictionary , and WordNet . Its thesaurus was based on multiple versions of Roget's Thesaurus . The site's web directory was an interface to the Open Directory Project , and its web search feature used Google Search . An interface to Google Translate was added in 2008.

[ 8 ] User tracking [ edit ] Reference.com in 2010 topped the list compiled by The Wall Street Journal ranking websites by how many third-party tracking cookies were added to the user's computer. Reference.com added 234 tracking cookies when encountering a first-time user.

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Reference.com Goes Live as the Most Comprehensive Internet Forums Service" .

Business Wire . 10 July 2019.

[ dead link ] ^ "Reference.com Expands Content by Adding Wikipedia Encyclopedia to Search Capabilities" . Lexico Publishing Group. 15 September 2005.

Archived from the original on 25 February 2009 . Retrieved 30 October 2008 .

^ Auchard, Eric (3 July 2008).

"Ask.com closes acquisition of Dictionary.com" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2022 . Retrieved 1 July 2017 .

^ "Ask.com closes Dictionary.com deal" .

CNet . 4 July 2008.

^ "About Dictionary.com" .

Reference.com . Archived from the original on 26 September 2008 . Retrieved 24 November 2017 .

^ Tracy Swedlow (12 February 1997).

"New Web Service Provides Search Tool for Usenet and More" .

PC World . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011.

^ Anthony Ramirez (4 January 1998).

"Neighborhood Report: New York Online" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 .

^ "Translator – An Ask.com Service" .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2018 . Retrieved 1 October 2009 .

^ "Tracking The Companies That Track You Online" .

Fresh Air . August 19, 2010.

Archived from the original on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 September 2010 .

v t e IAC Angi Inc.

Angi Handy HomeAdvisor HomeStars Ask Media Group Ask.com Ask Applications Excite Reference.com Sidewalk.com People Inc.

Allrecipes The Balance Better Homes and Gardens Brides Cooking Light Entertainment Weekly Food & Wine Health HelloGiggles InStyle Investopedia Life Lifewire Martha Stewart Living Midwest Living Parents People People en Español Real Simple Serious Eats Shape Simply Recipes Southern Living Travel + Leisure TreeHugger Verywell Wood Other properties Care.com The Daily Beast DailyBurn Acquisitions Meredith National Media Time Inc.

Divesitures Angi Inc.

BlueCrew CollegeHumor Home Shopping Network Expedia Group Interval International LendingTree Match Group Mosaic Group Ticketmaster Urbanspoon Vimeo Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reference.com&oldid=1270979486 " Categories : Online English dictionaries American websites Websites which mirror Wikipedia IAC Inc.

Internet properties established in 1997 Thesauri (lexicography) Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 03:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reference.com 7 languages Add topic

