Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic procedure 2 Specific techniques Toggle Specific techniques subsection 2.1 Shotgunning 2.2 The Forer effect (Barnum statements) 2.2.1 Warm reading 2.3 The rainbow ruse 3 Contrasting claims of performers 4 Sitter misremembering 5 Subconscious cold reading 6 In media 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Cold reading 23 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of techniques used by mentalists, psychics, fortune-tellers, and mediums This article is about the communication technique. For the theatrical training technique, see Cold reading (theatrical) . For the Stone Sour song "Cold Reader", see Stone Sour (album) .

Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Doppelgänger Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune-telling Ghost hunting Haunted locations India UK US Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telekinesis Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific literacy Scientific skepticism Parapsychology Anomalous experiences Apparitional experiences Empath False awakening Hypnosis Ideomotor phenomenon Out-of-body experiences Parapsychology Synchronicity Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend v t e Cold reading is a set of techniques used by mentalists , psychics , fortune-tellers , and mediums .

[ 1 ] Without prior knowledge, a practiced cold-reader can quickly obtain a great deal of information by analyzing the person's body language , age , clothing or fashion , hairstyle , gender , sexual orientation , religion , ethnicity , level of education , manner of speech , place of origin, etc. during a line of questioning. Cold readings commonly employ high-probability guesses, quickly picking up on signals as to whether their guesses are in the right direction or not. The reader then emphasizes and reinforces any accurate connections while quickly moving on from missed guesses. Psychologists believe that this appears to work because of the Barnum effect and due to confirmation biases within people.

[ 2 ] Basic procedure [ edit ] Before starting the actual reading, the reader will typically try to elicit cooperation from the subject, saying something such as, "I often see images that are a bit unclear and which may sometimes mean more to you than to me; if you help, we can together uncover new things about you." One of the most crucial elements of a convincing cold reading is a subject eager to make connections or reinterpret vague statements in any way that will help the reader appear to make specific predictions or intuitions. While the reader will do most of the talking, it is the subject who provides the meaning.

After determining that the subject is cooperative, the reader will make a number of probing statements or questions, typically using variations of the methods noted below. The subject will then reveal further information with their replies (whether verbal or non-verbal) and the cold reader can continue from there, pursuing promising lines of inquiry and quickly abandoning or avoiding unproductive ones. In general, while revelations seem to come from the reader, most of the facts and statements come from the subject, which are then refined and restated by the reader so as to reinforce the idea that the reader got something correct.

Subtle cues such as changes in facial expression or body language can indicate whether a particular line of questioning is effective or not. Combining the techniques of cold reading with information obtained covertly (also called " hot reading ") can leave a strong impression that the reader knows or has access to a great deal of information about the subject. Because the majority of time during a reading is spent dwelling on the "hits" the reader obtains, while the time spent recognizing "misses" is minimized, the effect gives an impression that the cold reader knows far more about the subject than an ordinary stranger could.

James Underdown from Center for Inquiry and Independent Investigations Group said, "In the context of a studio audience full of people, cold reading is not very impressive." Underdown explains cold reading from a mathematical viewpoint. A typical studio audience consists of approximately 200 people, divided up into three sections. A conservative estimate assumes each person knows 150 people. Underdown says: This means that when John Edward or James Van Praagh asks the question "Who's Margaret?" he is hoping there is a Margaret in the 10,000 people in the database of that section. If there is no answer, they open the question up to the whole audience's database of over 30,000 people! Would it be surprising for there to be a dozen Margarets in such a large sample?

[ 3 ] Mentalist Mark Edward relates from personal experience as a "psychic performer" how powerful a hit can be when someone in a large audience "claims" a phrase such as a "clown in a graveyard" statement. Edward describes a mental image of a clown placing flowers on graves and adds, "Does that mean anything to someone?" whereupon a woman stands up and claims that he is speaking directly to her. She remembers it as Edward specifically stating that she knew a man who dressed as a clown and placed flowers on graves in her hometown. Edward reports that it took some convincing to get her to understand that he was not directly talking to her, but had thrown the statement out to the entire audience of 300 people. She made the connection, and because it seemed so personal, and the situation so odd, she felt that he was talking to her directly.

[ 4 ] Specific techniques [ edit ] Shotgunning [ edit ] "Shotgunning" is a commonly used cold reading technique. This technique is named after the manner in which a shotgun fires a cluster of small projectiles in the hope that one or more of them will strike the target.

The cold reader slowly offers a huge quantity of very general information, often to an entire audience (some of which is very likely to be correct, near correct or, at the very least, provocative or evocative to someone present), observes their subjects' reactions (especially their body language), and then narrows the scope, acknowledging particular people or concepts and refining the original statements according to those reactions to promote an emotional response. A majority of people in a room will, at some point for example, have lost an older relative or known at least one person with a common name like "Mike" or "John".

Shotgunning might include a series of vague statements such as: "I see a heart problem with a father-figure in your family." A vast variety of medical problems have chest pain as a symptom, and heart disease is the leading cause of death worldwide. "Father-figure" can refer to somebody's father, grandfather, uncle, cousin, or any male relative who is also a parent or has served in a parental role to the person.

"I see a woman with blackness in the chest, lung cancer, heart disease, breast cancer..." Most people will know a woman who was diagnosed with one of these problems, which are among the leading causes of illness and death.

"I sense an older male figure in your life, who wants you to know while you may have had disagreements in your life, he still loved you." Nearly all people will have had such a person in their lives, and nearly all of them will have had a disagreement.

The Forer effect (Barnum statements) [ edit ] The Forer effect relies in part on the eagerness of people to fill in details and make connections between what is said and some aspect of their own lives, often searching their entire life's history to find some connection, or reinterpreting statements in a number of different possible ways so as to make it apply to themselves.

" Barnum statements ", named after P. T. Barnum , the American showman, are statements that seem personal, yet apply to many people.

[ 5 ] And while seemingly specific, such statements are often open-ended or give the reader the maximum amount of "wiggle room" in a reading. They are designed to elicit identifying responses from people. The statements can then be developed into longer and more sophisticated paragraphs and seem to reveal great amounts of detail about a person. A talented and charismatic reader can sometimes even bully a subject into admitting a connection, demanding over and over that they acknowledge a particular statement as having some relevance and maintaining that they are just not thinking hard enough, or are repressing some important memory.

Statements of this type might include: "I sense that you are sometimes insecure, especially with people you don't know very well." "You have a box of old unsorted photographs in your house." "You had an accident when you were a child involving water." "You're having problems with a friend or relative." "Your father passed on due to problems in his chest or abdomen." Regarding the last statement, if the subject is old enough, their father is quite likely to have died, and this statement would easily apply to a large number of medical conditions including heart disease , pneumonia , diabetes , emphysema , cirrhosis of the liver , kidney failure , most types of cancer , as well as any cause of death in which cardiac arrest precedes death, or damage to the brainstem responsible for cardiopulmonary function.

Warm reading [ edit ] Warm reading is a performance tool used by professional mentalists and psychic scam artists .

[ 6 ] While hot reading is the use of foreknowledge and cold reading works on reacting to the subject's responses, warm reading refers to the judicious use of Barnum effect statements.

When these psychological tricks are used properly, the statements give the impression that the mentalist, or psychic scam artist, is intuitively perceptive and psychically gifted. In reality, the statements fit nearly all of humanity, regardless of gender, personal opinions, age, epoch, culture, or nationality.

Michael Shermer gives the example of jewelry worn by those in mourning. Most people in this situation will be wearing or carrying an item of jewelry with some connection to the person they have lost, but if asked directly in the context of a psychic reading whether they have such an item, the client may be shocked and assume that the reader learned the information directly from the deceased loved one.

[ 7 ] Robert Todd Carroll notes in The Skeptic's Dictionary that some would consider this to be cold reading.

[ 8 ] The rainbow ruse [ edit ] The rainbow ruse is a crafted statement which simultaneously awards the subject a specific personality trait, as well as the opposite of that trait. With such a phrase, a cold reader can "cover all possibilities" and appear to have made an accurate deduction in the mind of the subject, despite the fact that a rainbow ruse statement is vague and contradictory. This technique is used since personality traits are not quantifiable, and also because nearly everybody has experienced both sides of a particular emotion at some time in their lives.

Statements of this type include: "Most of the time you are positive and cheerful, but there has been a time in the past when you were very upset." "You are a very kind and considerate person, but when somebody does something to break your trust, you feel deep-seated anger." "I would say that you are mostly shy and quiet, but when the mood strikes you, you can easily become the center of attention." A cold reader can choose from a variety of personality traits, think of its opposite, and then bind the two together in a phrase, vaguely linked by factors such as mood, time, or potential.

Contrasting claims of performers [ edit ] The mentalist branch of the stage-magician community approves of "reading" as long as it is presented strictly as an artistic entertainment and one is not pretending to be psychic.

[ 9 ] Some performers who use cold reading are honest about their use of the technique.

Lynne Kelly , Kari Coleman, [ 10 ] Ian Rowland , [ 11 ] and Derren Brown [ 12 ] have used these techniques at either private fortune-telling sessions or open forum "talking with the dead" sessions in the manner of those who claim to be genuine mediums . Only after receiving acclaim and applause from their audience do they reveal that they needed no psychic power for the performance, only a sound knowledge of psychology and cold reading.

In an episode of his Trick of the Mind series broadcast in March 2006, Derren Brown showed how easily people can be influenced through cold reading techniques by repeating Bertram Forer 's famous demonstration of the personal validation fallacy , or Forer effect .

Sitter misremembering [ edit ] In a detailed review of four sittings conducted by medium Tyler Henry , Edward and Susan Gerbic reviewed all statements made by him on the TV show Hollywood Medium . In their opinion not one statement made by Henry was accurate, yet each sitter felt that their reading was highly successful. In interviews with each sitter after their sitting, all four claimed specific statements made by Henry, but, after reviewing the show, it was shown that he had not made those statements. Each sitter had misremembered what Henry said. One of many examples of this was when Henry, during a session with celebrity Ross Mathews , stated "Bambi, why am I connecting to Bambi?" Mathews stated that his father, who was a hunter, would not shoot deer because of the movie Bambi . In the post-interview, Mathews stated that "It was weird that Henry knew that my father would not shoot deer because of Bambi", demonstrating that Mathews did not remember that he, not Henry, had supplied the connection to his father.

[ 13 ] Gerbic has pointed out the broader issue of the human brain attempting to make connections that then make it appear that the psychic was correct. She lists this among a number of techniques or situations that psychics take advantage of.

[ 14 ] Subconscious cold reading [ edit ] Former New Age practitioner Karla McLaren has spoken of the importance of reducing the appearance of unusual expertise that might create a power differential; posing observations as questions rather than facts. This attempt to be polite, she realized, actually invited the other person, as McLaren has said, to "lean into the reading" and give her more pertinent information.

[ 15 ] After some people have performed hundreds of readings, their skills may improve to the point where they may start believing they can read minds. They may ask themselves if their success is because of psychology, intuition or a psychic ability.

[ 16 ] This point of thought is known by some skeptics of the paranormal as the "transcendental temptation".

[ 17 ] Magic historian and occult investigator Milbourne Christopher has warned that the transcendental choice may lead one unknowingly into a belief in the occult and a deterioration of reason.

[ 18 ] In media [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cold reading" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Wizard of Oz (1939).

Professor Marvel ( Frank Morgan ) utilizes both cold reading and hot reading techniques on Dorothy ( Judy Garland ) in an effort to urge her to return home.

Nightmare Alley (1947). Depicted ex- carny and aspiring cult leader Stanton Carlisle ( Tyrone Power ) using cold reading and other mentalist techniques to convince people he can communicate with the dead. The film was based on the William Lindsay Gresham novel of the same name .  The novel was again adapted into a movie in 2021 and depicts many aspects of cold reading delineated in the above article.

In Fletch Lives (1989), Irwin Fletcher uses a very heavy-handed version of cold reading to pass himself off as a faith healer during a televangelist praise meeting.

Leap of Faith (1992). Early in the film, revival tent evangelist and phony faith healer Jonas Nightengale ( Steve Martin ) uses cold reading on a police officer who has pulled over his tour bus, to dissuade him from writing a ticket.

" The Biggest Douche in the Universe " ( South Park episode, 2002).

Stan Marsh , one of the main characters in the animated comedy series, has an encounter with self-proclaimed psychic John Edward after attending a taping of Edward's TV show Crossing Over . Stan then uses cold reading on some passers-by in an attempt to convince his friend Kyle Broflovski that Edward is a fake, only to be mistaken for a child psychic and given his own competing TV show. This leads to a "psychic showdown" between Stan and Edward. Eventually, aliens arrive and declare Edward "The Biggest Douche in the Universe" for exploiting people's grief to gain TV ratings.

High Spirits with Shirley Ghostman (2005). BBC TV show in which character comedian Marc Wootton portrays a spoof psychic who parodies the typical cold reading techniques used on an unsuspecting audience.

Psych (2006). Shawn Spencer, the main character in the show, uses cold reading to convince detectives that he has psychic abilities while actually using logic, reason, keen observation skills, and an eidetic memory to solve cases.

The Mentalist (2008). The main character is someone who formerly used cold readings to pretend to be psychic, and now uses cold reading to assist him in solving criminal cases, especially when interviewing witnesses and possible suspects. His interactions with past clients are sometimes the subjects of episodes and he often tutors his colleagues and other individuals in the tools of his trade to teach them that "there's no such thing as psychics." [ 19 ] Leverage (2010). In Series 2 Episode 13 "The Future Job", Dalton Rand ( Luke Perry ) is a con artist who uses both hot reading (information gathering) and cold reading to convince an audience that he can communicate with the dead.  The cold reading methods he uses are exposed by the team.

[ 20 ] Now You See Me (2013).  One of the Four Horsemen, Merritt McKinley ( Woody Harrelson ), is a mentalist who uses cold reading (along with hypnotism) to assist in extortion and his illusion act.

Comedian John Oliver addressed the topic during an episode of his talk show Last Week Tonight on February 24, 2019. In the segment, Oliver criticized the media for enabling psychics who prey on grieving families, and explained the techniques of cold reading and hot reading . On cold reading, he said: "It's like asking a room full of praying mantises : Has anybody here lost a loved one because you ate them after having sex?. You know that all those little green hands are going up. (...) The broader the generality, the higher the chance it resonates with someone – basically, it's a magic trick, and yet prominent, smart people are willing to cosign on psychics' abilities." [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Confidence trick Confirmation bias Forer effect Hot reading Kinesics List of parapsychology topics List of topics characterized as pseudoscience Mentalism Subjective validation References [ edit ] ^ Dutton, Denis (1988).

"The cold reading technique" .

Experientia .

44 (4): 326– 32.

doi : 10.1007/BF01961271 .

PMID 3360083 .

S2CID 2382430 . Archived from the original on January 14, 2020 . Retrieved June 30, 2009 .

^ Forer, BR (1949) "The fallacy of personal validation: A classroom demonstration of gullibility" .

Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology . 44, 118–23 ^ Underdown, James .

"They See Dead People – Or Do They?: An Investigation of Television Mediums" .

CSI .

Skeptical Inquirer . Archived from the original on September 27, 2012 . Retrieved July 11, 2015 .

^ Edward, Mark (20 April 2016).

"The Clown in the Graveyard" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Center for Inquiry . Retrieved 22 April 2016 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : 777Skeptic (15 August 2007).

"Derren Brown Astrology" – via YouTube.

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Huston, Peter. (2002).

More Scams from the Great Beyond!: How to Make Even More Money Off the Creationism, Evolution, Environmentalism, Fringe Politics, Weird Science, the Occult, and Other Strange Beliefs . Paladin Press.

ISBN 1-58160-354-1 ^ Shermer, Michael (2001).

"Deconstructing The Dead" .

Scientific American .

285 (2): 29.

Bibcode : 2001SciAm.285b..29S .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0801-29 . Retrieved 19 May 2016 .

^ Robert Todd Carroll.

"Warm Reading" . The Skeptic's Dictionary. Retrieved 2014-02-10.

^ The Dance by Brad Henderson, Brad Henderson and Henderson Productions, 2007 ^ Kari Coleman (2001).

"My Psychic Adventure" .

Swift .

2 (3&4) . Retrieved 2006-12-11 .

^ Rowland, Ian (2008-04-01).

The Full Facts Book of Cold Reading: A Comprehensive Guide to the Most Persuasive Psychological Manipulation Technique in the World (4 ed.). London: Ian Rowland Limited. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-9558476-0-8 . Archived from the original on 2010-05-13 . Retrieved 2008-04-01 .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Derren Brown Interview (1/6) – Richard Dawkins" . Richard Dawkins Foundation for Reason & Science. 10 December 2008 – via YouTube.

^ Gerbic, Susan ; Edward, Mark (14 April 2016).

"Tip the Canoe of Tyler Too!" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Center for Inquiry . Retrieved 22 April 2016 .

^ Gerbic, Susan (23 March 2018).

"Ten Tricks of the Psychics I Bet You Didn't Know" .

CSI . Committee for Skeptical Inquiry . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ Karla McLaren (May 2004).

"Bridging the Chasm between Two Cultures" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Retrieved 2012-08-29 .

^ Paramiracles by Ted Lesley, Hermetic Press, 1994 ^ Kurtz, Paul (1986).

The Transcendental Temptation: A Critique of Religion and the Paranormal . Prometheus Books.

ISBN 0-87975-645-4 .

^ ESP, Seers & Psychics: What the Occult Really is by Milbourne Christopher, Thomas Y. Crowell Co., 1970 ^ "The Mentalist" .

tv.com . Archived from the original on 13 November 2011 . Retrieved 9 January 2020 .

^ Walker, Chad (February 9, 2010).

"TV Review: Leverage 2.13 – "The Future Job" " .

fandomania . Retrieved August 5, 2010 .

^ Horton, Adrian (February 25, 2019).

"John Oliver on psychics: 'A vast underworld of unscrupulous vultures' " .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on February 25, 2019 . Retrieved February 25, 2019 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Austin Cline What is Cold Reading?

Skeptical Perspectives Hyman, Ray.

Guide to Cold Reading Colin Hunter.

Cold Reading: Confessions of a "Psychic" Denis Dutton The Cold Reading Technique Dickson, D.H., & Kelly, I.W. "The 'Barnum effect' in personality assessment: A review of the literature," Psychological Reports , 57, 367–82, (1985).

Stagnaro, Angelo.

Something from Nothing . Manipulix Books. 2002.

Stagnaro, Angelo.

The Other Side . Manipulix Books. 2005.

Shermer, Michael. (2001). "Deconstructing The Dead: Cross Over One Last Time To Expose Medium John Edward," Scientific American , Aug. 1.

Hyman, Ray. "'Cold Reading': How to Convince Strangers That You Know All About Them," The Skeptical Inquirer Spring/Summer 1977.

Hyman, Ray.

The Elusive Quarry : A Scientific Appraisal of Psychical Research (Prometheus Books, 1989).

Keene, M. Lamar. The Psychic Mafia (Prometheus, 1997).

Randi, James.

Flim-Flam!

(Buffalo, New York: Prometheus Books,1982).

External links [ edit ] Cold Reading – Skeptic's Dictionary Cold Reading – Skeptic Friends Network Cold Reading: The Psychic's True Power (archived version) – Robert Novella The Cold Reading Technique Archived 2020-01-14 at the Wayback Machine – Denis Dutton Forer Effect – Skeptic's Dictionary How come TV psychics seem so convincing?

– The Straight Dope Psychic sophistry – Tony Youens Shotgunning – Skeptic's Dictionary The Skeptic's Guide To The Paranormal – Lynne Kelly Junior Skeptic Magazine – Daniel Loxton Junior Skeptic on cold-reading Psychic Methods Exposed — Cold Reading Tricks v t e Parapsychology Outline Topics Apparitional experience Astral projection Auras Bilocation Clairvoyance Deathbed phenomena Dermo-optical perception Dream telepathy Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Extrasensory perception Ganzfeld experiment Ghosts Kirlian photography Levitation Materialization Mediumship Near-death experience Orb Out-of-body experience Pam Reynolds case Paranormal Parapsychology research at SRI Past life regression Plant perception (paranormal) Poltergeist Precognition Psychic Psychic detective Psychic reading Psychic surgery Psychometry Pyrokinesis Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Second sight Sensory leakage Spoon bending Superconscious Telekinesis Telepathy Thoughtography Xenoglossy Zener cards Active organizations American Society for Psychical Research Association for the Scientific Study of Anomalous Phenomena College of Psychic Studies Institut Métapsychique International Institute of Noetic Sciences International Association for Near-Death Studies Koestler Parapsychology Unit Parapsychological Association Parapsychology Foundation Rhine Research Center Society for Psychical Research The Ghost Club Defunct organizations American Psychical Institute British College of Psychic Science Cambridge Ghost Society International Institute for Psychical Research London Dialectical Society Metropolitan Psychical Society National Laboratory of Psychical Research Oxford Phasmatological Society Princeton Engineering Anomalies Research Laboratory Society for the Study of Supernormal Pictures People List of parapsychologists Skeptics of parapsychology Publications An Experiment with Time Extrasensory Perception Irreducible Mind Journal of Near-Death Studies Journal of Parapsychology Journal of Scientific Exploration Life After Life Life Before Life Mental Radio Old Souls: The Scientific Evidence for Past Lives Parapsychology: Frontier Science of the Mind The Roots of Coincidence Twenty Cases Suggestive of Reincarnation Varieties of Anomalous Experience Category Commons v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cold_reading&oldid=1292215595 " Categories : Divination Magic (illusion) Mentalism Parapsychology Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2009 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cold reading 23 languages Add topic

