Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 2004 workshop 1.2 2007 events 2 Classes being taught in law schools 3 See also 4 References 5 Literature 6 Related reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Earth jurisprudence 2 languages العربية Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy of law This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Earth jurisprudence is a philosophy of law and human governance that is based on the fact that humans are only one part of a wider community of beings and that the welfare of each member of that community is dependent on the welfare of the Earth as a whole.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It states that human societies will only be viable and flourish if they regulate themselves as part of this wider Earth community and do so in a way that is consistent with the fundamental laws or principles that govern how the universe functions, which is the 'Great Jurisprudence'.

[ citation needed ] Earth jurisprudence can be differentiated from the Great jurisprudence, but can also be understood as being embedded within it. Earth jurisprudence can be seen as a special case of the Great Jurisprudence, applying universal principles to the governmental, societal and biological processes of Earth.

[ citation needed ] Earth jurisprudence seeks to expand our understanding of the relevance of governance beyond humanity to the whole Earth community, it is Earth-centric rather than anthropocentric . It is concerned with the maintenance and regulation of relations between all members of the Earth community, not just between human beings. Earth jurisprudence is intended to provide a philosophical basis for the development and implementation of human governance systems, which may include ethics , laws , institutions, policies and practices. It also places an emphasis on the internalisation of these insights and on personal practice, in living in accordance with Earth jurisprudence as a way of life.

[ citation needed ] Earth jurisprudence should reflect a particular human community's understanding of how to regulate itself as part of the Earth community and should express the qualities of the Great jurisprudence of which it forms part. The specific applications of Earth jurisprudence will vary from society to society, while sharing common elements. These elements include: [ citation needed ] a recognition that any Earth jurisprudence exists within a wider context that shapes it and influences how it functions; a recognition that the universe is the source of the fundamental ' Earth rights ' of all members of the Earth community, rather than some part of the human governance system and accordingly these rights cannot be validly circumscribed or abrogated by human jurisprudence; a means of recognising the roles and 'rights' of non-human members of the Earth community and of restraining humans from unjustifiably preventing them fulfilling those roles; a concern for reciprocity and the maintenance of a dynamic equilibrium between all the members of the Earth community determined by what is best for the system as a whole (Earth justice); and an approach to condoning or disapproving human conduct on the basis of whether or not the conduct strengthens or weakens the bonds that constitute the Earth community.

History [ edit ] The need for a new jurisprudence was first identified by Thomas Berry who identified the destructive anthropocentrism on which existing legal and political structures are based as a major impediment to the necessary transition to an ecological age in which humans would seek a new intimacy with the integral functioning of the natural world.

[ citation needed ] The feasibility of developing this jurisprudence (by then provisionally referred to as 'Earth jurisprudence') was discussed at meeting attended by Berry in April 2001, organised by the Gaia Foundation in London at the Airlie Conference Center outside Washington . A group of people involved in the law and with indigenous peoples came together from South Africa, Britain, Colombia, Canada and the United States.

[ 3 ] The first detailed exploration of Earth jurisprudence in print and the introduction of the term 'Great Jurisprudence' occurred with the first publication of Wild Law by Cormac Cullinan , launched at the World Summit for Sustainable Development in Cape Town 2002.

2004 workshop [ edit ] April 2004, first UK workshop held to discuss and develop the principles of Earth jurisprudence, titled 'Wild Law Wilderness Workshop: A Walking Workshop on Earth Jurisprudence' .  Donald Reid (former chairman of UKELA, the UK Environmental Law Association) and Cormac Cullinan (author of Wild Law ) lead the workshop in the Knoydart Peninsula (one of the last true wilderness areas in the Scotland).

The feasibility of developing a new form of jurisprudence was discussed at a conference in Washington attended by Thomas Berry in April 2001, organised by the Gaia Foundation. A group of people involved with law and indigenous peoples attended from South Africa, Britain, Colombia, Canada and the United States.

[ 4 ] In 2006 the first Center for Earth Jurisprudence established in Florida. The mission of the Centre, which is co-sponsored by Barry and St. Thomas Universities, Florida, is to re-envision law and governance in ways that support the well being of the Earth community as a whole. This involves fostering mutually enhancing relationships among humans and nature and recognition of the rights of nature .

[ 1 ] An earth jurisprudence UK conference, 'A Walk on the Wild Side: Changing Environmental Law', was held in November.  Another earth jurisprudence meeting, a talk and discussion on 'Law and Governance from an Earth-Centred Perspective', was also held in November.

2007 events [ edit ] "Earth Jurisprudence: Defining the Field and Claiming the Promise" , a three-day colloquium on the principles and implications of the emerging field of Earth Jurisprudence. Cormac Cullinan of EnAct International, South Africa, Thomas Linzey and Richard Grossman both of Community Environmental Legal Defense Fund, Pennsylvania, and Liz Hosken of Gaia Foundation, London, are amongst the speakers at the new Centre for Earth Jurisprudence in Florida, USA, April 2007.

UK conference and workshop, September 2007, entitled, "A 'Wild Law' Response to Climate Change".  A participatory event to develop a practical approach for applying Wild Law principles which are already helping shift legal processes in the US and South Africa. Organised by UK Environmental Law Association, in partnership with the Environmental Law Foundation and the Gaia Foundation, with funding from the Body Shop Foundation.  Internationally renowned speakers will include Andrew Kimbrell, Executive Director of the Center for Food Safety , Pennsylvania, who helped win a Supreme Court case in the US on climate change; Cormac Cullinan, the South African lawyer and author of Wild Law ; and Peter Roderick, Director of the Climate Justice Programme UK, a barrister with twenty years' experience in private practise, the oil industry, academia and the public interest environmental sector, and was Friends of the Earth 's lawyer in London from 1996.  Held at a conference centre in Derbyshire, UK.

References: UKELA next events.

An Earth Jurisprudence conference held in the US in February 2008, in collaboration with the new Center for Earth Jurisprudence, and with students from Barry University Law School and St. Thomas University Law School .

Australia has a very active Earth jurisprudence and 'wild law' movement.  The first wild law conference in Australia was held in Adelaide, South Australia in 2009 and a second conference was held in Wollongong, New South Wales, in 2010.  A third Wild Law conference was organised in 2011 in Brisbane, Queensland and at that time a core group of Earth jurisprudence advocates formed the Australian Earth Laws Alliance .

Classes being taught in law schools [ edit ] Barry University School of Law initiated a course in earth jurisprudence during 2007.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Common heritage of humanity Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Earth Charter Rights of nature Scale (analytical tool) Anthropogenic metabolism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Law center's first case: Saving the planet" .

Miami Herald . May 14, 2006. Archived from the original on September 22, 2015.

Earth Jurisprudence is premised on the concept that Law and governance is meant to protect the well-being of the planet and all components of the Earth ^ Discovering the meaning of Earth jurisprudence . Legalbrief. August 27, 2002.

^ Mike Bell (2003).

Thomas Berry and an Earth Jurisprudence: An Exploratory Essay . Vol. 19.

{{ cite book }} : |magazine= ignored ( help ) ^ Mike Bell (2003).

"Thomas Berry and an Earth Jurisprudence: An Exploratory Essay" .

The Trumpeter . Vol. 19, no. 1.

^ "EARTH JURISPRUDENCE SYLLABUS" (PDF) .

www.earthjuris.org . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

Literature [ edit ] Cullinan, C (2003), Wild Law: A Manifesto for Earth Justice , Green Books, Totnes, Devon, ISBN 1-903998-35-2 Simon Boyle, 'On thin ice' , The Guardian newspaper, London, November 2006 Stephan Harding, 'Earthly rights' , The Guardian newspaper, London, April 2007 Silver Donald Cameron , 'When does a tree have rights?' Archived 2023-01-31 at the Wayback Machine , The Chronicle Herald (Halifax, Nova Scotia), January, 2007 Cormac Cullinan, 'If Nature Had Rights' Archived 2014-02-16 at the Wayback Machine , Orion (magazine) , USA, January 2008.

Related reading [ edit ] Abram, D (1996), The Spell of the Sensuous , Vintage Books, New York Berry, T (1999), The Great Work: Our Way into the Future , Bell Tower, New York Berry, T (2002), 'Rights of the Earth: Recognising the Rights of All Living Things' - Resurgence , No. 214, September/October 2002 Berry, T (1996), Every Being Has Rights, 23rd Annual E. F. Schumacher Lectures, Stockbridge, Massachusetts Berry, T, Swimme, B (1992) The Universe Story: From the Primordial Flaring Forth to the Ecozoic Era - A Celebration of the Unfolding of the Cosmos , Harper Collins, New York Cullinan, C (2002) 'Justice For All: Human Governance Must Be Consistent With Universal laws' - Resurgence , No. 214, September/October 2002 Gardner, J (2004) Human Rights and Human Obligations - Lecture at the International PEN Congress in Tromsø, Norway Reichel-Dolmatoff, G (1994) The Forest Within: The World-View of the Tukano Amazonian Indians , Green Books, Totnes Reichel-Dolmatoff, G (1997) Rainforest Shamans: Essays on the Tukano Indians of the Northwest Amazon , Green Books, Totnes Rühs, N.; Jones, A (2016) The Implementation of Earth Jurisprudence through Substantive Constitutional Rights of Nature Sustainability , 8, 174.

Reid, D (2001) 'Earth Jurisprudence: What Lessons Can Be Learned from Celtic Influences on Scottish Law?' Presentation to Technical Session on Wilderness and Jurisprudence at the 7th World Wilderness Congress , Port Elizabeth, South Africa Roldán Ortega, R (2000) Indigenous Peoples of Colombia and the Law: A Critical Approach to the Study of Past and Present Situations , COAMA, Bogotá, Tercer Mundo Editores Stutzin, G (2002) 'Nature's Rights: Justice Requires that Nature Be Recognised As a Legal Entity' - Resurgence , No. 210, January / February 2002. Godofredo Stutzin was 1990 winner of The United Nations Environment Program ( UNEP )'s Global 500 Roll of Honour which recognises the environmental achievements of individuals and organizations around the world External links [ edit ] Center for Earth Jurisprudence v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Earth_jurisprudence&oldid=1303918231 " Categories : Environmental law Philosophy of law Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia references cleanup from March 2021 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 21:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Earth jurisprudence 2 languages Add topic

