Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contemporary definition 3 Uses in art history 4 Formalism in Other Disciplines 5 Topics Related to Formalism (art) 6 Sources 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Formalism (art) 14 languages العربية Català Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Italiano עברית Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of art by analyzing and comparing form and style In art history , formalism is the study of art by analyzing and comparing form and style . Its discussion also includes the way objects are made and their purely visual or material aspects. In painting, formalism emphasizes compositional elements such as color, line, shape, texture, and other perceptual aspects rather than content, meaning, or the historical and social context. At its extreme, formalism in art history posits that everything necessary to comprehending a work of art is contained within the work of art. The context of the work, including the reason for its creation, the historical background, and the life of the artist, that is, its conceptual aspect is considered to be external to the artistic medium itself, and therefore of secondary importance.

History [ edit ] The historical origin of the modern form of the question of aesthetic formalism is usually dated to Immanuel Kant and the writing of his third Critique where Kant states: "Every form of the objects of sense is either figure ( Gestalt ) or play ( Spiel ). In the latter case it is either play of figures or the mere play of sensations. The charm ( Reiz ) of colors... may be added, but the delineations ( Zeichnung ) in the... composition ( Komposition )... constitute the proper object of the pure judgment of taste." [ 1 ] The philosopher Donald Crawford has summarized Kant's position stating: "Thus, for Kant, form consists of the spatial... organization of elements: figure, shape, or delineation... In the parts of the Critique of Judgment in which form is emphasized as the essential aspect of beauty, Kant is consistently a pure formalist." [ 2 ] Contemporary definition [ edit ] Nick Zangwill has defined formalism in art as referring to those properties "that are determined solely by sensory or physical properties—so long as the physical properties in question are not relations to other things and other times." [ 3 ] The philosopher and architect Branko Mitrovic (philosopher) has defined formalism in art and architecture as "the doctrine that states that the aesthetic qualities of works of visual art derive from the visual and spatial properties." [ 4 ] According to the observation that works of art can in general contain formal properties and nonformal properties, the philosopher Nick Zangwill has delineated three types of formalism as they are encountered at the turn of the 21st century. First, Zangwill identifies extreme formalists who think "that all works of art are purely formal works—where a work is purely formal if all its aesthetic properties are formal aesthetic properties," then he defines anti-formalist thinkers as those who "think that no works of art have formal aesthetic properties." [ 5 ] The third type which Zangwill identifies as representing the transition of the philosophy of aesthetics into the 21st century is that of moderate formalism , where its principal exponents defend the principle "that all the aesthetic properties of works of art in a select class are formal, and second, that although many works of art outside that class have nonformal aesthetic properties, many of those works also have important formal aesthetic properties that must not be ignored." [ 5 ] The philosopher Michalle Gal has offered a moderate version of formalism, entitled "Deep Formalism", which is a symbolic formalism based on philosophical aestheticism. The artwork is defined by her as deep form: "a form steeped in content that cannot be extracted from it. Artistic content, since it has no existence or sense apart from the form, cannot actually be referred to, other than speculatively. The content seals the form in an opaque, non-reflective, productive symbol." [ 6 ] Here she introduces a broad concept of symbol, an opaque-productive symbol: one that is not transparent to preconceived or predetermined referents and meanings, but rather produces new ones.

Uses in art history [ edit ] A formal analysis is an academic method in art history and criticism for analyzing works of art : "In order to perceive style, and understand it, art historians use 'formal analysis'. This means they describe things very carefully. These descriptions, which may include subjective vocabulary, are always accompanied by illustrations, so that there can be no doubt about what exists objectively".

[ 7 ] Formalism in Other Disciplines [ edit ] Formalism (literature) Formalism (music) Formalism (philosophy) New Formalism Progressive music Russian formalism Topics Related to Formalism (art) [ edit ] Abstract expressionism Josef Albers Color field painting Elements of art Geometric abstraction Hard-edge painting Lyrical Abstraction Minimalism Op Art Post-modernism Post-painterly abstraction Washington Color School Sources [ edit ] Bell, Clive.

Art.

New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company Publishers. 1914.

Project Gutenberg [ full citation needed ] Denis, Maurice. 'Definition of Neo-Traditionism.' Art and Criticism.

August 1890.

[ full citation needed ] Greenberg, Clement. "Towards a Newer Laocoön." Partisan Review, 7 (July-August 1940): 296-310.

[ full citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Kant.

Critique of Judgment . Section 14.8.

^ Donald Crawford, Kant's Aesthetic Theory (Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press, 1974), p. 100.

^ Nick Zangwill, The Metaphysics of Beauty (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2001), p. 56, ISBN 0801438209 .

^ Branko Mitrović, Philosophy for architects (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, [2011]), p. 51.

^ a b Zangwill 2001, p. 84.

^ Gal, Michalle (2015).

Aestheticism: Deep Formalism and the Emergence of Modernist Aesthetics . Peter Lang AG. p. 14.

doi : 10.3726/978-3-0351-0787-6 .

ISBN 9783035199925 .

^ Review by: Clemency Chase Coggins of The Uses of Style in Archaeology edited by Margaret W. Conkey and Christine A. Hastorf, p. 233, Journal of Field Archaeology , Vol. 19, No. 2 (Summer, 1992), pp. 232–34, Maney Publishing, JSTOR External links [ edit ] "Aesthetic Formalism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Formalism_(art)&oldid=1225799734 " Categories : Aesthetics Visual arts theory Art history Modern art Formalism (aesthetics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2014 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 26 May 2024, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Formalism (art) 14 languages Add topic

