Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geopolitical situation and background Toggle Geopolitical situation and background subsection 1.1 Influence of the Italian Renaissance 2 Renaissance in the Low Countries Toggle Renaissance in the Low Countries subsection 2.1 Art 2.2 Architecture and sculpture 2.3 Music 2.4 Literature 2.5 Science 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Political situation 3.2 Arts 4 References Toggle the table of contents Renaissance in the Low Countries 8 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Esperanto Nederlands Português Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dutch Renaissance ) Cultural period Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e The Renaissance in the Low Countries was a cultural period in the Northern Renaissance that took place in around the 16th century in the Low Countries (corresponding to modern-day Belgium , the Netherlands and French Flanders ).

Culture in the Low Countries at the end of the 15th century was influenced by the Italian Renaissance , through trade via Bruges , which made Flanders wealthy. Its nobles commissioned artists who became known across Europe. In science, the anatomist Andreas Vesalius led the way; in cartography , Gerardus Mercator 's map assisted explorers and navigators. In art, Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting went from the strange work of Hieronymus Bosch to the everyday life of Pieter Brueghel the Elder . In architecture, music and literature too, the culture of the Low Countries moved into the Renaissance style.

Geopolitical situation and background [ edit ] Map showing the political situation in the Low Countries between 1556 and 1648.

In 1500, the Seventeen Provinces were in a personal union under the Burgundian Dukes , and with the Flemish cities as centers of gravity, culturally and economically formed one of the richest parts of Europe. During the course of the century the region also experienced significant changes.

Humanism and Reformation led to a rebellion against the Spanish rule of Philip II of Spain and the start of the religious war . By the end of the 16th century the Northern and Southern Netherlands were effectively split. While this fracture was reflected in the visual arts by the Dutch Golden Age in the north and the Flemish Baroque in the south, other areas of thought remained associated with 16th-century currents of Renaissance thought. Gradually, the balance of power shifted away from the Southern Netherlands, which remained under Spanish authority, to the emerging Dutch Republic .

[ 1 ] Two factors determined the fate of the region in the 16th century. The first was the union with the kingdom of Spain through the 1496 marriage of Philip the Handsome of Burgundy and Juana of Castile . Their son, Charles V, born in Ghent , would inherit the largest empire in the world, and the Netherlands , although a prominent part of the empire, became dependent on a large foreign power.

A second factor included religious developments. The Middle Ages gave way to new modes of religious thinking.

Devotio Moderna practices, for example, were particularly strong in the region, while the 16th-century criticisms of the Catholic Church that spread throughout Europe also reached the Low Countries.

Humanists such as Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam were critical but remained loyal to the church. However, the spread of the Protestant Reformation , started by Martin Luther in 1517, eventually led to outright war. The Reformation, particularly the ideas of John Calvin , gained significant support in the Low Countries, and following the 1566 iconoclastic outbreaks Spain attempted to quell the tide and maintain the authority of the post-Tridentine Church through force by installing Fernando Álvarez de Toledo, Duke of Alba .

[ 2 ] The repression that followed led to the Dutch Revolt , the beginning of the Eighty Years War , and the establishment of the Dutch Republic in the northern provinces. Subsequently, the Southern Netherlands became a bastion for the Counter Reformation , while Calvinism was the main religion of those in power in the Dutch Republic.

Influence of the Italian Renaissance [ edit ] Desiderius Erasmus in 1523 Trade in the port of Bruges and the textile industry, mostly in Ghent, turned Flanders into the wealthiest part of Northern Europe at the end of the 15th century. The Burgundian court dwelled mostly in Bruges, Ghent and Brussels . The nobles and rich traders were able to commission artists, creating a class of highly skilled painters and musicians who were admired and requested around the continent.

[ 3 ] This led to frequent exchanges between the Low Countries and Northern Italy. Examples are Italian architects Tommaso Vincidor and Alessandro Pasqualini , who worked in the Low Countries for most of their careers, Flemish painter Jan Gossaert , whose visit to Italy in 1508 in the company of Philip of Burgundy left a deep impression, [ 1 ] musician Adrian Willaert who made Venice into the most important musical centre of its time [ 3 ] (see Venetian School ) and Giambologna , a Flemish sculptor who spent his most productive years in Florence .

Before 1500, the Italian Renaissance had little or no influence above the Alps. After this Renaissance influences moved northward, but unlike the Italian Renaissance , Gothic elements remained important. The revival of the classical period is also not a central theme like in Italy, the "rebirth" shows itself more as a return to nature and earthly beauty.

[ 3 ] Renaissance in the Low Countries [ edit ] Art [ edit ] Main articles: Early Netherlandish painting and Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting Hell , the right panel from the triptych The Garden of Earthly Delights by Hieronymus Bosch Landscape with the Fall of Icarus after Pieter Bruegel the Elder Fifteenth-century painting in the Low Countries still shows strong religious influences, contrary to the Germanic painting. Even after 1500, when Renaissance influences begin to show, the influence of the masters from the previous century leads to a largely religious and narrative style of painting.

The first painter showing the marks of the new era is Hieronymus Bosch . His work is strange and full of seemingly irrational imagery, making it difficult to interpret.

[ 1 ] Most of all it seems surprisingly modern, introducing a world of dreams that highly contrasts with the traditional style of the Flemish masters of his day.

After 1550, the Flemish and Dutch painters begin to show more interest in nature and in beauty an sich , leading to a style that incorporates Renaissance elements, but remains very far from the elegant lightness of Italian Renaissance art , [ 3 ] and directly leads to the themes of the great Flemish and Dutch Baroque painters: landscapes, still lifes and genre painting – scenes from everyday life.

[ 1 ] This evolution is seen in the works of Joachim Patinir and Pieter Aertsen , but the true genius among these painters was Pieter Brueghel the Elder , well known for his depictions of nature and everyday life, showing a preference for the natural condition of man, choosing to depict the peasant instead of the prince.

The Landscape with the Fall of Icarus , now thought to be an early copy, combines several elements of northern Renaissance painting. It hints at the renewed interest for antiquity (the Icarus legend), but the hero Icarus is hidden away in the background. The main actors in the painting are nature itself and, most prominently, the peasant, who does not even look up from his plough when Icarus falls. Brueghel shows man as an anti-hero, comical and sometimes grotesque.

[ 3 ] Architecture and sculpture [ edit ] As in painting, Renaissance architecture took some time to reach the Low Countries, and did not entirely supplant Gothic elements.

[ 4 ] The most important sculptor in the Southern Netherlands was Giambologna , who spent most of his career in Italy. An architect directly influenced by the Italian masters was Cornelis Floris de Vriendt , who designed the city hall of Antwerp , finished in 1564.

Sluter, The Well of Moses , 1395-1405 In sculpture, however, 15th-century Netherlandish artists, while adhering to Christian subjects, developed techniques and a naturalistic style which compares favorably to the work of early-Renaissance Italian contemporaries such as Donatello .

Claus Sluter (fl. ~1400) produced works such as the Well of Moses with a dynamism almost unknown at the turn of the 15th century; and Dutch-born Nikolaus Gerhaert van Leyden (b. ~1420) made sculptures such as "Man Meditating", which even today appear more "modern" than does Italian Quattrocento carving.

Gerhaert, Man Meditating , 1467 In the early-17th century Dutch Republic , Hendrick de Keyser plays an important role in developing the Amsterdam Renaissance style, not slavishly following the classical style but incorporating many decorative elements, giving a result that could also be categorized as Mannerism .

Hans Vredeman de Vries was another important name, primarily as a garden architect.

Music [ edit ] Main article: Franco-Flemish School Orlande de Lassus leading a chamber ensemble, painted by Hans Mielich Although there is no reference to antiquity, there is a clear Flemish "Renaissance consciousness", as indicated by the words of Flemish theorist Johannes Tinctoris , who said of these Franco-Flemish composers: "Although it is beyond belief, nothing worth listening to had been composed before their time".

[ 1 ] Josquin des Prez was the most celebrated composer during the High Renaissance , and during his career enjoyed the patronage of three popes. Equally at ease in secular and religious music.

[ 1 ] Other important composers from the Low Countries were Guillaume Dufay , Johannes Ockeghem , Jacob Clemens non Papa and Adrian Willaert .

Orlande de Lassus , a Fleming who had lived in Italy as a youth and spent most of his career in Munich , was the leading composer of the late Renaissance.

Literature [ edit ] See also: Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age literature Antwerp City Hall (finished in 1564) In the middle of the 16th century, a group of rhetoricians (see Medieval Dutch literature ) in Brabant and Flanders attempted to put new life into the stereotyped forms of the preceding age by introducing in original composition the new-found branches of Latin and Greek poetry. The leader of these men was Johan Baptista Houwaert , who was led by an unbounded love of classical and mythological fancy.

[ 5 ] The most important genre was music publishing, especially psalms . The Souterliedekens publication is one of the most important sources for the reconstruction of Renaissance folksongs. Later publishing was heavily influenced by the rebellion against the Spanish: heroic battle songs and political ballads ridiculing the Spanish occupants.

Best remembered of the writers is Philips van Marnix, lord of Sint-Aldegonde , who was one of the leading spirits in the war of Dutch independence. He wrote a satire on the Roman Catholic Church, started to work on a Bible translation and allegedly wrote the lyrics to the Dutch national anthem .

Other important names are Dirck Volckertszoon Coornhert , Hendrick Laurensz. Spieghel and Roemer Visscher . Inevitably, their works and career were very much determined by the struggle between Reformation and the Catholic Church.

Science [ edit ] Gerardus Mercator 's map of Europe, 1554 The new age presents itself in science as well. Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius 's life typically shows both the new possibilities and the troubles that came with them. He delivered ground-breaking work on human anatomy, after centuries of disregard for it. This earned him great respect from some, but also caused several enquiries into his methods ( dissection of the human body) and the religious implications of his work.

While Vesalius performed ground-breaking work in rediscovering the human body, Gerardus Mercator , as one of the leading cartographers of his time, did the same for rediscovering the outside world. Mercator too came into trouble with the Church because of his beliefs, and spent several months in jail after a conviction for heresy .

Both scientists' lives show how the Renaissance scientist is not afraid of challenging what has been taken for granted for centuries, and how this leads to problems with the all-powerful Catholic Church.

Though the invention of the printing press by Laurens Janszoon Coster in the 1430s appears to be a romantic notion, the Low Countries had an early start in printing. By 1470 a printing press was in use in Utrecht , where the first dated extant book was printed in 1473, while the first book in the Dutch language was the 1477 Delft Bible. By 1481 the Low Countries had printing shops in 21 cities and towns.

[ 6 ] Famous publishing houses like those of Christoffel Plantijn in Antwerp from 1555 on, Petrus Phalesius the Elder in Leuven from 1553, and the House of Elzevir in Leiden from around 1580 turned the Low Countries into a regional center of publishing.

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance in Belgium .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance in the Netherlands .

English Renaissance French Renaissance German Renaissance Political situation [ edit ] Burgundian Netherlands Seventeen Provinces Dutch Republic – Dutch Golden Age Eighty Years' War Arts [ edit ] Flemish painting Romanism (painting) List of Flemish painters List of Dutch painters References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Janson, H.W.; Janson, Anthony F. (1997).

History of Art (5th, rev. ed.). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

ISBN 0-8109-3442-6 .

^ Kamen, Henry (2005).

Spain, 1469–1714, A Society of Conflict (3rd ed.). Harlow, United Kingdom: Pearson Education.

ISBN 0-582-78464-6 .

^ a b c d e Heughebaert, H.; Defoort, A.; Van Der Donck, R. (1998).

Artistieke opvoeding . Wommelgem, Belgium: Den Gulden Engel bvba.

ISBN 90-5035-222-7 .

^ Rietbergen, P. J. A. N. (2000).

A Short History of the Netherlands: From Prehistory to the Present Day (4th ed.). Amersfoort: Bekking. p. 59.

ISBN 90-6109-440-2 .

OCLC 52849131 .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Gosse, Edmund William (1911). " Dutch Literature § Houwaert ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 721.

^ E. L. Eisenstein: The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe, Cambridge, 1993 pp.13–17, quoted in: Angus Maddison : Growth and Interaction in the World Economy: The Roots of Modernity, Washington 2005, p.17f.

v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Early modern Europe Overviews Eras Renaissance Outline High Renaissance Early modern period Early modern Europe Elizabethan era Age of Discovery Baroque Age of Enlightenment International relations (1648–1814) By country Northern Europe England Papacy France Germany Low Countries Events Political Fall of Constantinople Decline of the Byzantine Empire Technological: Printing Revolution Intellectual: Scientific Revolution Social history Concepts Absolute monarchy Journalism of Early Modern Europe The General Crisis Peasant Wars Politics Countries Holy Roman Empire Free imperial city France Germany Britain British Empire Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic Seventeen Provinces Economic history Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Kingdom of Bohemia Lands of the Bohemian Crown Protestant Union Grand Duchy of Tuscany Leaders Habsburg monarchy England House of Stuart House of Tudor France House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy in France Ancien Régime Louis XIV Wars French Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Cabinet wars Second Hundred Years' War War of the Spanish Succession Seven Years' War Diplomacy French–Habsburg rivalry Peace of Westphalia Treaties of Nijmegen Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Religion Overviews Christianity in the modern era Proto-Protestantism Bohemian Reformation Hussites History of European Jews in the Middle Ages Haskalah Islamic world contributions to Medieval Europe Protestant Reformation Ninety-five Theses Calvinism Huguenots English Lutheranism Scottish Switzerland Radical Counter-Reformation European wars of religion Academic fields Philosophy Philosophy: Renaissance philosophy Renaissance humanism Northern Europe Greek scholars in the Renaissance Science Science in the Renaissance Works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Authors : Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Matteo Palmieri Leonardo da Vinci Arts General Renaissance art Painting: Italian painting Florentine painting Venetian painting Dutch and Flemish painting Early Netherlandish painting End of period Great Divergence Industrial Revolution Age of Revolution French Revolution Coalition Wars Revolutionary Napoleonic Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 See also Europe Art of Europe Genetic history of Europe History of the European Union Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe World History of Western civilization History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region Human history • History of philosophy • History of Europe NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐fvgbc
Cached time: 20250812014348
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.410 seconds
Real time usage: 0.546 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1684/1000000
Revision size: 16864/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 84019/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1604/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 52152/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.230/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5598940/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  400.754      1 -total
 30.61%  122.679      1 Template:Reflist
 22.17%   88.860      4 Template:Cite_book
 18.18%   72.875      1 Template:Renaissance
 17.75%   71.121      1 Template:Sidebar
 16.06%   64.375      1 Template:Short_description
 15.38%   61.637      2 Template:Commons_category
 14.84%   59.473      2 Template:Sister_project
 14.36%   57.546      2 Template:Side_box
  9.84%   39.415     10 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4481033:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014348 and revision id 1301189996. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_in_the_Low_Countries&oldid=1301189996 " Categories : Renaissance in the Low Countries Northern Renaissance Dutch Republic History of Flanders Habsburg Netherlands Spanish Netherlands Dutch Renaissance painters Flemish Renaissance painters Renaissance by country 16th century in the Dutch Republic 16th century in the Habsburg Netherlands 16th century in France 16th century in the Netherlands Early modern history of France Early modern history of the Netherlands Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance in the Low Countries 8 languages Add topic

