Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Burning 2 Cause 3 Backdrafts and flashovers 4 In popular culture 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Backdraft 20 languages Български Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Română Русский Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Backdraft (disambiguation) .

Rapid or explosive burning of superheated gasses in a fire A backdraft ( North American English ), backdraught ( British English ) [ 1 ] or smoke explosion is the abrupt burning of superheated gases in a fire caused when oxygen rapidly enters a hot, oxygen-depleted environment; for example, when a window or door to an enclosed space is opened or broken. Backdrafts are typically seen as a blast of smoke and/or flame out of an opening of a building. Backdrafts present a serious threat to firefighters .  There is some debate concerning whether backdrafts should be considered a type of flashover .

A firefighter demonstrates the behavior of a backdraft during live-fire training Explosive combustion of hydrogen . Escaping hydrogen is ignited, while the removal of the bottom cap allows air to enter. Eventually, the air mixes with the hydrogen inside the container, causing an explosion. A similar process occurs during a backdraft, with the introduction of oxygen and mixing with unburnt gases causing abrupt or even explosive combustion Burning [ edit ] When material is heated enough, it begins to break down into smaller compounds, including flammable or even explosive gas, typically hydrocarbons . This is called pyrolysis , and does not require oxygen. If oxygen is also provided, then the hydrocarbons can combust, starting a fire.

If material undergoing pyrolysis is later given sufficient oxygen, the hydrocarbons will ignite, and therefore, combustion takes place.

Cause [ edit ] Incompletely-combusted smoke can ignite explosively.

[ 2 ] A backdraft can occur when a compartment fire has little or no ventilation. Due to this, little or no oxygen can flow into the compartment. Then, because fires reduce oxygen, the oxygen concentration decreases. When the oxygen concentration becomes too low to support combustion, some or all of the combustion switches to pyrolysis. However, the hydrocarbons and smoke (primarily particulate matter ) remain at a temperature hot enough to auto-ignite . If oxygen is then re-introduced to the compartment, e.g. by opening a door or window to a closed room, while the gasses are still hot enough to auto-ignite, combustion will restart, often abruptly or even explosively, as the gasses are heated by the combustion and expand rapidly because of the rapidly increasing temperature, combined with the energy released from combustion.

The colour and movement of smoke is used by firefighters to infer fire conditions, including the risk of backdraft.

[ 2 ] Characteristic warning signs of a backdraft include yellow or brown smoke, smoke which exits small holes in puffs (a sort of breathing effect) and is often found around the edges of doors and windows, and windows which appear brown or black when viewed from the exterior due to soot from incomplete combustion. This is an indication that the room lacks enough oxygen to permit oxidation of the soot particles. Firefighters often look to see if there is soot on the inside of windows and in any cracks in the window (caused e.g. by the heat). The windows may also have a slight vibration due to varying pressure within the compartment due to intermittent combustion.

If firefighters discover a room sucking air into itself, for example through a crack, they generally evacuate immediately, because this is a strong indication that a backdraft is imminent. Due to pressure differences, puffs of smoke are sometimes drawn back into the enclosed space from which they emanated, which is how the term backdraft originated.

Backdrafts are very dangerous, [ 3 ] often surprising even experienced firefighters. The most common tactic used by firefighters to defuse a potential backdraft is to ventilate a room from its highest point, allowing the heat and smoke to escape without igniting.

Common signs of imminent backdraft include a sudden inrush of air upon creating an opening into a closed compartment, no visible signs of flame in a hot compartment (fire above its upper flammability limit ), "pulsing" smoke plumes from openings, and auto-ignition of hot gases at openings as they mix with oxygen in the surrounding air.

Backdrafts and flashovers [ edit ] ISO 13943 [ 4 ] broadly defines flashover as a "transition to a state of total surface involvement in a fire of combustible materials within an enclosure." This definition embraces several different scenarios and includes backdrafts, but there is considerable disagreement about categorizing backdrafts as flashovers.

[ 5 ] In common usage, the term flashover describes the near-simultaneous ignition of material caused by heat attaining the autoignition temperature of the combustible material and gases in an enclosure. Flashovers according to this narrower definition, i.e. those caused by rising temperatures, would not be considered backdrafts since backdrafts are caused by the introduction of oxygen into an enclosed space with conditions already suitable for ignition, and are thus caused by chemical change.

[ 6 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Backdrafts were publicized by the 1991 movie Backdraft , in which a serial arsonist in Chicago uses them as a means of assassinating conspirators in a scam.

In the film adaptation of Stephen King's 1408 , the protagonist Mike Enslin induces one as a last-ditch effort to kill the room.

The term is also used and is the title of a scene in the 2012 video game Root Double: Before Crime * After Days .

In the second book of the light novel series Imperial Reincarnation: I Came, I Saw, I Survived, the character Carmine uses a magically produced backdraft to defend himself against an assassination attempt.

References [ edit ] ^ "Control measure - Understand signs and symptoms of backdraught" .

www.ukfrs.com . Fire Central Programme Office. 1 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ a b Brouwer, Ed (6 June 2008).

"Trainer's Corner: The science of reading smoke" .

www.firefightingincanada.com . Firefighting in Canada.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2019 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

^ Hall, Richard & Adams, Barbara (1998).

Essentials of firefighting (4th ed.). International Fire Service Training Association.

ISBN 0-87939-149-9 .

^ "ISO FDIS 13943 Vocabulary" . International Organization for Standardization.

Archived from the original on 2012-11-08 . Retrieved 2011-06-11 .

^ "Rapid Fire Progress" (PDF) . firetactics.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-23 . Retrieved 2011-06-11 .

^ Dunn, Vincent, Deputy Chief, F. D. N. Y. (Ret.).

"Backdraft and flashover; what's the difference?" (PDF) . vincentdunn.com . Retrieved 2011-06-11 .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] A backdraft (still image and video) (in Swedish) Slow Motion Backdraft video White Smoke Warning Daniel's Block Fire-BACKDRAFT v t e Fire History Control of fire by early humans Historic fires Native American use of fire in ecosystems Science Chain reaction Combustion Dust explosion Fire ecology Fire piston Flash point Fire protection Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Components Fuel Oxygen Heat Flame Smoke Individual fires By type By country By year Crime Arson Death by burning People Pyromanias Child Firefighter Culture Cremation Fire worship Terra preta Organizations International Flame Research Foundation The Combustion Institute Other Wildfires List of wildfires Backdraft Firefighting Firestorm Fire whirl Blue lava Ash Slash-and-burn Fire making Category Commons Wiktionary v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Backdraft&oldid=1305218372 " Categories : Combustion Fire Fire protection Firefighting Public safety Thermodynamics Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Swedish-language sources (sv) This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 19:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Backdraft 20 languages Add topic

