Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Homosexuality 3 References 4 Further reading (Italian) Toggle the table of contents Benedetto Varchi 11 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Latina مصرى Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian humanist, historian and poet Benedetto Varchi, by Titian Benedetto Varchi ( Italian pronunciation: [beneˈdetto ˈvarki] ; 1502/1503 – 1565) was an Italian humanist , historian , and poet .

Biography [ edit ] Born in Florence to a family that had originated at Montevarchi , he frequented the neoplatonic academy that Bernardo Rucellai organized in his garden, the Orti Oricellari ; there, in spite of the fact that Rucellai was married to the elder sister of Lorenzo de' Medici , republican ideals circulated, in the context of revived classical culture, that culminated in a plot in 1513 to subvert Medici rule in Florence. At Pisa, Varchi studied to become a notary.

With his return to Florence, he fought in the defence of the temporarily revived Republic of Florence , during the siege by the Mediceans and imperialists in 1530, and was exiled after the surrender of the city; he spent time at Padua (1537), where he was a protégé of the émigré Piero Strozzi and at Bologna (1540).   In 1536 he took part in  Strozzi's unsuccessful expedition against Medicean rule, but seven years later Varchi was called back to Florence by Cosimo I , who gave him a pension and appointed him one of the three official historians of Florence along with Giovanni Battista Adriani and Scipione Ammirato .

[ 1 ] His Storia fiorentina (16 vol.) covers the period from 1527 to 1538, though it was so frank it was not published in Florence until 1721. Varchi also wrote a number of plays, poems, dialogues, and translations from the classics.

[ 2 ] With his return to Medici patronage, he became a member of the Accademia fiorentina , occupied with studies of linguistics, literary criticism, esthetics, and philosophy, but also, as became a Renaissance humanist in botany and alchemy. His tract L'Hercolano , in the form of a dialogue between the writer and a conte Ercolano , discussed the Tuscan dialect as it was spoken at Florence, in the vulgar rather than in Latin, an innovation in works of linguistics; it was published posthumously, in 1570.

[ 3 ] He wrote a comedy La Suocera ("The Mother-in-Law").

Towards the end of his life, he had a spiritual crisis and took holy orders.

In Ezra Pound 's The Cantos , Varchi is mentioned with approbation (Canto V) for his honesty as a historian who did not try to fill in gaps in a historical record just to make that record neat. Rather, he was willing to admit that he did not know or that the motives or the events surrounding a particular incident could not be absolutely determined. Pound gives as an example of Varchi's honesty his investigation—for his history of Florence—of the murder of Alessandro de' Medici . Varchi admitted that after all his attempts to uncover the facts he could not decide on the motives of Alessandro's murderer ( Lorenzino de' Medici , Alessandro's cousin).

Homosexuality [ edit ] In his time, Varchi was notorious for his many sonnets to young boys. Though his loves were not always reciprocated, and despite his denunciations of men who engaged in "filthy loves", he was criticized by his contemporaries for his attachments to young boys. One critic mocked him in a satire: "O father Varchi, new Socrates ...  his arms open and his trousers down, this is how your Bembo is waiting for you in the Elysian Fields ". Another comments on his legacy, "But since he was always inclined to boy love ...  he greatly lessened the reputation that would have been rightfully appropriate." [ 4 ] In 1545, Varchi was arrested and tried for pederasty, and was eventually pardoned by Cosimo de' Medici upon the intercession of his many friends.

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ De Gaetano, Armand L. (1976).

Giambattista Gelli and the Florentine Academy: The rebellion against Latin . Firenze: Leo S. Olschki . p. 107.

ISBN 978-8822222251 .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Varchi, Benedetto ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 905.

^ Ercolano, dialogo nel qual si ragiona generalmente delle lingue e in particolare della fiorentina e della toscana , Giunti, Firenze 1570.

^ Homosexuality & Civilization , Louis Crompton , pages 277-8 ^ Encyclopedia of Italian literary studies By Gaetana Marrone, Paolo Puppa, Luca Somigli; p.1949 An extensive bibliography may be found at Italian Wikipedia: "Benedetto Varchi" Further reading (Italian) [ edit ] Due lezioni Il discorso della bellezza e della grazia Rime Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benedetto_Varchi&oldid=1299136824 " Categories : 1500s births 1565 deaths 16th-century Italian historians 16th-century Italian male writers Italian male non-fiction writers Italian gay writers Italian LGBTQ poets Gay poets Writers from Florence 16th-century Italian LGBTQ people Italian Renaissance humanists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 19:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benedetto Varchi 11 languages Add topic

