Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Physical explanation 2 Quantification 3 History 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Dichromatism 5 languages العربية Hrvatski 日本語 Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For colour blindness, see Dichromacy . For dimorphic colouration, see Sexual dimorphism .

Dichromatism (or polychromatism) is a phenomenon where a material or solution's hue is dependent on both the concentration of the absorbing substance and the depth or thickness of the medium traversed.

[ 1 ] In most substances which are not dichromatic, only the brightness and saturation of the colour depend on their concentration and layer thickness.

A drop of pumpkin seed oil on a white plate, showing dichromatism Examples of dichromatic substances are pumpkin seed oil , bromophenol blue , and resazurin .
When the layer of pumpkin seed oil is less than 0.7 mm thick, the oil appears bright green, and in layer thicker than this, it appears bright red.

The phenomenon is related to both the physical chemistry properties of the substance and the physiological response of the human visual system to colour. This combined physicochemical–physiological basis was first explained in 2007.

[ 2 ] In gemstones, dichromatism is sometimes referred to as the 'Usambara effect'.

[ 3 ] Physical explanation [ edit ] Dichromatic properties can be explained by the Beer–Lambert law and by the excitation characteristics of the three types of cone photoreceptors in the human retina . Dichromatism is potentially observable in any substance that has an absorption spectrum with one wide but shallow local minimum and one narrow but deep local minimum. The apparent width of the deep minimum may also be limited by the end of the visible range of human eye; in this case, the true full width may not necessarily be narrow. As the thickness of the substance increases, the perceived hue changes from that defined by the position of the wide-but-shallow minimum (in thin layers) to the hue of the deep-but-narrow minimum (in thick layers).

The absorbance spectrum of pumpkin seed oil has the wide-but-shallow minimum in the green region of the spectrum and deep local minimum in the red region. In thin layers, the absorption at any specific green wavelength is not as low as it is for the red minimum, but a broader band of greenish wavelengths are transmitted, and hence the overall appearance is green. The effect is enhanced by the greater sensitivity to green of the photoreceptors in the human eye, and the narrowing of the red transmittance band by the long-wavelength limit of cone photoreceptor sensitivity.
According to the Beer–Lambert law, when viewing through the coloured substance (and thus ignoring reflection), the proportion of light transmitted at a given wavelength, T , decreases exponentially with thickness t , T = e − at , where a is the absorbance at that wavelength. Let G = e − a G t be the green transmittance and R = e − a R t be the red transmittance. The ratio of the two transmitted intensities is then ( G / R ) = e ( a R - a G ) t . If the red absorbance is less than the green, then as the thickness t increases, so does the ratio of red to green transmitted light, which causes the apparent hue of the colour to switch from green to red.

Quantification [ edit ] The extent of dichromatism of material can be quantified by the Kreft's dichromaticity index (DI). It is defined as the difference in hue angle (Δh ab ) between the colour of the sample at the dilution, where the chroma (colour saturation) is maximal and the colour of four times more diluted (or thinner) and four times more concentrated (or thicker) sample. The two hue angle differences are called dichromaticity index towards lighter (Kreft's DI L ) and
dichromaticity index towards darker (Kreft's DI D ) respectively.

[ 4 ] Kreft's dichromaticity index DI L and DI D for pumpkin oil, which is one of the most dichromatic substances, are −9 and −44, respectively. This means that pumpkin oil changes its colour from green-yellow to orange-red (for 44 degrees in Lab colour space ) when the thickness of the observed layer is increased from cca 0.5 mm to 2 mm; and it changes slightly towards green (for 9 degrees) if its thickness is reduced for 4-fold.

History [ edit ] A record by William Herschel (1738–1822), shows he observed dichromatism with a solution of ferrous sulphate and tincture of nutgall in 1801 when working on an early solar telescope , but he did not recognise the effect.

[ 5 ] External links [ edit ] Kreft Samo & Kreft Marko (2007). Physicochemical and physiological basis of dichromatic colour. Naturwissenschaften, doi: 10.1007/s00114-007-0272-9 References [ edit ] ^ Kennard, T. G.; Howell, D. H. (July 1941).

"Types of coloring in minerals" (PDF) .

American Mineralogist .

26 (07): 405– 421 – via Mineralogical Society of America.

^ Kreft, Samo; Kreft, Marko (2007-11-01).

"Physicochemical and physiological basis of dichromatic colour" .

Naturwissenschaften .

94 (11): 935– 939.

doi : 10.1007/s00114-007-0272-9 .

ISSN 1432-1904 – via Springer Nature Link.

^ Klumb, A. W. (February 2019).

"The Usambara Effect and other colour change effects in gemstones" (PDF) .

Facette . No. 25.

Swiss Gemmological Institute . p. 16.

^ Kreft, S.; Kreft, M. (2009).

"Quantification of dichromatism: a characteristic of color in transparent materials" .

Journal of the Optical Society of America A .

26 (7): 1576– 1581.

Bibcode : 2009JOSAA..26.1576K .

doi : 10.1364/JOSAA.26.001576 .

PMID 19568292 .

^ The History of the Telescope - By Henry C. King - Page 141 v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dichromatism&oldid=1291983793 " Categories : Color appearance phenomena Color Optics This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 15:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dichromatism 5 languages Add topic

