Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forestry 2 Fishing 3 Mining 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents High grading 3 languages العربية Deutsch Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Selective harvesting to remove only valuable items This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "High grading" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In forestry , fishing and mining , high grading refers to the selective harvesting of goods to keep only the most valuable items. The term is frequently associated with fraud, especially in mining.

Forestry [ edit ] In forestry , high grading, also sometimes referred to as selective logging, is a selective type of timber harvesting that removes the highest grade of timber (i.e. the most merchantable stems) in an area of forest. It is sometimes described by the phrase “ cut the best and leave the rest ”, and should not be confused with selection cutting .

Over time, high grading gives rise to forest stands containing stems of lower timber quality. The reduced income from timber can make it harder to fund good silvicultural practices, thereby impacting the economy of non-timber forest products and other activities such as hunting , wildlife watching or hiking . The practice also has an ecological cost, with a direct impact in terms of biodiversity , genetic diversity and species mix. Finally, it may cause forest to become unsafe due to an excessive amount of unmanaged trees at risk falling in a storm .

[ 1 ] High grading can also be a form of fraud on the owner of the trees. Indeed, stumpage rates (the amount paid per a certain volume of wood) are based on the average quality of the wood. By taking only the best timber, the wood cutter obtains wood more valuable than average at the price of average wood.

The opposite of this practice is low grading , where the lower quality trees are periodically harvested, making the genetic stock faster growing and of better timber quality. Such stems might well be taken by use of thinning methods as part of a thinning régime, especially via the thinning from below method.

Fishing [ edit ] High grading is a practice of selectively harvesting fish so that only the best quality fish are brought ashore.  The practice is popular in situations under individual fishing quotas where only a limited number of fish are allowed to be harvested.  Following the letter, but not the spirit of the law, fish are caught, and if not considered optimal, thrown back into the ocean.  The practice of high grading allows fishers to get higher prices for their limited catch but is environmentally destructive because many of the fish returned to the water die.

[ 2 ] This was an issue with the EU regulation of fisheries.

Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall , a celebrity chef , led a campaign against this with a TV show called Hugh´s Fish Fight , which successfully lobbied for a change in EU law to reduce the waste ( discards ) from thrown back fish in sea fishery.

[ 3 ] Mining [ edit ] In mining, high grading refers to mining out the portions of the orebody that has the highest grade of material to be mined. However, it may also refer to the concealment and theft of valuable gold or silver ore by miners for personal profit.  Common in the United States in the late 19th century and early 20th century, [ 4 ] high graders would usually conceal the highest grades of ore they encountered during their work day in a pocket or lunch pail, or within the body, and later attempt to fence it on the black market .

As mining companies became more aware of the growing problem, they built changing stations where they forced the miners to shower after their shift in the mines, making it easier to foil attempts at theft.

“HIGH GRADING AT TONOPAH .” The arrest of four men for high grading took place at Tonopah last Friday morning as the men were coming off shift at the McNamara mine. The men arrested are William Turner, vice president of the Tonopah miners' union ; Tom Conifrey, Tom Cunningham and Patrick Flanigan. They were caught with the rich ore concealed upon their persons, and it is said that nearly a wagonload of ore was recovered from the residences of the high graders. These men have been suspected for a long time, and Friday morning the entire shift was held up and searched. All were lodged in the county jail , and two of them have since given bail . It is announced that they will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law.

— Rhyolite Herald, October 28, 1908 See also [ edit ] Cherry picking (disambiguation) Ecoforestry References [ edit ] ^ Silviculture Concepts and Applications Ralph D. Nyland, Chapter 23 Other Partial Cuttings 2002 ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-01-27 . Retrieved 2015-10-09 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "The Fish Fight Story" .

Fish Fight . Archived from the original on 2012-09-29 . Retrieved 2016-06-05 .

^ Willoughby, Tim (10 December 2010).

"High-grading: Stealthily stealing silver" .

Aspen Times Weekly .

External links [ edit ] History of highgrading in California (mining) v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=High_grading&oldid=1296363421 " Categories : Underground mining Forestry and the environment Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 14:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents High grading 3 languages Add topic

