Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career/Education 3 Contribution to the OED 4 Publications 5 References Toggle the table of contents Richard Charkin Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British publishing executive (born 1949) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Richard Charkin" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biographical article is written like a résumé .

Please help improve it by revising it to be neutral and encyclopedic .

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Charkin in 2016.

Richard Denis Paul Charkin OBE (born 17 June 1949) is a British publishing executive. He has held executive positions at Pergamon Press , Oxford University Press , Reed International / Reed Elsevier and Current Science Group, and is the former Chief Executive of Macmillan Publishers Limited and Executive Director of Verlagsgruppe Georg von Holtzbrinck .

[ 1 ] In 2015, he became President of the International Publishers Association .

[ 2 ] He was Executive Director of Bloomsbury from 2007 to 2018 and is currently President of Bloomsbury China and of John Wisden. He is also a non-executive director of Institute of Physics Publishing , and is Chair of Common Purpose.

He serves on the International Advisory Board of the Frankfurt Book Fair and the Editorial Board of Logos [ 3 ] as well as teaching on the publishing courses at University College London , City University of London , and University of the Arts London .

Charkin is currently visiting professor at the University of the Arts London .

Early life [ edit ] Richard Charkin was born. Charkin lived in a house where academics once lived. He was encouraged by his family to pursue medical school at the Cambridge University Pre-clinical School in 1967. In 1972, Charkin landed his first editorial position as Assistant Editor for George G. Harrap & Co, and later went on dabble in publishing courses and book fairs, which opened his eyes to the world of publishing in genres like trade all the way to academics.

Career/Education [ edit ] Charkin's educational history is extensive – he acquired an MA in Natural Sciences from Trinity College at Cambridge, was a member of the Advanced Management Program at Harvard Business School, and even earned the title of Supernumerary Fellow of Green College at Oxford. Career wise, Charkin has been active in the publishing field since 1972, notable for his 11-year-long run as Bloomsbury Press’ Executive Director as well as his presidency with the IPA and UK PA respectively. Apart from this, Charkin has had a number of senior executive positions at several publishing companies such as Reed International, Macmillan Publishers, and Oxford University Press. As of late, he resides as Bloomsbury China's President, as well as the non-executive director of Liverpool University Press and the Institute of Physics Publishing. He is also a publishing professor at multiple university locations around London, England and has founded a publishing company of his own, called Mensch Publishing.

[ 4 ] Contribution to the OED [ edit ] Charkin's time as both head of reference and managing director at Oxford University Press was incredibly influential to the evolution of the Oxford English Dictionary. Charkin cemented himself as an assertive and confident figure looking to improve both the functional and international purposes of the Press. In 1982, he pitched the idea of abandoning manual editing/publication for a more efficient, computerised editing/publishing system. By 1983, Charkin secured a deal with both IBM and ICC to get the necessary equipment and assistance for the computerisation of the Dictionary. By 1984, Oxford University had approved Charkin and co.’s project, which confirmed the digitised future of the OED. Many members of the Press wondered if Charkin's successful ruminations would lead to the end of the Print, worrying that the introduction of the "New OED" project would far exceed the popularity of the original edition. For the next five years, Charkin and co. worked tirelessly to merge the Supplements with the OED in preparation for the 1989 release of the Second Edition. Charkin and the University Press agreed that, after this Edition, they could finally begin expanding upon the long-awaited distribution of CD-ROMs containing OED text. In 1992, this was made a reality, thanks to the efforts of Charkin, alongside John Simpson, Ed Weiner, the Tim Benbow, Julia Swanell and more. The Internet was still not a public tool at this point, making CD availability a big deal for readers and editors alike. This was achieved through the project team's painstaking effort of manually inputting the whole text of the OED, a personal choice that was made to honour the traditional print-based method. Charkin's willingness to push the Press in a bigger and bolder direction gave the team confidence to see the digitisation project through, an accomplishment that evolved the art of lexicography and paved the way for the future of online publication.

Publications [ edit ] Charkin Blog, The Archive , Macmillan, 2008.

The Lowdown: top tips for wannabe CEOs (with Richard Pettinger), Creative Content Ltd, 2009 Publishing Perspectives articles My Back Pages , Marble Hill London, 2023.

References [ edit ] Charkin, R. (28 January 2022).

Richard Charkin: A 2022 Publishing Resolution . Publishing Perspectives. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://publishingperspectives.com/2022/01/richard-charkin-a-2022-publishing-resolution-covid19/ “Charkin’s half century in publishing” (2018).

Blogs: The Society of Authors . Blogs | The Society of Authors. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://www.societyofauthors.org/News/Blogs/SoA-Blog/December-2018/Charkin-s-half-century-in-publishing Charkin, R. (27 January 2023).

Richard Charkin: "Remnants of Organs" in Medicine and Publishing . Publishing Perspectives. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://publishingperspectives.com/2022/07/richard-charkin-vestigial-organs-in-medicine-and-publishing/ Charkin, R. (22 January 2023).

Richard Charkin: Three Gifts for Publishing's Christmas . Publishing Perspectives. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://publishingperspectives.com/2022/12/richard-charkin-three-gifts-for-publishings-christmas/ Oxford University Press. (2023).

History of the OED . Oxford English Dictionary. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://public.oed.com/history/ Simpson, J. (2017).

The Word Detective: Searching for the Meaning of it All at the Oxford English Dictionary: A Memoir . Basic Books.

Skylark. (2019).

Richard Charkin . Trillium Partners. Retrieved 29 January 2023, from https://www.trilliumpartners.co.uk/team-member/richard-charkin/ ^ "The board - Corporate and Investor Relations - Bloomsbury.com" .

bloomsbury-ir.co.uk .

^ "Richard Charkin" .

HuffPost .

^ "Logos – about" .

brill .

^ "About Mensch Publishing" .

Mensch Publishing . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Charkin&oldid=1296029415 " Categories : 1949 births Academics of City, University of London Academics of the University of the Arts London Academics of University College London Alumni of Trinity College, Cambridge 20th-century British publishers (people) Fellows of Green Templeton College, Oxford Living people Officers of the Order of the British Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2025 BLP articles lacking sources from March 2015 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with a promotional tone from March 2015 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from June 2025 This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 10:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Charkin Add languages Add topic

