Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United States 2 Russia 3 Pre-flight 4 Alcohol industry 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Alcohol and spaceflight Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alcohol is generally disallowed in spaceflight , but space agencies have previously allowed its consumption.

[ 1 ] NASA has been stricter about alcohol consumption than the Roscosmos , both according to regulations and in practice. Astronauts and cosmonauts are restricted from being intoxicated at launch. Despite restrictions on consumption, there have been experiments in making and keeping alcoholic drinks in space.

The effects of alcohol on human physiology in microgravity have not been researched, though because medications can differ in their effects NASA expects that the effects of alcohol will also differ.

[ 2 ] Beer and other carbonated drinks are not suitable for spaceflight as the bubbles cause "wet burps"; also, a foamy head cannot form as the bubbles do not rise.

[ 2 ] Overview of alcohol within spaceflight United States [ edit ] On July 20, 1969, Apollo 11 astronaut Buzz Aldrin drank some wine when he took communion while on the Moon in the Lunar Module Eagle . The ceremony was not broadcast following earlier protests against religious activity that opponents believed to breach the separation between church and state.

[ 3 ] In the 1970s, NASA's Charles Bourland planned to send sherry with the astronauts visiting Skylab , but the idea was scrapped because the smell was found to induce a gag reflex in zero-gravity flight tests, there was ambivalence among the astronauts, and angry letters were received after plans were discussed in public by Gerry Carr .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Alcohol is prohibited aboard the International Space Station due to the impact it can have on the Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) .

[ 6 ] A 1985 NASA report on extended spaceflight predicted that alcohol would be missed, but would only become common in stable settlements.

[ 7 ] Russia [ edit ] The Russian state media Russia Beyond says drinking has been officially banned, but the first alcoholic drink sent into space by cosmonauts was a bottle of cognac, to the Salyut 7 in 1984.

[ 8 ] Cosmonaut Igor Volk said they would lose weight and hide alcohol in their spacesuits or hide bottles inside book covers, and Georgy Grechko discussed the difficulties of drinking in space as the liquid and air would mix to form froth.

[ 8 ] Cosmonauts aboard Mir were allowed alcoholic drinks including cognac, vodka, and "ginseng liqueur", supposedly for health reasons, according to comments made by former cosmonaut Alexander Lazutkin to the Interfax news agency in 2010.

[ 6 ] [ 1 ] Cosmonaut Alexander Poleshchuk said bottles of cognac would be hidden behind panels on Mir .

[ 9 ] American astronauts on Mir watched while their Russian colleagues drank; NASA tried to block the release of photographs of a 1997 "cognac party" onboard Mir , but James Oberg of NBC News obtained them via a freedom of information request.

[ 10 ] In 2006, the ban on cosmonauts drinking on the International Space Station (ISS) was proposed to be lifted, though champagne was still regarded as too dangerous, as the pressurised bottle could have "unpredictable" recoil when opened, or explode while still sealed.

[ 9 ] Crew care packages cannot contain any alcohol, even in aftershave or mouthwash.

[ 4 ] Pre-flight [ edit ] In July 2007, following a scandal in which astronauts were alleged to have flown while drunk, NASA said that its rules around alcohol were vague and introduced a new rule prohibiting astronauts from being "under the influence" and consuming alcohol within 12 hours of launch, based on the rules for T-38 training jets .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Alcohol industry [ edit ] A 3D-printed plastic whisky glass was designed for spaceflight in 2015, and whisky was sent to the ISS for four years to study the effect on its flavor.

[ 4 ] One beer company sponsored a graduate student's research into brewing beer in space, [ 2 ] and in 2017 another planned to sponsor research on the ISS with the aim of serving beer on Mars.

[ 13 ] Making alcohol in space would be difficult; for example, conventional distillation would be impossible in zero gravity and the volumes of liquid required are high.

[ 13 ] On April 19, 2025, the first beer and gin were launched into space from Mt White Station, New Zealand as stabilisation ballast aboard Ethan Kosoof's Meraki II unmanned spacecraft.  The rocket launched at 7:03am and crossed the Karman line into space at 7:05am before carrying on to apogee at 398,914ft above mean sea level, one minute later. This sets the current altitude record for both beer and gin.  Meraki II's maximum speed was Mach 5.64 at 16.5km, now the current speed record for beer and gin.

150ml of 'The 42' by Room42 Brewery of Whatawhata, NZ was sealed into half of a vacuum-proof enclosure inside Meraki II. The 42 is a 6.4%ABV KPA beer, (Kiwi Pale Ale, an ale made with Pilsner malt), a style of hoppy ale with a light malt base that is popular in New Zealand.

150ml of 'Sweet Spot' by Redhead Distillery of Te Pahu, NZ was sealed into the other half of the ballast enclosure.  Sweet Spot is a 43%ABV double-distilled gin made with all botanicals macerated in the kettle of a reflux still during final distillation. The gin basket consists of juniper and coriander seeds, cardamom pods, bay leaf and lemon zest.

See also [ edit ] Space food Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight References [ edit ] ^ a b c Dickerson, Kelly (February 2, 2016).

"A surprising amount of booze has flown into space" .

Business Insider .

^ a b c Davison, Anna (July 31, 2007).

"Beer in space: A short but frothy history" .

New Scientist .

^ Cresswell, Matthew (September 13, 2012).

"How Buzz Aldrin's communion on the moon was hushed up" .

The Guardian .

^ a b c Martin, Alan (September 9, 2015).

"Alcohol in space: From communion wine to zero-gravity whisky" .

Alphr .

^ Twilley, Nicola (January 31, 2014).

"Why Astronauts Were Banned From Drinking Wine In Outer Space" .

Gizmodo .

^ a b Lufkin, Bryan.

"Why astronauts are banned from getting drunk in space" .

BBC Online . BBC . Retrieved 24 November 2018 .

^ Connors, Mary M.; Harrison, Albert A.; Akins, Faren R. (1985).

"Living Aloft: Human Requirements for Extended Spaceflight" (PDF) .

Ames Research Center . NASA.

It is unlikely that alcohol as a social beverage will find its way into space, at least until relatively large and stable settlements are established. Alcohol, as a recreational drug, may be keenly missed by space travelers, since there is evidence that alcohol plays an important social role in exotic environments (p.8) ... With this level of cultural acceptance, alcohol could find its way into space when resupply arrangements are in place and when storage capacity is plentiful ... It is reasonable to assume that substitute methods of gratification will be sought, perhaps including the use of alcohol or other diverting drugs. Alternately, the self-censuring which restricts competitive interaction in confinement may also preclude the use of drugs (p. 246) ... If alcohol or drugs were to be available in space, problems associated with grief responses could be aggravated (p. 261) ^ a b Levkovich, Yevgeny (April 12, 2017).

"Space smugglers: How Russian cosmonauts sneak booze into outer space" .

RBTH .

^ a b Saradzhyan, Simon (January 15, 2006).

"Russia lets cosmonauts drink - but they musn't go into orbit" .

The Telegraph .

^ Boyle, Alan (October 14, 2010).

"Alcohol in space? Da!" .

NBC News .

^ Schwartz, John (July 29, 2007).

"The Astronaut's Drinking Rules" .

New York Times .

^ O’Connor, Bryan (August 28, 2007).

"Space Flight Safety Review (Alcohol Use In The Preflight Period)" (PDF) .

NASA Office of Safety and Mission Assurance . NASA Headquarters, Washington, DC.

^ a b Stockton, Nick (March 22, 2017).

"What's the point of going to space if you don't make booze?" .

Wired .

Further reading [ edit ] Bourland, C.T.; Vogt, G.L. (2009). "Beverages".

The Astronaut's Cookbook . Springer. pp.

166– 177.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-0624-3_9 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-0623-6 .

Baker, Hannah (March 20, 2019).

"Alcohol in Space" .

National Space Centre .

v t e Alcohol Alcohol use Alcohol-related crimes Drunk driving Alcohol-related traffic crashes in the United States Drunk driving in the United States Moonshine Bathtub gin Prison alcohol Pájaro verde Pruno Public intoxication Rum-running Sly-grog shop Wine fraud Alcoholism Alcohol and Native Americans Alcoholism in adolescence Alcoholism in family systems Alcoholism in rural Australia Collaborative Study on the Genetics of Alcoholism Disease theory of alcoholism High-functioning alcoholic (HFA) Seeing pink elephants Chemistry Beverage-specific Beer chemistry Wine chemistry Comparison of psychoactive alcohols in alcoholic drinks Congener Alcohol congener analysis Ethanol Blood alcohol content Fusel alcohol Effects Short-term effects of alcohol consumption Long-term effects of alcohol Pharmacology of ethanol Subjective response to alcohol Adverse effects Anxiety Aging Brain Cancer breast cancer Cortisol Memory Sleep Tolerance / intolerance Weight Beverage-specific Beer: Potomania Wine: Red wine headache Health issues Cirrhosis Fetal alcohol syndrome Social issues Adulterated alcohol Adulterated moonshine Denatured alcohol ( List of methanol poisoning incidents ) Surrogate alcohol Alcohol abuse Alcohol advertising on college campuses Sex Beer goggles Alcohol myopia Alcohol in association football Alcohol use among college students Binge drinking Austrian syndrome Alcohol intoxication Epidemiology of binge drinking Holiday heart syndrome Problematic alcoholic products Alcohol powder Alcopop Borg Low-cost alcohol Flavored fortified wine Polysubstance alcoholic drinks Caffeinated alcoholic drink Coca wine Nicotini Zapoy Blackout Blackout Wednesday Drinking game list Pregaming Drinking in public Drunk walking Drunkorexia Dry drunk Dutch courage Flaming drink Hair of the dog Hurtful communication Drunk dialing In vino veritas Nightcap Pantsdrunk Passive drinking Binge drinking devices Beer bong Yard of ale Routes of administration Alcohol enema Alcohol inhalation Vodka eyeballing Sconcing History Andrew Johnson alcoholism debate Dionysian Mysteries Dipsomania Gilbert Paul Jordan Gin Craze List of deaths through alcohol Rum ration Rum Rebellion Shebeen Six o'clock swill Illegal drinking establishments Nip joint Speakeasy Whiskey Rebellion General Alcoholic beverage Beer Beer mile International Beer Day International Women's Collaboration Brew Day Women in brewing Drinking culture Apéritif and digestif Hangover remedies Health effects of wine Wine and food pairing Drunken monkey hypothesis Ladies' night List of countries by alcohol consumption per capita Alcohol consumption by youth in the United States Ritual use of alcohol Whiskey International whisk(e)y day Alcohol control Alcohol law Administrative License Suspension (ALS) Alcohol (Minimum Pricing) (Scotland) Act 2012 Alcohol exclusion laws Alcohol monopoly Alcoholic beverage control state Alcohol packaging warning messages Ban on caffeinated alcoholic drinks in the United States Drunk driving law by country DWI court Field sobriety testing Hip flask defence Ignition interlock device Dry county List of dry communities by U.S. state Last call Legal drinking age Legal drinking age in the United States Shoulder tap List of alcohol laws of US Alcohol prohibition List of countries with alcohol prohibition Neo-prohibitionism Temperance movement Sobriety Alcohol detoxification Alcohol-free zone Dry campus Open-container law Brief intervention Designated driver Alcohol rehabilitation Drunk tank Managed alcohol program Non-alcoholic drink List of cocktails List of mixed drinks Spritzer Malt drinks Teetotalism Temperance bar Temperance and Good Citizenship Day Twelve-step groups Al-Anon/Alateen Alcoholics Anonymous (AA): Adult Children of Alcoholics (ACA) Sober companion Sober curious Sober living house Sobering center Sobrietol Quit lit Alcohol limitation 0-0-1-3 Alcohol consumption recommendations Alcohol education Alcohol server training Monitoring Breathalyzer Sweat alcohol content monitor FRAMES Foundation for Advancing Alcohol Responsibility Campaigns Dry January Dry July Get Your Sexy Back Ocsober Liquor license Low-alcohol drinks Fermented tea Low-alcohol beer Low-alcoholic malt drinks Small beer Measurement Alcoholic spirits measure Standard drink Addiction medicine Benzodiazepines Chlordiazepoxide Disulfiram-like drugs Disulfiram Calcium carbimide Cyanamide General anaesthetics Nitrous oxide Sulfonic acids Acamprosate Homotaurine Religion and alcohol Catholic Christian views on alcohol Alcohol in the Bible Islam and alcohol Words of Wisdom (LDS) History Beer Street and Gin Lane Bratt System Dry state Gin Act 1751 Medicinal Liquor Prescriptions Act of 1933 Related Index of alcohol-related articles Alcohol and spaceflight Gateway drug effect Mood disorder Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease Self-medication Spins Town drunk French paradox Category v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alcohol_and_spaceflight&oldid=1303738837 " Categories : Alcohol Human spaceflight Space psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alcohol and spaceflight Add languages Add topic

