Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Circumstances 3 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 3.1 Early life and education 3.2 Career 3.2.1 In Bukhara and Gurganj 3.2.2 In Gorgan 3.2.3 In Ray and Hamadan 3.2.4 In Isfahan 4 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 4.1 Metaphysical doctrine 4.1.1 Impossibility, contingency, necessity 4.1.2 Differentia 4.1.3 Reception 4.2 Argument for God's existence 4.3 Al-Biruni correspondence 4.4 Theology 4.5 Thought experiments 5 Principal works Toggle Principal works subsection 5.1 The Canon of Medicine 5.2 Liber Primus Naturalium 5.3 The Book of Healing 5.3.1 Earth sciences 5.3.2 Philosophy of science 5.3.3 Logic 5.3.4 Physics 5.3.5 Psychology 6 Other contributions Toggle Other contributions subsection 6.1 Astronomy and astrology 6.2 Chemistry 6.3 Poetry 7 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 7.1 Classical Islamic civilization 7.2 Medieval and Renaissance Europe 7.3 Modern reception 7.3.1 In popular culture 8 List of works Toggle List of works subsection 8.1 Persian works 9 See also Toggle See also subsection 9.1 Namesakes of Ibn Sina 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Citations 11 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 11.1 Sources 12 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 12.1 Encyclopedic articles 12.2 Primary literature 12.3 Secondary literature 12.4 Medicine 12.5 Philosophy 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Avicenna 157 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bislama Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай 贛語 گیلکی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Тыва дыл Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ibn Sina ) Persian polymath, physician and philosopher (c. 980–1037) For the crater, see Avicenna (crater) .

"Ibn Sīnā" redirects here; not to be confused with Ali Sina or Ibn Sina Peak .

Avicenna Ibn Sina ابن سینا Modern portrait, 1952 Born c.

980 Afshana, Transoxiana , Samanid Empire Died 22 June 1037 (1037-06-22) (aged 56–57) [ 1 ] Hamadan , Kakuyid Emirate Monuments Avicenna Mausoleum Other names Sharaf al-Mulk ( شرف الملك ) Hujjat al-Haq ( حجة الحق ) al-Sheikh al-Ra'is ( الشيخ الرئيس ) Ibn-Sino (Abu Ali Abdulloh Ibn-Sino) Bu Alī Sīnā ( بو علی سینا ) Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age Region Middle Eastern philosophy Persian philosophy School Aristotelianism , Avicennism Main interests Medicine Aromatherapy Philosophy and logic Kalām ( Islamic theology ) Science Poetry Notable works The Book of Healing The Canon of Medicine This article contains special characters .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols .

Part of a series on Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā) Works The Book of Healing The Canon of Medicine Al-Nijat Thoughts Avicennism On God's existence Floating man Al-Ghazali's criticism of Avicennian philosophy Pupils Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Bahmanyar Ibn Abi Sadiq Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Monuments Avicenna Mausoleum Avicenna (crater) Bu-Ali Sina University Avicenne Hospital The Physician The Physician (2013 film) Avicenna Cultural and Scientific Foundation Scholars Pavilion v t e Ibn Sina [ a ] ( c.

980 – 22 June 1037), commonly known in the West as Avicenna ( / ˌ æ v ɪ ˈ s ɛ n ə , ˌ ɑː v -/ A(H)V -iss- EN -ə ), was a preeminent philosopher and physician of the Muslim world .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He was a seminal figure of the Islamic Golden Age , serving in the courts of various Iranian rulers, [ 4 ] and was influential to medieval European medical and Scholastic thought.

[ 5 ] Often described as the father of early modern medicine, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Avicenna's most famous works are The Book of Healing , a philosophical and scientific encyclopedia, and The Canon of Medicine , a medical encyclopedia [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] that became a standard medical text at many medieval European universities [ 12 ] and remained in use as late as 1650.

[ 13 ] Besides philosophy and medicine, Avicenna's corpus includes writings on astronomy , alchemy , geography and geology , psychology , Islamic theology , logic , mathematics , physics , and works of poetry .

[ 14 ] His philosophy was of the Peripatetic school derived from Aristotelianism , [ 15 ] of which he is considered among the greatest proponents within the Muslim world.

[ 5 ] Avicenna wrote most of his philosophical and scientific works in Arabic but also wrote several key works in Persian ; his poetry was written in both languages. Of the 450 works  he is believed to have written, around 240 have survived, including 150 on philosophy and 40 on medicine.

[ 15 ] Name Avicenna is a Latin corruption of the Arabic patronym Ibn Sīnā ( ابن سينا ), [ 16 ] meaning "Son of Sina". However, Avicenna was not the son but the great-great-grandson of a man named Sina.

[ 17 ] His formal Arabic name was Abū ʿAlī al-Ḥusayn bin ʿAbdallāh bin al-Ḥasan bin ʿAlī bin Sīnā al-Balkhī al-Bukhārī ( أبو علي الحسين بن عبد الله بن الحسن بن علي بن سينا البلخي البخاري ).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Circumstances Avicenna created an extensive corpus of works during what is commonly known as the Islamic Golden Age , in which the translations of Byzantine , Greco-Roman , Persian , and Indian texts were studied extensively. Greco-Roman ( Middle Platonic , Neoplatonic , and Aristotelian ) texts translated by the Kindi school were commented, redacted and developed substantially by Islamic intellectuals, who also built upon Persian and Indian mathematical systems, astronomy , algebra , trigonometry and medicine .

[ 20 ] The Samanid Empire in the eastern part of Persia, Greater Khorasan , and Central Asia , as well as the Buyid dynasty in the western part of Persia and Iraq , provided a thriving atmosphere for scholarly and cultural development. Under the Samanids, Bukhara rivaled Baghdad for cultural capital of the Muslim world .

[ 21 ] There, Avicenna had access to the great libraries of Balkh , Khwarazm , Gorgan , Rey , Isfahan and Hamadan .

Various texts (such as the 'Ahd with Bahmanyar) show that Avicenna debated philosophical points with the greatest scholars of the time.

Nizami Aruzi described how before ibn Sina left Khwarazm, he had met al-Biruni (a scientist and astronomer), Abu Nasr Mansur (a renowned mathematician), Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi (a respected philosopher) and ibn al-Khammar (a great physician). The study of the Quran and the Hadith also thrived, and Islamic philosophy, fiqh "jurisprudence", and kalam "speculative theology" were all further developed by ibn Sina and his opponents at this time.

Biography Early life and education Avicenna was born in c.

980 in the village of Afshana in Transoxiana to a Persian family.

[ 22 ] The village was near the Samanid capital of Bukhara , which was his mother's hometown.

[ 23 ] His father Abd Allah was a native of the city of Balkh in Bactria .

[ 24 ] An official of the Samanid bureaucracy, he had served as the governor of a village of the royal estate of Harmaytan near Bukhara during the reign of Nuh II ( r.

976–997 ).

[ 24 ] Avicenna also had a younger brother. A few years later, the family settled in Bukhara, a center of learning, which attracted many scholars. It was there that Avicenna was educated, which early on was seemingly administered by his father.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Although both Avicenna's father and brother had converted to Isma'ilism , he himself did not follow the faith.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] He was instead a Hanafi Sunni , the same school followed by the Samanids.

[ 30 ] Avicenna was first schooled in the Quran and literature, and by the age of 10, he had memorized the entire Quran .

[ 26 ] He was later sent by his father to an Indian greengrocer, who taught him arithmetic .

[ 31 ] Afterwards, he was schooled in fiqh by the Hanafi jurist Ismail al-Zahid. Sometime later, his father invited the physician and philosopher al-Natili to their house to educate ibn Sina.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Together, they studied the Isagoge of Porphyry (died 305) and possibly the Categories of Aristotle (died 322 BCE) as well. After Avicenna had read the Almagest of Ptolemy (died 170) and Euclid's Elements , al-Natili told him to continue his research independently.

[ 27 ] By the time Avicenna was eighteen, he was well-educated in Greek sciences . Although ibn Sina only mentions al-Natili as his teacher in his autobiography , he most likely had other teachers as well, such as the physicians Qumri and Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi.

[ 25 ] [ 31 ] Career In Bukhara and Gurganj Map of Khurasan and Transoxiana At the age of seventeen, Avicenna was made a physician of Nuh II. By the time Avicenna was at least 21 years old, his father died. He was subsequently given an administrative post, possibly succeeding his father as the governor of Harmaytan. Avicenna later moved to Gurganj , the capital of Khwarazm, which he reports that he did due to "necessity". The date he went to the place is uncertain, as he reports that he served the Khwarazmshah , the ruler of Khwarazm, the Ma'munid ruler Abu al-Hasan Ali . The latter ruled from 997 to 1009, which indicates that Avicenna moved sometime during that period.

He may have moved in 999, the year in which the Samanid Empire fell after the Kara-Khanid Khanate captured Bukhara and imprisoned the Samanid emir Abd al-Malik II . Due to his high position and strong connection with the Samanids, ibn Sina may have found himself in an unfavorable position after the fall of his suzerain.

[ 25 ] It was through the minister of Gurganj, Abu'l-Husayn as-Sahi, a patron of Greek sciences, that Avicenna entered into the service of Abu al-Hasan Ali.

[ 32 ] Under the Ma'munids, Gurganj became a centre of learning, attracting many prominent figures, such as ibn Sina and his former teacher Abu Sahl al-Masihi, the mathematician Abu Nasr Mansur, the physician ibn al-Khammar, and the philologist al-Tha'alibi .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] In Gorgan Avicenna later moved due to "necessity" once more (in 1012), this time to the west. There he travelled through the Khurasani cities of Nasa , Abivard , Tus , Samangan and Jajarm . He was planning to visit the ruler of the city of Gorgan , the Ziyarid Qabus ( r.

977–981, 997–1012 ), a cultivated patron of writing, whose court attracted many distinguished poets and scholars. However, when Avicenna eventually arrived, he discovered that the ruler had been dead since the winter of 1013.

[ 25 ] [ 35 ] Avicenna then left Gorgan for Dihistan , but returned after becoming ill. There he met Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani (died 1070) who became his pupil and companion.

[ 25 ] [ 36 ] Avicenna stayed briefly in Gorgan, reportedly serving Qabus's son and successor Manuchihr ( r. 1012–1031 ) and resided in the house of a patron.

[ 25 ] In Ray and Hamadan Coin of Majd al-Dawla ( r.

997–1029 ), the amir (ruler) of the Buyid branch of Ray In c.

1014 , Avicenna went to the city of Ray , where he entered into the service of the Buyid amir Majd al-Dawla ( r.

997–1029 ) and his mother Sayyida Shirin , the de facto ruler of the realm. There he served as the physician at the court, treating Majd al-Dawla, who was suffering from melancholia . Avicenna reportedly later served as the "business manager" of Sayyida Shirin in Qazvin and Hamadan , though details regarding this tenure are unclear.

[ 25 ] [ 37 ] During this period, Avicenna finished writing The Canon of Medicine and started writing his The Book of Healing .

[ 37 ] In 1015, during Avicenna's stay in Hamadan , he participated in a public debate, as was customary for newly arrived scholars in western Iran at that time. The purpose of the debate was to examine one's reputation against a prominent resident.

[ 38 ] The person whom Avicenna debated against was Abu'l-Qasim al-Kirmani, a member of the school of philosophers of Baghdad .

[ 39 ] The debate became heated, resulting in ibn Sina accusing Abu'l-Qasim of lack of basic knowledge in logic , while Abu'l-Qasim accused ibn Sina of impoliteness.

[ 38 ] After the debate, Avicenna sent a letter to the Baghdad Peripatetics, asking if Abu'l-Qasim's claim that he shared the same opinion as them was true. Abu'l-Qasim later retaliated by writing a letter to an unknown person in which he made accusations so serious that ibn Sina wrote to Abu Sa'd, the deputy of Majd al-Dawla, to investigate the matter. The accusation made towards Avicenna may have been the same as he had received earlier, in which he was accused by the people of Hamadan of copying the stylistic structures of the Quran in his Sermons on Divine Unity .

[ 40 ] The seriousness of this charge, in the words of the historian Peter Adamson, "cannot be underestimated in the larger Muslim culture".

[ 41 ] Not long afterwards, Avicenna shifted his allegiance to the rising Buyid amir Shams al-Dawla , the younger brother of Majd al-Dawla, which Adamson suggests was due to Abu'l-Qasim also working under Sayyida Shirin.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Avicenna had been called upon by Shams al-Dawla to treat him, but after the latter's campaign in the same year against his former ally, the Annazid ruler Abu Shawk ( r.

1010–1046 ), he forced Avicenna to become his vizier .

[ 44 ] Although Avicenna would sometimes clash with Shams al-Dawla's troops, he remained vizier until the latter died of colic in 1021. Avicenna was asked to stay as vizier by Shams al-Dawla's son and successor Sama' al-Dawla ( r. 1021–1023 ), but he instead went into hiding with his patron, Abu Ghalib al-Attar, to wait for better opportunities to emerge. It was during this period that Avicenna was secretly in contact with Ala al-Dawla Muhammad ( r.

1008–1041 ), the Kakuyid ruler of Isfahan and uncle of Sayyida Shirin.

[ 25 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] It was during his stay at Attar's home that Avicenna completed The Book of Healing , writing 50 pages a day.

[ 47 ] The Buyid court in Hamadan, particularly the Kurdish vizier Taj al-Mulk, suspected Avicenna of correspondence with Ala al-Dawla, and as a result, had the house of Attar ransacked and ibn Sina imprisoned in the fortress of Fardajan, outside Hamadan. Juzjani blames one of ibn Sina's informers for his capture. He was imprisoned for four months until Ala al-Dawla captured Hamadan, ending Sama al-Dawla's reign.

[ 25 ] [ 48 ] In Isfahan Coin of Ala al-Dawla Muhammad ( r.

1008–1041 ), the Kakuyid ruler of Isfahan Avicenna was subsequently released, and went to Isfahan, where he was well received by Ala al-Dawla. In the words of Juzjani, the Kakuyid ruler gave Avicenna "the respect and esteem which someone like him deserved".

[ 25 ] Adamson also says that Avicenna's service under Ala al-Dawla "proved to be the most stable period of his life".

[ 49 ] Avicenna served as the advisor, if not vizier of Ala al-Dawla, accompanying him in many of his military expeditions and travels.

[ 25 ] [ 49 ] Avicenna dedicated two Persian works to him, a philosophical treatise named Danish-nama-yi Ala'i ("Book of Science for Ala"), and a medical treatise about the pulse.

[ 50 ] The Mausoleum of Avicenna , Hamadan , Iran During the brief occupation of Isfahan by the Ghaznavids in January 1030, Avicenna and Ala al-Dawla relocated to the southwestern Iranian region of Khuzistan , where they stayed until the death of the Ghaznavid ruler Mahmud ( r.

998–1030 ), which occurred two months later. It was seemingly when Avicenna returned to Isfahan that he started writing his Pointers and Reminders .

[ 51 ] In 1037, while Avicenna was accompanying Ala al-Dawla to a battle near Isfahan, he contracted a severe colic, having suffered from colic throughout his life. He died shortly afterwards in Hamadan, where he was buried.

[ 52 ] Philosophy Avicenna wrote extensively on early Islamic philosophy , especially the subjects logic , ethics and metaphysics , including treatises named Logic and Metaphysics . Most of his works were written in Arabic, then the language of science in the Muslim world, and some in Early New Persian. Of linguistic significance even to this day are a few books that he wrote in Persian, particularly the Danishnama . Avicenna's commentaries on Aristotle often criticized the philosopher, [ 53 ] encouraging a lively debate in the spirit of ijtihad .

Avicenna's Neoplatonic scheme of emanations became fundamental in kalam in the 12th century.

[ 54 ] The Book of Healing became available in Europe in a partial Latin translation some fifty years after its composition under the title Sufficientia , and some authors have identified a "Latin Avicennism" as flourishing for some time paralleling the more influential Latin Averroism , but it was suppressed by the Parisian decrees of 1210 and 1215 .

[ 55 ] Avicenna's psychology and theory of knowledge influenced the theologian William of Auvergne [ 56 ] and Albertus Magnus , [ 56 ] while his metaphysics influenced the thought of Thomas Aquinas .

[ 56 ] Metaphysical doctrine This section may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( January 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early Islamic philosophy and Islamic metaphysics , imbued as it is with kalam, distinguishes between essence and existence more clearly than Aristotelianism. Whereas existence is the domain of the contingent and the accidental, essence endures within a being beyond the accidental. The philosophy of Avicenna, particularly that part relating to metaphysics, owes much to al-Farabi. The search for a definitive Islamic philosophy separate from Occasionalism can be seen in what is left of his work.

Following al-Farabi 's lead, Avicenna initiated a full-fledged inquiry into the question of being, in which he distinguished between essence (Arabic: ماهية , romanized: māhiya ) and existence (Arabic: وجود , romanized: wujūd ). He argued that the fact of existence cannot be inferred from or accounted for by the essence of existing things, and that form and matter by themselves cannot interact and originate the movement of the universe or the progressive actualization of existing things. Existence must, therefore, be due to an agent-cause that necessitates, imparts, gives, or adds existence to an essence. To do so, the cause must be an existing thing and coexist with its effect.

[ 57 ] Impossibility, contingency, necessity See also: Necessity and sufficiency , Contingency (philosophy) , Metaphysical necessity , and Potentiality and actuality Further information: Modal logic Avicenna's consideration of the essence-attributes question may be elucidated in terms of his ontological analysis of the modalities of being; namely impossibility, contingency and necessity. Avicenna argued that the impossible being is that which cannot exist, while the contingent in itself ( mumkin bi-dhatihi ) has the potentiality to be or not to be without entailing a contradiction. When actualized, the contingent becomes a 'necessary existent due to what is other than itself' ( wajib al-wujud bi-ghayrihi ). Thus, contingency-in-itself is potential beingness that could eventually be actualized by an external cause other than itself. The metaphysical structures of necessity and contingency are different. Necessary being due to itself ( wajib al-wujud bi-dhatihi ) is true in itself, while the contingent being is 'false in itself' and 'true due to something else other than itself'. The necessary is the source of its own being without borrowed existence. It is what always exists.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Differentia See also: Differentia The Necessary exists 'due-to-Its-Self', and has no quiddity/essence other than existence. Furthermore, It is 'One' ( wahid ahad ) [ 60 ] since there cannot be more than one 'Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself' without differentia (fasl) to distinguish them from each other. Yet, to require differentia entails that they exist 'due-to-themselves' as well as 'due to what is other than themselves'; and this is contradictory. If no differentia distinguishes them from each other, then, in no sense are these 'Existents' not the same.

[ 61 ] Avicenna adds that the 'Necessary-Existent-due-to-Itself' has no genus ( jins ), nor a definition ( hadd ), nor a counterpart ( nadd ), nor an opposite ( did ), and is detached ( bari ) from matter ( madda ), quality ( kayf ), quantity ( kam ), place ( ayn ), situation ( wad ) and time ( waqt ).

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Reception Avicenna's theology on metaphysical issues ( ilāhiyyāt ) has been criticized by some Islamic scholars , among them al-Ghazali , ibn Taymiyya , and ibn Qayyim al-Jawziyya .

[ 65 ] [ page needed ] While discussing the views of the theists among the Greek philosophers, namely Socrates , Plato and Aristotle in Al-Munqidh min ad-Dalal "Deliverance from Error", al-Ghazali noted: [the Greek philosophers] must be taxed with unbelief, as must their partisans among the Muslim philosophers, such as Avicenna and al-Farabi and their likes. None, however, of the Muslim philosophers engaged so much in transmitting Aristotle's lore as did the two men just mentioned. [...] The sum of what we regard as the authentic philosophy of Aristotle, as transmitted by al-Farabi and Avicenna, can be reduced to three parts: a part which must be branded as unbelief; a part which must be stigmatized as innovation; and a part which need not be repudiated at all.

[ 66 ] Argument for God's existence Main article: Proof of the Truthful Avicenna made an argument for the existence of God which would be known as the " Proof of the Truthful " ( wajib al-wujud ). Avicenna argued that there must be a Proof of the Truthful, an entity that cannot not exist [ 67 ] and through a series of arguments, he identified it with God in Islam .

[ 68 ] Present-day historian of philosophy Peter Adamson called this argument one of the most influential medieval arguments for God's existence, and Avicenna's biggest contribution to the history of philosophy.

[ 67 ] Al-Biruni correspondence Correspondence between ibn Sina with his student Ahmad ibn ʿAli al-Maʿsumi and al-Biruni has survived in which they debated Aristotelian natural philosophy and the Peripatetic school. al-Biruni began by asking eighteen questions, ten of which were criticisms of Aristotle's On the Heavens .

[ 69 ] Theology Ibn Sina was a devout Muslim and sought to reconcile rational philosophy with Islamic theology. He aimed to prove the existence of God and His creation of the world scientifically and through reason and logic .

[ 70 ] His views on Islamic theology and philosophy were enormously influential, forming part of the core of the curriculum at Islamic religious schools until the 19th century.

[ 71 ] Avicenna wrote several short treatises dealing with Islamic theology. These included treatises on the prophets and messengers in Islam , whom he viewed as "inspired philosophers", and also on various scientific and philosophical interpretations of the Quran, such as how Quranic cosmology corresponds to his philosophical system. In general, these treatises linked his philosophical writings to Islamic religious ideas; for example, the body's afterlife.

There are occasional brief hints and allusions in his longer works, however, that Avicenna considered philosophy as the only sensible way to distinguish real prophecy from illusion. He did not state this more clearly because of the political implications of such a theory if prophecy could be questioned, and also because most of the time he was writing shorter works which concentrated on explaining his theories on philosophy and theology clearly, without digressing to consider epistemological matters which could only be properly considered by other philosophers.

[ 72 ] Later interpretations of Avicenna's philosophy split into three different schools; those (such as al-Tusi ) who continued to apply his philosophy as a system to interpret later political events and scientific advances; those (such as al-Razi ) who considered Avicenna's theological works in isolation from his wider philosophical concerns; and those (such as al-Ghazali ) who selectively used parts of his philosophy to support their own attempts to gain greater spiritual insights through a variety of mystical means. It was the theological interpretation championed by those such as al-Razi which eventually came to predominate in the madrasahs .

[ 73 ] Avicenna memorized the Quran by the age of ten, and as an adult, wrote five treatises commenting on surahs of the Quran. One of these texts included the Proof of Prophecies , in which he comments on several Quranic verses and holds the Quran in high esteem. Avicenna argued that the Islamic prophets should be considered higher than philosophers.

[ 74 ] Avicenna is generally understood to have been aligned with the Hanafi school of Sunni thought.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Avicenna studied Hanafi law, many of his notable teachers were Hanafi jurists, and he served under the Hanafi court of Ali ibn Mamun.

[ 77 ] [ 75 ] Avicenna said at an early age that he remained "unconvinced" by Ismaili missionary attempts to convert him.

[ 75 ] Medieval historian Ẓahīr al-dīn al-Bayhaqī (d. 1169) believed Avicenna to be a follower of the Brethren of Purity .

[ 76 ] Thought experiments Main article: Floating man While he was imprisoned in the castle of Fardajan near Hamadhan, Avicenna wrote his famous " floating man "—literally falling man—a thought experiment to demonstrate human self-awareness and the substantiality and immateriality of the soul. Avicenna believed his "Floating Man" thought experiment demonstrated that the soul is a substance, and claimed humans cannot doubt their own consciousness, even in a situation that prevents all sensory data input. The thought experiment told its readers to imagine themselves created all at once while suspended in the air, isolated from all sensations , which includes no sensory contact with even their own bodies. He argued that, in this scenario, one would still have self-consciousness . Because it is conceivable that a person, suspended in air while cut off from sense experience , would still be capable of determining his own existence, the thought experiment points to the conclusions that the soul is a perfection, independent of the body, and an immaterial substance.

[ 78 ] The conceivability of this "Floating Man" indicates that the soul is perceived intellectually, which entails the soul's separateness from the body. Avicenna referred to the living human intelligence , particularly the active intellect , which he believed to be the hypostasis by which God communicates truth to the human mind and imparts order and intelligibility to nature. Following is an English translation of the argument: One of us (i.e. a human being) should be imagined as having been created in a single stroke; created perfect and complete but with his vision obscured so that he cannot perceive external entities; created falling through air or a void, in such a manner that he is not struck by the firmness of the air in any way that compels him to feel it, and with his limbs separated so that they do not come in contact with or touch each other. Then contemplate the following: can he be assured of the existence of himself? He does not have any doubt in that his self exists, without thereby asserting that he has any exterior limbs, nor any internal organs, neither heart nor brain, nor any one of the exterior things at all; but rather he can affirm the existence of himself, without thereby asserting there that this self has any extension in space. Even if it were possible for him in that state to imagine a hand or any other limb, he would not imagine it as being a part of his self, nor as a condition for the existence of that self; for as you know that which is asserted is different from that which is not asserted and that which is inferred is different from that which is not inferred. Therefore the self, the existence of which has been asserted, is a unique characteristic, in as much that it is not as such the same as the body or the limbs, which have not been ascertained. Thus that which is ascertained (i.e. the self), does have a way of being sure of the existence of the soul as something other than the body, even something non-bodily; this he knows, this he should understand intuitively, if it is that he is ignorant of it and needs to be beaten with a stick [to realize it].

— Ibn Sina, Kitab Al-Shifa, On the Soul [ 61 ] [ 79 ] However, Avicenna posited the brain as the place where reason interacts with sensation. Sensation prepares the soul to receive rational concepts from the universal Agent Intellect. The first knowledge of the flying person would be "I am," affirming his or her essence. That essence could not be the body, obviously, as the flying person has no sensation. Thus, the knowledge that "I am" is the core of a human being: the soul exists and is self-aware.

[ 80 ] Avicenna thus concluded that the idea of the self is not logically dependent on any physical thing , and that the soul should not be seen in relative terms , but as a primary given, a substance . The body is unnecessary; in relation to it, the soul is its perfection.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] In itself, the soul is an immaterial substance.

[ 84 ] Principal works The Canon of Medicine Main article: The Canon of Medicine Canons of medicine book from Avicenna, Latin translation located at UT Health of San Antonio Avicenna authored a five-volume medical encyclopedia, The Canon of Medicine ( Arabic : القانون في الطب , romanized : al-Qānūn fī l-ṭibb ). It was used as the standard medical textbook in the Islamic world and Europe up to the 18th century.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] The Canon still plays an important role in Unani medicine .

[ 87 ] Liber Primus Naturalium Avicenna considered whether events like rare diseases or disorders have natural causes.

[ 88 ] He used the example of polydactyly to explain his perception that causal reasons exist for all medical events. This view of medical phenomena anticipated developments in the Enlightenment by seven centuries.

[ 89 ] The Book of Healing Main article: The Book of Healing This section should include  only a brief summary of The Book of Healing .

See Wikipedia:Summary style for information on how to properly incorporate it into this article's main text.

( July 2016 ) Earth sciences Avicenna wrote on Earth sciences such as geology in The Book of Healing .

[ 90 ] While discussing the formation of mountains , he explained: Either they are the effects of upheavals of the crust of the earth, such as might occur during a violent earthquake, or they are the effect of water, which, cutting itself a new route, has denuded the valleys, the strata being of different kinds, some soft, some hard ... It would require a long period of time for all such changes to be accomplished, during which the mountains themselves might be somewhat diminished in size.

[ 90 ] Philosophy of science In the Al-Burhan ( On Demonstration ) section of The Book of Healing , Avicenna discussed the philosophy of science and described an early scientific method of inquiry . He discussed Aristotle's Posterior Analytics and significantly diverged from it on several points. Avicenna discussed the issue of a proper methodology for scientific inquiry and the question of "How does one acquire the first principles of a science?" He asked how a scientist would arrive at "the initial axioms or hypotheses of a deductive science without inferring them from some more basic premises?" He explained that the ideal situation is when one grasps that a "relation holds between the terms, which would allow for absolute, universal certainty". Avicenna then added two further methods for arriving at the first principles : the ancient Aristotelian method of induction ( istiqra ), and the method of examination and experimentation ( tajriba ). Avicenna criticized Aristotelian induction, arguing that "it does not lead to the absolute, universal, and certain premises that it purports to provide." In its place, he developed a "method of experimentation as a means for scientific inquiry." [ 91 ] Logic An early formal system of temporal logic was studied by Avicenna.

[ 92 ] Although he did not develop a real theory of temporal propositions, he did study the relationship between temporalis and the implication.

[ 93 ] Avicenna's work was further developed by Najm al-Dīn al-Qazwīnī al-Kātibī and became the dominant system of Islamic logic until modern times.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Avicennian logic also influenced several early European logicians such as Albertus Magnus [ 96 ] and William of Ockham .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Avicenna endorsed the law of non-contradiction proposed by Aristotle, that a fact could not be both true and false at the same time and in the same sense of the terminology used. He stated, "Anyone who denies the law of non-contradiction should be beaten and burned until he admits that to be beaten is not the same as not to be beaten, and to be burned is not the same as not to be burned." [ 99 ] Physics In mechanics , Avicenna, in The Book of Healing , developed a theory of motion , in which he made a distinction between the inclination (tendency to motion) and force of a projectile , and concluded that motion was a result of an inclination ( mayl ) transferred to the projectile by the thrower, and that projectile motion in a vacuum would not cease.

[ 100 ] He viewed inclination as a permanent force whose effect is dissipated by external forces such as air resistance .

[ 101 ] The theory of motion presented by Avicenna was probably influenced by the 6th-century Alexandrian scholar John Philoponus . Avicenna's is a less sophisticated variant of the theory of impetus developed by Buridan in the 14th century. It is unclear if Buridan was influenced by Avicenna, or by Philoponus directly.

[ 102 ] In optics , Avicenna was among those who argued that light had a speed, observing that "if the perception of light is due to the emission of some sort of particles by a luminous source, the speed of light must be finite." [ 103 ] He also provided a wrong explanation of the rainbow phenomenon.

Carl Benjamin Boyer described Avicenna's ("Ibn Sīnā") theory on the rainbow as follows: Independent observation had demonstrated to him that the bow is not formed in the dark cloud but rather in the very thin mist lying between the cloud and the sun or observer. The cloud, he thought, serves as the background of this thin substance, much as a quicksilver lining is placed upon the rear surface of the glass in a mirror. Ibn Sīnā would change the place not only of the bow, but also of the color formation, holding the iridescence to be merely a subjective sensation in the eye.

[ 104 ] In 1253, a Latin text entitled Speculum Tripartitum stated the following regarding Avicenna's theory on heat : Avicenna says in his book of heaven and earth, that heat is generated from motion in external things.

[ 105 ] Psychology Avicenna's legacy in classical psychology is primarily embodied in the Kitab al-nafs parts of his Kitab al-shifa ( The Book of Healing ) and Kitab al-najat ( The Book of Deliverance ). These were known in Latin under the title De Anima (treatises "on the soul").

[ dubious – discuss ] Notably, Avicenna develops what is called the Flying Man argument in the Psychology of The Cure I.1.7 as defence of the argument that the soul is without quantitative extension, which has an affinity with Descartes 's cogito argument (or what phenomenology designates as a form of an " epoche ").

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Avicenna's psychology requires that connection between the body and soul be strong enough to ensure the soul's individuation, but weak enough to allow for its immortality. Avicenna grounds his psychology on physiology, which means his account of the soul is one that deals almost entirely with the natural science of the body and its abilities of perception. Thus, the philosopher's connection between the soul and body is explained almost entirely by his understanding of perception; in this way, bodily perception interrelates with the immaterial human intellect. In sense perception, the perceiver senses the form of the object; first, by perceiving features of the object by our external senses. This sensory information is supplied to the internal senses, which merge all the pieces into a whole, unified conscious experience. This process of perception and abstraction is the nexus of the soul and body, for the material body may only perceive material objects, while the immaterial soul may only receive the immaterial, universal forms. The way the soul and body interact in the final abstraction of the universal from the concrete particular is the key to their relationship and interaction, which takes place in the physical body.

[ 106 ] The soul completes the action of intellection by accepting forms that have been abstracted from matter. This process requires a concrete particular (material) to be abstracted into the universal intelligible (immaterial). The material and immaterial interact through the Active Intellect, which is a "divine light" containing the intelligible forms.

[ 107 ] The Active Intellect reveals the universals concealed in material objects much like the sun makes colour available to our eyes.

Other contributions Astronomy and astrology Main article: Astrology in the medieval Islamic world Skull of Avicenna, found in 1950 during construction of the new mausoleum Avicenna wrote an attack on astrology titled Missive on the Champions of the Rule of the Stars ( رسالة في ابطال احكم النجوم ) in which he cited passages from the Quran to dispute the power of astrology to foretell the future.

[ 108 ] He believed that each classical planet had some influence on the Earth but argued against current astrological practices .

[ 109 ] Avicenna's astronomical writings had some influence on later writers, although in general his work could be considered less developed than that of ibn al-Haytham or al-Biruni. One important feature of his writing is that he considers mathematical astronomy a separate discipline from astrology.

[ 110 ] He criticized Aristotle's view of the stars receiving their light from the Sun , stating that the stars are self-luminous, and believed that the planets are also self-luminous.

[ 111 ] He claimed to have observed the transit of Venus . This is possible as there was a transit on 24 May 1032, but ibn Sina did not give the date of his observation and modern scholars have questioned whether he could have observed the transit from his location at that time; he may have mistaken a sunspot for Venus. He used his transit observation to help establish that Venus was, at least sometimes, below the Sun in the geocentric model , [ 110 ] i.e. the sphere of Venus comes before the sphere of the Sun when moving out from the Earth.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] He also wrote the Summary of the Almagest based on Ptolemy's Almagest with an appended treatise "to bring that which is stated in the Almagest and what is understood from Natural Science into conformity". For example, ibn Sina considers the motion of the solar apsis , which Ptolemy had taken to be fixed.

[ 110 ] Chemistry Avicenna was first to derive the attar of flowers from distillation [ 114 ] and used steam distillation to produce essential oils such as rose essence, which he used as aromatherapeutic treatments for heart conditions.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] Unlike al-Razi, Avicenna explicitly disputed the theory of the transmutation of substances commonly believed by alchemists : Those of the chemical craft know well that no change can be effected in the different species of substances, though they can produce the appearance of such change.

[ 117 ] Four works on alchemy attributed to Avicenna were translated into Latin as: [ 118 ] Liber Aboali Abincine de Anima in arte Alchemiae Declaratio Lapis physici Avicennae filio sui Aboali Avicennae de congelatione et conglutinatione lapidum Avicennae ad Hasan Regem epistola de Re recta Liber Aboali Abincine de Anima in arte Alchemiae was the most influential, having influenced later medieval chemists and alchemists such as Vincent of Beauvais . However, Anawati argues (following Ruska) that the de Anima is a fake by a Spanish author. Similarly the Declaratio is believed not to be actually by Avicenna. The third work ( The Book of Minerals ) is agreed to be Avicenna's writing, adapted from the Kitab al-Shifa ( Book of the Remedy ).

[ 118 ] Avicenna classified minerals into stones, fusible substances, sulfurs and salts, building on the ideas of Aristotle and Jabir.

[ 119 ] The epistola de Re recta is somewhat less sceptical of alchemy; Anawati argues that it is by Avicenna, but written earlier in his career when he had not yet firmly decided that transmutation was impossible.

[ 118 ] Poetry Almost half of Avicenna's works are versified.

[ 120 ] His poems appear in both Arabic and Persian. As an example, Edward Granville Browne claims that the following Persian verses are incorrectly attributed to Omar Khayyám , and were originally written by Ibn Sīnā: [ 121 ] از قعر گل سیاه تا اوج زحل کردم همه مشکلات گیتی را حل بیرون جستم زقید هر مکر و حیل هر بند گشاده شد مگر بند اجل From the depth of the black earth up to Saturn's apogee, All the problems of the universe have been solved by me.

I have escaped from the coils of snares and deceits; I have unraveled all knots except the knot of Death.

[ 122 ] : 91 Legacy Classical Islamic civilization Robert Wisnovsky, a scholar of Avicenna attached to McGill University , says that "Avicenna was the central figure in the long history of the rational sciences in Islam, particularly in the fields of metaphysics, logic and medicine" but that his works did not only have an influence in these "secular" fields of knowledge alone, as "these works, or portions of them, were read, taught, copied, commented upon, quoted, paraphrased and cited by thousands of post-Avicennian scholars—not only philosophers, logicians, physicians and specialists in the mathematical or exact sciences, but also by those who specialized in the disciplines of ʿilm al-kalām (rational theology, but understood to include natural philosophy , epistemology and philosophy of mind ) and usūl al-fiqh (jurisprudence, but understood to include philosophy of law, dialectic, and philosophy of language )." [ 123 ] Medieval and Renaissance Europe Inside view of the Avicenna Mausoleum, designed by Hooshang Seyhoun in 1945–1950 As early as the 14th century when Dante Alighieri depicted him in Limbo alongside the virtuous non-Christian thinkers in his Divine Comedy such as Virgil , Averroes , Homer , Horace , Ovid , Lucan , Socrates , Plato and Saladin . Avicenna has been recognized by both East and West as one of the great figures in intellectual history.

Johannes Kepler cites Avicenna's opinion when discussing the causes of planetary motions in Chapter 2 of Astronomia Nova .

[ 124 ] George Sarton , the author of The History of Science , described Avicenna as "one of the greatest thinkers and medical scholars in history" [ 125 ] and called him "the most famous scientist of Islam and one of the most famous of all races, places, and times". He was one of the Islamic world's leading writers in the field of medicine.

Avicenna at the sickbed, miniature by Walenty z Pilzna, Kraków (c. 1479–1480) Along with Rhazes , Abulcasis , Ibn al-Nafis and al-Ibadi , Avicenna is considered an important compiler of early Muslim medicine. He is remembered in the Western history of medicine as a major historical figure who made important contributions to medicine and the European Renaissance . His medical texts were unusual in that where controversy existed between Galen and Aristotle's views on medical matters (such as anatomy), he preferred to side with Aristotle, where necessary updating Aristotle's position to take into account post-Aristotelian advances in anatomical knowledge.

[ 126 ] Aristotle's dominant intellectual influence among medieval European scholars meant that Avicenna's linking of Galen's medical writings with Aristotle's philosophical writings in the Canon of Medicine (along with its comprehensive and logical organisation of knowledge) significantly increased Avicenna's importance in medieval Europe in comparison to other Islamic writers on medicine. His influence following translation of the Canon was such that from the early fourteenth to the mid-sixteenth centuries he was ranked with Hippocrates and Galen as one of the acknowledged authorities, princeps medicorum ("prince of physicians").

[ 127 ] Modern reception A monument to Avicenna in Qakh (city) , Azerbaijan Soviet Union in 1980 published a stamp entitled "1000th anniversary of the birth of Ibn Sina" Image of Avicenna on the Tajikistani somoni Institutions in a variety of counties have been named after Avicenna in honour of his scientific accomplishments, including the Avicenna Mausoleum and Museum , Bu-Ali Sina University , Avicenna Research Institute and Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences .

[ 128 ] There is also a crater on the Moon named Avicenna .

The Avicenna Prize , established in 2003, is awarded every two years by UNESCO and rewards individuals and groups for their achievements in the field of ethics in science.

[ 129 ] The statue of Avicenna in United Nations Office in Vienna as a part of the Persian Scholars Pavilion donated by Iran The Avicenna Directories (2008–2015; now the World Directory of Medical Schools ) list universities and schools where doctors, public health practitioners, pharmacists and others, are educated. The original project team stated: Why Avicenna? Avicenna ... was ... noted for his synthesis of knowledge from both east and west. He has had a lasting influence on the development of medicine and health sciences. The use of Avicenna's name symbolises the worldwide partnership that is needed for the promotion of health services of high quality.

[ 130 ] In June 2009, Iran donated a " Persian Scholars Pavilion " to the United Nations Office in Vienna . It now sits in the Vienna International Center .

[ 131 ] In popular culture The 1982 Soviet film Youth of Genius (Russian: Юность гения , romanized: Yunost geniya ) by Elyor Ishmukhamedov [ ru ] recounts Avicenna's younger years. The film is set in Bukhara at the turn of the millennium.

[ 132 ] In Louis L'Amour 's 1985 historical novel The Walking Drum , Kerbouchard studies and discusses Avicenna's The Canon of Medicine .

In his book The Physician (1988) Noah Gordon tells the story of a young English medical apprentice who disguises himself as a Jew to travel from England to Persia and learn from Avicenna, the great master of his time. The novel was adapted into a feature film, The Physician , in 2013. Avicenna was played by Ben Kingsley .

He appears in 2025's Civilization VII as a Great Person for the Abbasid civilization. When used, Avicenna creates a hospital with 2 extra food points.

[ 133 ] List of works The treatises of Avicenna influenced later Muslim thinkers in many areas including theology, philology, mathematics, astronomy, physics and music. His works numbered almost 450 volumes on a wide range of subjects, of which around 240 have survived. In particular, 150 volumes of his surviving works concentrate on philosophy and 40 of them concentrate on medicine.

[ 15 ] His most famous works are The Book of Healing , and The Canon of Medicine .

Avicenna wrote at least one treatise on alchemy, but several others have been falsely attributed to him. His Logic , Metaphysics , Physics , and De Caelo , are treatises giving a synoptic view of Aristotelian doctrine , [ 134 ] though Metaphysics demonstrates a significant departure from the brand of Neoplatonism known as Aristotelianism in Avicenna's world; Arabic philosophers [ who?

] [ year needed ] have hinted at the idea that Avicenna was attempting to "re-Aristotelianise" Muslim philosophy in its entirety, unlike his predecessors, who accepted the conflation of Platonic, Aristotelian, Neo- and Middle-Platonic works transmitted into the Muslim world.

The Logic and Metaphysics have been extensively reprinted, the latter, e.g., at Venice in 1493, 1495 and 1546. Some of his shorter essays on medicine, logic, etc., take a poetical form (the poem on logic was published by Schmoelders in 1836).

[ 135 ] Two encyclopedic treatises, dealing with philosophy, are often mentioned. The larger, Al-Shifa' ( Sanatio ), exists nearly complete in manuscript in the Bodleian Library and elsewhere; part of it on the De Anima appeared at Pavia (1490) as the Liber Sextus Naturalium , and the long account of Avicenna's philosophy given by Muhammad al-Shahrastani seems to be mainly an analysis, and in many places a reproduction, of the Al-Shifa'. A shorter form of the work is known as the An-najat ( Liberatio ). The Latin editions of part of these works have been modified by the corrections which the monastic editors confess that they applied. There is also a حكمت مشرقيه ( hikmat-al-mashriqqiyya , in Latin Philosophia Orientalis ), mentioned by Roger Bacon , the majority of which was lost in antiquity, which according to Averroes was pantheistic in tone.

[ 134 ] Avicenna's works further include: [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Sirat al-shaykh al-ra'is ( The Life of Avicenna ), ed. and trans. WE. Gohlman, Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1974. (The only critical edition of Avicenna's autobiography, supplemented with material from a biography by his student Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani. A more recent translation of the Autobiography appears in D. Gutas, Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna's Philosophical Works , Leiden: Brill, 1988; second edition 2014.) [ 136 ] Al-isharat wa al-tanbihat ( Remarks and Admonitions ), ed. S. Dunya, Cairo, 1960; parts translated by S.C. Inati, Remarks and Admonitions, Part One: Logic, Toronto, Ont.: Pontifical Institute for Mediaeval Studies, 1984, and Ibn Sina and Mysticism, Remarks and Admonitions: Part 4, London: Kegan Paul International, 1996.

[ 136 ] Al-Qanun fi'l-tibb ( The Canon of Medicine ), ed. I. a-Qashsh, Cairo, 1987. (Encyclopedia of medicine.) [ 136 ] manuscript, [ 138 ] [ 139 ] Latin translation, Flores Avicenne, [ 140 ] Michael de Capella, 1508, [ 141 ] Modern text.

[ 142 ] Ahmed Shawkat Al-Shatti, Jibran Jabbur.

[ 143 ] Risalah fi sirr al-qadar ( Essay on the Secret of Destiny ), trans. G. Hourani in Reason and Tradition in Islamic Ethics, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

[ 136 ] Danishnama "The Book of Scientific Knowledge", ed. and trans. P. Morewedge, The Metaphysics of Avicenna , London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973.

[ 136 ] The Book of Healing , Avicenna's major work on philosophy. He probably began to compose al-Shifa' in 1014, and completed it in 1020. Critical editions of the Arabic text have been published in Cairo, 1952–83, originally under the supervision of I. Madkour.

[ 136 ] Kitab al-Najat "The Book of Salvation", trans. F. Rahman, Avicenna's Psychology: An English Translation of Kitab al-Najat, Book II, Chapter VI with Historical-philosophical Notes and Textual Improvements on the Cairo Edition , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1952. (The psychology of al-Shifa'.) (Digital version of the Arabic text) Risala fi'l-Ishq "A Treatise on Love". Translated by Emil L. Fackenheim.

Persian works Avicenna's most important Persian work is the Danishnama ( دانشنامه علائی , "Book of Knowledge". Avicenna created a new scientific vocabulary that had not previously existed in Persian. The Danishnama covers such topics as logic, metaphysics, music theory and other sciences of his time. It has been translated into English by Parwiz Morewedge in 1977.

[ 144 ] The book is also important in respect to Persian scientific works.

Andar Dānish-i Rag ( اندر دانش رگ , "On the Science of the Pulse") contains nine chapters on the science of the pulse and is a condensed synopsis.

Persian poetry from Avicenna is recorded in various manuscripts and later anthologies such as Nozhat al-Majales .

See also Al-Qumri (possibly Avicenna's teacher) Abdol Hamid Khosro Shahi (Iranian theologian) Mummia (Persian medicine) Eastern philosophy Iranian philosophy Islamic philosophy Contemporary Islamic philosophy Science in the medieval Islamic world List of scientists in medieval Islamic world Sufi philosophy Science and technology in Iran Ancient Iranian medicine List of pre-modern Iranian scientists and scholars Namesakes of Ibn Sina Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences in Aligarh Avicenna Bay in Antarctica Avicenna (crater) on the far side of the Moon Avicenna Cultural and Scientific Foundation Avicenne Hospital in Paris, France Avicenna International College in Budapest , Hungary Avicenna Mausoleum (complex dedicated to Avicenna) in Hamadan , Iran Avicenna Research Institute in Tehran, Iran Avicenna Tajik State Medical University in Dushanbe , Tajikistan Bu-Ali Sina University in Hamedan, Iran Ibn Sina Peak on the Kyrgyzstan – Tajikistan border Ibn Sina Foundation in Houston, Texas [ 145 ] Ibn Sina Hospital , Baghdad , Iraq Ibn Sina Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey [ 146 ] Ibn Sina Medical College Hospital, Dhaka , Bangladesh Ibn Sina University Hospital of Rabat-Salé at Mohammed V University in Rabat , Morocco Ibne Sina Hospital, Multan, Punjab, Pakistan [ 147 ] International Ibn Sina Clinic, Dushanbe , Tajikistan References Citations ^ Encyclopedia of Islam: Vol 1, p. 562, Edition I, 1964, Lahore, Pakistan ^ "Avicenna (Ibn Sina)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 October 2022 .

^ "Ibn Sina [Avicenna]" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 15 September 2016.

^ * Adamson 2016 , pp. 113, 117, 206.

(page 113) "For one thing, it means that he[Avicenna] had a Persian cultural background...he spoke Persian natively and did use it to write philosophy." (page 117) "But for the time being, it was a Persian from Khurasan who would have commentaries lavished upon him. Avicenna would be known by the honorific of "leading master" (al-shaykh al-raʾis)." (page 206) "Persians like Avicenna" Bennison 2009 , p.

195 . "Avicenna was a Persian whose father served the Samanids of Khurasan and Transoxania as the administrator of a rural district outside Bukhara." Paul Strathern (2005).

A brief history of medicine: from Hippocrates to gene therapy . Running Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1525-1 .

Brian Duignan (2010).

Medieval Philosophy . The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 89.

ISBN 978-1-61530-244-4 .

Michael Kort (2004).

Central Asian republics . Infobase Publishing. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-8160-5074-1 .

Goichon 1986 , p. 941. "He was born in 370/980 in Afshana, his mother's home, near Bukhara. His native language was Persian." "Avicenna was the greatest of all Persian thinkers; as physician and metaphysician ..." ( excerpt from A.J. Arberry, Avicenna on Theology , Kazi Publications Inc, 1995).

Corbin 1998 , p.

74 . "Whereas the name of Avicenna (Ibn Sina, died 1037) is generally listed as chronologically first among noteworthy Iranian philosophers, recent evidence has revealed previous existence of Ismaili philosophical systems with a structure no less complete than of Avicenna." ^ a b "Avicenna | Biography, Books, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 20 June 2025 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 .

Avicenna did not burst upon an empty Islamic intellectual stage. It is believed that Muslim writer Ibn al-Muqaffaʿ, or possibly his son, had introduced Aristotelian logic to the Islamic world more than two centuries before Avicenna. Al-Kindī, the first Islamic Peripatetic (Aristotelian) philosopher, and Turkish polymath al-Fārābī, from whose book Avicenna would learn Aristotle's metaphysics, preceded him. Of these luminaries, however, Avicenna remains by far the greatest.

^ "Did You Know?: Silk Roads Exchange and the Development of the Medical Sciences | Programme des Routes de la Soie" .

fr.unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 14 January 2023 .

Scholars from this period include Avicenna (Ibn Sina, 980–1037 CE), who is often described as the father of early modern medicine, the polymath Al-Biruni (973–1050 CE), and the botanist and pharmacist Ibn al-Baitar (1197–1248 CE).

^ Saffari, Mohsen; Pakpour, Amir (1 December 2012).

"Avicenna's Canon of Medicine: A Look at Health, Public Health, and Environmental Sanitation" .

Archives of Iranian Medicine .

15 (12): 785– 9.

PMID 23199255 .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 11 August 2018 .

Avicenna was a well-known Persian and a Muslim scientist who was considered to be the father of early modern medicine.

^ Colgan, Richard (19 September 2009).

Advice to the Young Physician: On the Art of Medicine . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 33.

ISBN 978-1-4419-1034-9 .

Avicenna is known as the father of early modern medicine.

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein (2007).

"Avicenna" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2007 . Retrieved 5 November 2007 .

^ Edwin Clarke, Charles Donald O'Malley (1996), The human brain and spinal cord: a historical study illustrated by writings from antiquity to the twentieth century , Norman Publishing, p. 20 ( ISBN 0-930405-25-0 ).

^ Iris Bruijn (2009), Ship's Surgeons of the Dutch East India Company: Commerce and the progress of medicine in the eighteenth century , Amsterdam University Press , p. 26 ( ISBN 90-8728-051-3 ).

^ "Avicenna 980–1037" . Hcs.osu.edu. Archived from the original on 7 October 2008 . Retrieved 19 January 2010 .

^ e.g. at the universities of Montpellier and Leuven (see "Medicine: an exhibition of books relating to medicine and surgery from the collection formed by J.K. Lilly" . Indiana.edu. 31 August 2004.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2010 .

).

^ "Avicenna", in Encyclopædia Iranica, Online Version 2006" . Iranica.com.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2011 . Retrieved 19 January 2010 .

^ a b c O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Avicenna" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Byrne, Joseph Patrick (2012), "Avicenna" , Encyclopedia of the Black Death, Vol. I , Santa Barbara, CA : ABC-CLIO, ISBN 978-1-59884-253-1 .

^ Van Gelder, Geert Jan, ed. (2013), "Introduction", Classical Arabic Literature , Library of Arabic Literature, New York: New York University Press, p.

xxii , ISBN 978-0-8147-7120-4 ^ "Avicenna" , Consortium of European Research Libraries , archived from the original on 19 August 2021 , retrieved 19 August 2021 ^ Avicenna (1935), "Majmoo' rasaa'il al-sheikh al-ra'iis abi Ali al-Hussein ibn Abdullah ibn Sina al-Bukhari" مجموع رسائل الشيخ الرئيس اب علي الحسين ابن عبدالله ابن سينا البخاري [The Grand Sheikh Ibn Sina's Collection of Treatises], World Digital Library (first ed.), Haydarabad Al-Dakan : Encyclopedia of the Ottoman Press, archived from the original on 19 August 2021 , retrieved 19 August 2021 ^ "Major periods of Muslim education and learning" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 2007.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2007 . Retrieved 16 December 2007 .

^ Afary, Janet (2007).

"Iran" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2013 . Retrieved 16 December 2007 .

^ According to El-Bizri 2006 , p. 369, Avicenna was "of Persian descent". According to Khalidi 2005 , p. xviii, Avicenna was "born of Persian parentage". According to Copleston 1993 , p. 190, Avicenna was "Persian by birth".

Gutas 2014 , pp. xi, 310, mentions Avicenna as an example for "Persian-born authors" and speaks of "presumed Persian origins" for Avicenna.

Glick, Livesey & Wallis 2005 , p. 256, states "An ethnic Persian, he [Avicenna] was born in Kharmaithen, near Bukhara".

^ Goichon 1986 , p. 941.

^ a b Gutas 2014 , p. 11.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Gutas 1987 , pp. 67–70.

^ a b c Gutas 2014 , p. 12.

^ a b c Adamson 2013 , p. 8.

^ Daftary 2017 , p. 191.

^ Daftary 2007 , pp. 202–203.

^ Gutas 1988 , pp. 330–331.

^ a b Gutas 2014 , p. 13.

^ Gutas 2014 , p. 19 (see also note 28).

^ Bosworth 1978 , p. 1066.

^ Bosworth 1984a , pp. 762–764.

^ Madelung 1975 , p. 215.

^ Gutas 2014 , pp. 19, 29.

^ a b Adamson 2013 , p. 14.

^ a b Adamson 2013 , pp. 15–16.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 15.

^ Adamson 2013 , pp. 16–18.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 17.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 18.

^ Madelung 1975 , p. 293.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 18 (see also note 45).

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 22.

^ Bosworth 1984b , pp. 773–774.

^ Adamson 2013 , pp. 22–23.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 23.

^ a b Adamson 2013 , p. 25.

^ Lazard 1975 , p. 630.

^ Gutas 2014 , p. 133.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 26.

^ Stroumsa, Sarah (1992).

"Avicenna's Philosophical Stories: Aristotle's Poetics Reinterpreted" .

Arabica .

39 (2): 183– 206.

doi : 10.1163/157005892X00166 .

ISSN 0570-5398 .

JSTOR 4057059 .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 October 2022 .

^ Nahyan A.G. Fancy (2006), pp. 80–81, "Pulmonary Transit and Bodily Resurrection: The Interaction of Medicine, Philosophy and Religion in the Works of Ibn al-Nafīs (d. 1288)", Electronic Theses and Dissertations , University of Notre Dame Archived 4 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine [ page needed ] ^ cf. e.g.
Henry Corbin, History of Islamic Philosophy , Routledge, 2014, p. 174 .
Henry Corbin, Avicenna and the Visionary Recital , Princeton University Press, 2014, p. 103 .

^ a b c "The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (c. 980–1037)" . Iep.utm.edu. 6 January 2006.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2009 . Retrieved 19 January 2010 .

^ "Islam" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . 2007.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2007 . Retrieved 27 November 2007 .

^ Avicenna, Kitab al-shifa', Metaphysics II , (eds.) G.C. Anawati, Ibrahim Madkour, Sa'id Zayed (Cairo, 1975), p. 36 ^ Nader El-Bizri , "Avicenna and Essentialism," Review of Metaphysics , Vol. 54 (2001), pp. 753–778 ^ Avicenna, Metaphysica of Avicenna , trans. Parviz Morewedge (New York, 1973), p. 43.

^ a b Nader El-Bizri, The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger (Binghamton, N.Y.: Global Publications SUNY, 2000) ^ Avicenna, Kitab al-Hidaya , ed. Muhammad 'Abdu (Cairo, 1874), pp. 262–263 ^ Salem Mashran, al-Janib al-ilahi 'ind Ibn Sina (Damascus, 1992), p. 99 ^ Nader El-Bizri, "Being and Necessity: A Phenomenological Investigation of Avicenna's Metaphysics and Cosmology," in Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology on the Perennial Issue of Microcosm and Macrocosm , ed. Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2006), pp. 243–261 ^ Ibn al-Qayyim, Eghaathat al-Lahfaan , Published: Al Ashqar University (2003) Printed by International Islamic Publishing House: Riyadh.

^ Ibn Muḥammad al-Ghazālī, Abū Ḥāmid Muḥammad (1980).

al-Munqidh min al-Dalal (PDF) . Boston: American University of Beirut. p. 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016.

^ a b Adamson 2013 , p. 170.

^ Adamson 2013 , p. 171.

^ Rafik Berjak and Muzaffar Iqbal, "Ibn Sina—Al-Biruni correspondence", Islam & Science , June 2003.

^ Lenn Evan Goodman (2003), Islamic Humanism , pp. 8–9, Oxford University Press , ISBN 0-19-513580-6 .

^ James W. Morris (1992), "The Philosopher-Prophet in Avicenna's Political Philosophy", in C. Butterworth (ed.), The Political Aspects of Islamic Philosophy , ISBN 978-0-932885-07-4 , Chapter 4, Cambridge Harvard University Press , pp. 152–198 [p. 156].

^ James W. Morris (1992), "The Philosopher-Prophet in Avicenna's Political Philosophy", in C. Butterworth (ed.), The Political Aspects of Islamic Philosophy , Chapter 4, Cambridge Harvard University Press , pp. 152–198 [pp.  160–161].

^ James W. Morris (1992), "The Philosopher-Prophet in Avicenna's Political Philosophy", in C. Butterworth (ed.), The Political Aspects of Islamic Philosophy , Chapter 4, Cambridge Harvard University Press , pp. 152–198 [pp. 156–158].

^ Jules Janssens (2004), "Avicenna and the Qur'an: A Survey of his Qur'anic commentaries", MIDEO 25 , p. 177–192.

^ a b c Aisha Khan (2006).

Avicenna (Ibn Sina): Muslim physician and philosopher of the eleventh century . The Rosen Publishing Group. p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-4042-0509-3 .

^ a b Janssens, Jules L. (1991).

An annotated bibliography on Ibn Sînâ (1970–1989): including Arabic and Persian publications and Turkish and Russian references . Leuven University Press. pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 978-90-6186-476-9 .

excerpt: "... Dimitri Gutas's Avicenna's maḏhab convincingly demonstrates that I.S. was a sunnî-Ḥanafî." [1] Archived 27 June 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ DIMITRI GUTAS (1987), "Avicenna's "maḏhab" with an Appendix on the Question of His Date of Birth", Quaderni di Studi Arabi , 5/6 , Istituto per l'Oriente C. A. Nallino: 323– 336, JSTOR 25802612 ^ See a discussion of this in connection with an analytic take on the philosophy of mind in: Nader El-Bizri , 'Avicenna and the Problem of Consciousness', in Consciousness and the Great Philosophers , eds. S. Leach and J. Tartaglia (London: Routledge, 2016), 45–53 ^ Ibn Sina, الفن السادس من الطبيعيات من كتاب الشفاء القسم الأول (Beirut, Lebanon.: M.A.J.D Enterprise Universitaire d'Etude et de Publication S.A.R.L) يجب أن يتوهم الواحد منا كأنه خلق دفعةً وخلق كاملاً لكنه حجب بصره عن مشاهدة الخارجات وخلق يهوى في هواء أو خلاء هوياً لا يصدمه فيه قوام الهواء صدماً ما يحوج إلى أن يحس وفرق بين أعضائه فلم تتلاق ولم تتماس ثم يتأمل هل أنه يثبت وجود ذاته ولا يشكك في إثباته لذاته موجوداً ولا يثبت مع ذلك طرفاً من أعضائه ولا باطناً من أحشائه ولا قلباً ولا دماغاً ولا شيئاً من الأشياء من خارج بل كان يثبت ذاته ولا يثبت لها طولاً ولا عرضاً ولا عمقاً ولو أنه أمكنه في تلك الحالة أن يتخيل يداً أو عضواً آخر  لم يتخيله جزء من ذاته ولا  شرطاً في ذاته وأنت تعلم أن المثبت غير الذي لم يثبت والمقربه غير الذي لم يقربه فإذن للذات التي أثبت وجودها خاصية على أنها هو بعينه غير جسمه وأعضائه التي لم تثبت فإذن المثبت له سبيل إلى أن يثبته على وجود النفس شيئاً غير الجسم بل غير جسم وأنه عارف به مستشعر له وإن كان ذاهلاً عنه يحتاج إلى أن يقرع عصاه.

— Ibn Sina, Kitab Al-Shifa, On the Soul ^ Hasse, Dag Nikolaus (2000).

Avicenna's De Anima in the Latin West . London: Warburg Institute. p. 81.

^ a b Nader El-Bizri , The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger (Binghamton, NY: Global Publications SUNY, 2000), pp. 149–171.

^ a b Nader El-Bizri, "Avicenna's De Anima between Aristotle and Husserl," in The Passions of the Soul in the Metamorphosis of Becoming , ed. Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003), pp. 67–89.

^ Nasr, Seyyed Hossein; Leaman, Oliver (1996).

History of Islamic philosophy . Routledge. pp. 315, 1022– 1023.

ISBN 978-0-415-05667-0 .

^ Hasse, Dag Nikolaus (2000).

Avicenna's De Anima in the Latin West . London: Warburg Institute. p. 92.

^ McGinnis, Jon (2010).

Avicenna . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

227 .

ISBN 978-0-19-533147-9 .

^ A.C. Brown, Jonathan (2014).

Misquoting Muhammad: The Challenge and Choices of Interpreting the Prophet's Legacy .

Oneworld Publications . p.

12 .

ISBN 978-1-78074-420-9 .

^ Indian Studies on Ibn Sina's Works by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Avicenna (Scientific and Practical International Journal of Ibn Sino International Foundation, Tashkent/Uzbekistan. 1–2; 2003: 40–42 ^ Avicenna Latinus. 1992. Liber Primus Naturalium: Tractatus Primus, De Causis et Principiis Naturalium. Leiden (The Netherlands): E.J. Brill.

^ Axel Lange and Gerd B. Müller . Polydactyly in Development, Inheritance, and Evolution. The Quarterly Review of Biology Vol. 92, No. 1, Mar. 2017, pp. 1–38.

doi : 10.1086/690841 .

^ a b Stephen Toulmin and June Goodfield (1965), The Ancestry of Science: The Discovery of Time , p. 64, University of Chicago Press ^ McGinnis, Jon (July 2003).

"Scientific Methodologies in Medieval Islam" .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

41 (3): 307– 327.

doi : 10.1353/hph.2003.0033 .

ISSN 0022-5053 .

S2CID 30864273 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ History of logic: Arabic logic Archived 12 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Peter Øhrstrøm; Per Hasle (1995).

Temporal Logic: From Ancient Ideas to Artificial Intelligence . Springer. p. 72.

^ Street, Tony (2000), "Toward a History of Syllogistic After Avicenna: Notes on Rescher's Studies on Arabic Modal Logic", Journal of Islamic Studies , 11 (2): 209– 228, doi : 10.1093/jis/11.2.209 ^ Street, Tony (1 January 2005). "Logic". In Peter Adamson & Richard C. Taylor (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Arabic Philosophy . Cambridge University Press. pp.

247 –265.

ISBN 978-0-521-52069-0 .

^ Washell, Richard F. (1973).

"Logic, Language, and Albert the Great" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

34 (3): 445– 450.

doi : 10.2307/2708963 .

ISSN 0022-5037 .

JSTOR 2708963 .

^ Kneale p. 229 ^ Kneale: p. 266; Ockham: Summa Logicae i. 14; Avicenna: Avicennae Opera Venice 1508 f87rb ^ Avicenna, Metaphysics, I; commenting on Aristotle, Topics I.11.105a4–5 ^ Fernando Espinoza (2005). "An analysis of the historical development of ideas about motion and its implications for teaching", Physics Education 40 (2), p. 141.

^ A. Sayili (1987), "Ibn Sīnā and Buridan on the Motion of the Projectile", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 500 (1), pp. 477–482: "It was a permanent force whose effect got dissipated only as a result of external agents such as air resistance. He is apparently the first to conceive such a permanent type of impressed virtue for non-natural motion." ^ Jack Zupko, "John Buridan" in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2014
( fn. 48 Archived 11 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine )
"We do not know precisely where Buridan got the idea of impetus, but a less sophisticated notion of impressed forced can be found in Avicenna's doctrine of mayl (inclination). In this he was possibly influenced by Philoponus, who was developing the Stoic notion of hormé (impulse). For discussion, see Zupko (1997) ['What Is the Science of the Soul? A Case Study in the Evolution of Late Medieval Natural Philosophy,' Synthese, 110(2): 297–334]." ^ George Sarton , Introduction to the History of Science , Vol. 1, p. 710.

^ Carl Benjamin Boyer (1954). "Robert Grosseteste on the Rainbow", Osiris 11 , pp. 247–258 [248].

^ Gutman, Oliver (1997). "On the Fringes of the Corpus Aristotelicum: the Pseudo-Avicenna Liber Celi Et Mundi".

Early Science and Medicine .

2 (2): 109– 128.

doi : 10.1163/157338297X00087 .

^ Avicenna (1952). F. Rahman (ed.).

Avicenna's Psychology. An English translation of Kitāb al-Najāt, Book II, Chapter VI, with Historico-Philosophical Notes and Textual Improvements on the Cairo edition . London: Oxford University Press, Geoffrey Cumberlege. p. 41.

^ Avicenna (1952). F. Rahman (ed.).

Avicenna's Psychology. An English translation of Kitāb al-Najāt, Book II, Chapter VI, with Historico-Philosophical Notes and Textual Improvements on the Cairo edition . London: Oxford University Press, Geoffrey Cumberlege. pp.

68– 69.

^ George Saliba (1994), A History of Arabic Astronomy: Planetary Theories During the Golden Age of Islam , pp. 60, 67–69.

New York University Press , ISBN 0-8147-8023-7 .

^ Saliba, George (2011).

"Avicenna" .

Encyclopædia Iranica, Online Edition .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2020 . Retrieved 18 January 2012 .

^ a b c Sally P. Ragep (2007).

"Ibn Sīnā: Abū ʿAlī al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAbdallāh ibn Sīnā" . In Thomas Hockey (ed.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers .

Springer Science+Business Media . pp.

570– 572.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 .

^ Ariew, Roger (March 1987). "The phases of venus before 1610".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part A .

18 (1): 81– 92.

Bibcode : 1987SHPSA..18...81A .

doi : 10.1016/0039-3681(87)90012-4 .

^ Goldstein, Bernard R. (1969). "Some Medieval Reports of Venus and Mercury Transits".

Centaurus .

14 (1): 49– 59.

Bibcode : 1969Cent...14...49G .

doi : 10.1111/j.1600-0498.1969.tb00135.x .

^ Goldstein, Bernard R. (March 1972). "Theory and Observation in Medieval Astronomy".

Isis .

63 (1): 39–47 [44].

Bibcode : 1972Isis...63...39G .

doi : 10.1086/350839 .

S2CID 120700705 .

^ Essa, Ahmed; Ali, Othman (2010).

Studies in Islamic Civilization: The Muslim Contribution to the Renaissance . International Institute of Islamic Thought (IIIT). p. 70.

ISBN 978-1-56564-350-5 .

^ Marlene Ericksen (2000).

Healing with Aromatherapy , p. 9. McGraw-Hill Professional.

ISBN 0-658-00382-8 .

^ Ghulam Moinuddin Chishti (1991).

The Traditional Healer's Handbook: A Classic Guide to the Medicine of Avicenna . Inner Traditions / Bear & Co. p. 239.

ISBN 978-0-89281-438-1 .

^ Robert Briffault (1938).

The Making of Humanity , p. 196–197.

^ a b c Georges C. Anawati (1996), "Arabic alchemy", in Roshdi Rashed, ed., Encyclopedia of the History of Arabic Science , Vol. 3, pp. 853–885 [875].

Routledge , London and New York.

^ Leicester, Henry Marshall (1971), The Historical Background of Chemistry , Courier Dover Publications, p. 70, ISBN 978-0-486-61053-5 , There was one famous Arab physician who doubted even the reality of transmutation. This was 'Abu Ali al-Husain ibn Abdallah ibn Sina (980–1037), called Avicenna in the West, the greatest physician of Islam. ... Many of his observations on chemistry are included in the Kitab al-Shifa , the "Book of the Remedy". In the physical section of this work he discusses the formation of minerals, which he classifies into stones, fusible substances, sulfurs, and salts. Mercury is classified with the fusible substances, metals ^ E.G. Browne , Islamic Medicine (sometimes also printed under the title Arabian medicine ), 2002, Goodword Pub., ISBN 81-87570-19-9 , p61 ^ E.G. Browne, Islamic Medicine (sometimes also printed under the title Arabian medicine ), 2002, Goodword Pub., ISBN 81-87570-19-9 , pp. 60–61) ^ Gabrieli, F. (1950). Avicenna's Millenary. East and West, 1(2), 87–92.

^ Wisnovsky, Robert (1 October 2012).

"Indirect Evidence for Establishing the Text of the Shifā" .

Oriens .

40 (2): 257– 258.

doi : 10.1163/18778372-00402004 .

ISSN 0078-6527 .

^ Johannes Kepler, New Astronomy , translated by William H. Donahue, Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr., 1992.

ISBN 0-521-30131-9 ^ George Sarton , Introduction to the History of Science .

( cf.

A. Zahoor and Z. Haq (1997).

Quotations From Famous Historians of Science Archived 3 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine , Cyberistan.) ^ Musallam, B. (2011).

"Avicenna Medicine and Biology" .

Encyclopædia Iranica .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2011 .

^ Weisser, U. (2011).

"Avicenna The influence of Avicenna on medical studies in the West" .

Encyclopædia Iranica .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2011 .

^ "Home Page" .

amch.edu.pk . 28 March 2014. Archived from the original on 8 November 2013.

^ "UNESCO: The Avicenna Prize for Ethics in Science" . 4 September 2019.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2016 .

^ "Educating health professionals: the Avicenna project" The Lancet , March 2008. Volume 371 pp. 966–967.

^ "Monument to Be Inaugurated at the Vienna International Centre, 'Scholars Pavilion' donated to International Organizations in Vienna by Iran" .

unvienna.org .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 6 January 2015 .

^ "Youth of Genius" (USSR, Uzbekfilm and Tajikfilm, 1982): 1984 – State Prize of the USSR (Elyer Ishmuhamedov); 1983 – VKF (All-Union Film Festival) Grand Prize (Elyer Ishmuhamedov); 1983 – VKF (All-Union Film Festival) Award for Best Cinematography (Tatiana Loginov). See annotation on kino-teatr.ru Archived 20 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "ABBASID - EXPLORATION AGE CIVILIZATION" .

civilization.2k.com .

2K Games . Retrieved 14 July 2025 .

^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Avicenna ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

62– 63.

^ Thought Experiments: Popular Thought Experiments in Philosophy, Physics, Ethics, Computer Science & Mathematics by Fredrick Kennard, p. 115 ^ a b c d e f g "Ibn Sina Abu 'Ali Al-Husayn" . Muslimphilosophy.com.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2010 . Retrieved 19 January 2010 .

^ Tasaneef lbn Sina by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Tabeeb Haziq, Gujarat, Pakistan, 1986, pp. 176–198 ^ "The Canon of Medicine" .

Wdl.org . 1 January 1597.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ "The Canon of Medicine" .

World Digital Library . 1597.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ Flowers of Avicenna . Printed by Claude Davost alias de Troys, for Bartholomeus Trot. 1 January 1508.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ "Flowers of Avicenna – Flores Avicenne" .

World Digital Library .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ "The Book of Simple Medicine and Plants" from "The Canon of Medicine" . Knowledge Foundation. 1 January 1900.

Archived from the original on 23 February 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ Avicenna.

"The Canon of Medicine" .

World Digital Library .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2014 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ Avicenna, Danish Nama-i 'Alai. trans. Parviz Morewedge as The Metaphysics of Avicenna (New York: Columbia University Press), 1977.

^ "Our Story" .

Ibn Sina Foundation .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ "Ibn Sina Hospital" .

Ibn Sina Hospital, Turkey .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ "Ibne Sina Hospital" .

Ibn e Siena .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2020 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

Notes ^ Persian and Arabic : ابن سینا , romanized : Ibn Sīnā Sources Adamson, Peter (2013).

Interpreting Avicenna: Critical Essays . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-0-521-19073-2 .

Adamson, Peter (2016).

Philosophy in the Islamic World: A history of philosophy without any gaps, Volume 3 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-957749-1 .

Bennison, Amira K. (2009).

The great caliphs: the golden age of the 'Abbasid Empire . New Haven: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15227-2 .

Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1978).

"K̲h̲wārazm-S̲h̲āhs" . In van Donzel, E.

; Lewis, B.

; Pellat, Ch.

& Bosworth, C. E.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume IV: Iran–Kha . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

OCLC 758278456 .

Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1984a).

"Āl-e Maʾmūn" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. I, Fasc. 7 . pp.

762– 764.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 September 2021 .

Bosworth, Clifford Edmund (1984b).

"ʿAlāʾ-al-dawla Moḥammad" .

Encyclopaedia Iranica, Vol. I, Fasc. 7 . pp.

773– 774.

Archived from the original on 3 September 2021 . Retrieved 18 September 2021 .

Copleston, Frederick (1993).

A History of Philosophy, Volume 2: Medieval Philosophy – From Augustine to Duns Scotus . Image Books.

ISBN 978-0-385-46844-2 .

Corbin, Henry (1998).

The Voyage and the messenger: Iran and philosophy . North Atlantic Books.

ISBN 9781556432699 .

Corbin, Henry (19 April 2016).

Avicenna and the Visionary Recital . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-63054-0 .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 12 August 2018 .

Daftary, Farhad (2007).

Ismaili History and Intellectual Traditions . The Isma'ilis: Their History and Doctrines.

ISBN 978-0-521-85084-1 .

Daftary, Farhad (2017).

Ismaili History and Intellectual Traditions . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-138-28810-2 .

Daly, Jonathan (19 December 2013).

The Rise of Western Power: A Comparative History of Western Civilization . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-1-4411-1851-6 .

El-Bizri, Nader (2006). "Ibn Sina, or Avicenna". In Meri, Josef W. (ed.).

Medieval Islamic Civilization: An Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Routledge. pp.

369– 370.

ISBN 978-0-415-96691-7 .

Glick, Thomas F.

; Livesey, Steven John; Wallis, Faith (2005).

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-138-05670-1 .

Goichon, A.M (1986).

"Ibn Sīnā" . In Lewis, B.

; Ménage, V. L.

; Pellat, Ch.

& Schacht, J.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume III: H–Iram . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

OCLC 495469525 .

Gutas, Dimitri (1987).

"Avicenna ii. Biography" . In Yarshater, Ehsan (ed.).

Encyclopædia Iranica . Vol. III/1: Ātaš–Awāʾel al-Maqālāt. London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul. pp.

67– 70.

ISBN 978-0-71009-113-0 .

Gutas, Dimitri (1988). "Avicenna's Maḏhab with an appendix on the question of his date of Birth".

Quaderni di Studi Arabi .

6 : 323– 336.

JSTOR 25802612 .

( registration required ) Gutas, Dimitri (2014).

Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna's Philosophical Works. Second, Revised and Enlarged Edition, Including an Inventory of Avicenna's Authentic Works . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004201729 .

Khalidi, Muhammad Ali (2005).

Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82243-5 .

Lazard, G. (1975). "The Rise of the New Persian Language". In Frye, Richard N.

(ed.).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 4: From the Arab Invasion to the Saljuqs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

595– 633.

ISBN 0-521-20093-8 .

Madelung, Wilferd (1975). "The Minor Dynasties of Northern Iran". In Frye, Richard N.

(ed.).

The Cambridge History of Iran . Vol. 4: From the Arab Invasion to the Saljuqs. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

595– 633.

ISBN 0-521-20093-8 .

Pasnau, Robert; Dyke, Christina Van (2010).

Cambridge History of Medieval Philosophy, Volume 1 . Cambridge University Press.

Further reading Encyclopedic articles Syed Iqbal, Zaheer (2010).

An Educational Encyclopedia of Islam (2nd ed.). Bangalore: Iqra Publishers. p. 1280.

ISBN 978-603-90004-4-0 .

Flannery, Michael.

"Avicenna" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2015 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 .

Goichon, A.-M.

(1999).

"Ibn Sina, Abu 'Ali al-Husayn b. 'Abd Allah b. Sina, known in the West as Avicenna" .

Encyclopedia of Islam .

Brill Publishers .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2007 . Retrieved 15 February 2007 .

Mahdi, M.

; Gutas, D; Abed, Sh.B.; Marmura, M.E.; Rahman, F.; Saliba, G.; Wright, O.; Musallam, B.; Achena, M.; Van Riet, S.; Weisser, U. (1987).

"Avicenna" .

Encyclopædia Iranica .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2011 . Retrieved 15 January 2012 .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Avicenna" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu Ali al-Husain ibn Abdallah ibn Sina (Avicenna)" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Ragep, Sally P. (2007).

"Ibn Sīnā: Abū ʿAlī al-Ḥusayn ibn ʿAbdallāh ibn Sīnā" . In Hockey, Thomas; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

570– 572.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2011 .

(PDF version) Avicenna Archived 3 June 2012 at the Wayback Machine entry by Sajjad H. Rizvi in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy M. Alper, Ömer; Durusoy, Ali; Terzioğlu, Arslan; H.Turabi, Ahmet; Karliğa, H.Bekir; Görgün, Tahsin (1999).

İBN SÎNÂ – An article published in Turkish Encyclopedia of Islam (in Turkish). Vol. 20 (Ibn Haldun - Ibnu'l Cezeri).

TDV Encyclopedia of Islam . pp.

319– 358.

ISBN 978-97-53-89447-0 .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2022 .

Primary literature For an old list of other extant works, C. Brockelmann 's Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur (Weimar 1898), vol. i. pp. 452–458. (XV. W.; G. W. T.) For a current list of his works see A. Bertolacci (2006) and D. Gutas (2014) in the section "Philosophy".

Avicenna (2005).

The Metaphysics of The Healing . A parallel English-Arabic text translation. Michael E. Marmura (trans.) (1 ed.). Brigham Young University.

ISBN 978-0-934893-77-0 .

Avicenna (1999).

The Canon of Medicine (al-Qānūn fī'l-ṭibb), vol. 1 . Laleh Bakhtiar (ed.), Oskar Cameron Gruner (trans.), Mazhar H. Shah (trans.). Great Books of the Islamic World.

ISBN 978-1-871031-67-6 .

Avicenne: Réfutation de l'astrologie . Edition et traduction du texte arabe, introduction, notes et lexique par Yahya Michot. Préface d'Elizabeth Teissier (Beirut-Paris: Albouraq, 2006) ISBN 2-84161-304-6 .

William E. Gohlam (ed.), The Life of Ibn Sina. A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation , Albany, State of New York University Press, 1974.

For Ibn Sina's life, see Ibn Khallikan 's Biographical Dictionary , translated by de Slane (1842); F. Wüstenfeld 's Geschichte der arabischen Aerzte und Naturforscher (Göttingen, 1840).

Madelung, Wilferd and Toby Mayer (ed. and tr.), Struggling with the Philosopher: A Refutation of Avicenna's Metaphysics.

A New Arabic Edition and English Translation of Shahrastani's Kitab al-Musara'a.

Secondary literature Afnan, Soheil M.

(1958).

Avicenna: His Life and Works . London: G. Allen & Unwin.

OCLC 31478971 .

This is, on the whole, an informed and good account of the life and accomplishments of one of the greatest influences on the development of thought both Eastern and Western. ... It is not as philosophically thorough as the works of D. Saliba, A.M. Goichon, or L. Gardet, but it is probably the best essay in English on this important thinker of the Middle Ages. (Julius R. Weinberg, The Philosophical Review , Vol. 69, No. 2, Apr. 1960, pp. 255–259) Goodman, Lenn E.

(2006).

Avicenna (Updated ed.). Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-415-01929-3 .

This is a distinguished work which stands out from, and above, many of the books and articles which have been written in this century on Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā) (980–1037). It has two main features on which its distinction as a major contribution to Avicennan studies may be said to rest: the first is its clarity and readability; the second is the comparative approach adopted by the author. ... (Ian Richard Netton, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society , Third Series, Vol. 4, No. 2, July 1994, pp. 263–264) Gutas, Dimitri (1987). "Avicenna's maḏhab, with an Appendix on the question of his date of birth".

Quaderni di Studi Arabi .

5– 6 : 323– 336.

Y.T. Langermann (ed.), Avicenna and his Legacy. A Golden Age of Science and Philosophy , Brepols Publishers, 2010, ISBN 978-2-503-52753-6 For a new understanding of his early career, based on a newly discovered text, see also: Michot, Yahya, Ibn Sînâ: Lettre au vizir Abû Sa'd .

Editio princeps d'après le manuscrit de Bursa, traduction de l'arabe, introduction, notes et lexique (Beirut-Paris: Albouraq, 2000) ISBN 2-84161-150-7 .

Strohmaier, Gotthard (2006).

Avicenna (in German). C.H. Beck.

ISBN 978-3-406-54134-6 .

This German publication is both one of the most comprehensive general introductions to the life and works of the philosopher and physician Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā, d. 1037) and an extensive and careful survey of his contribution to the history of science. Its author is a renowned expert in Greek and Arabic medicine who has paid considerable attention to Avicenna in his recent studies. ... (Amos Bertolacci, Isis , Vol. 96, No. 4, December 2005, p. 649) Rahman, Hakim Syed Zillur.

Resalah Judiya of Ibn Sina (First edition 1971), Literary Research Unit, CCRIH, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh; (Second edition 1981) Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine, Govt. of India, New Delhi; (Fourth edition 1999), Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine, Govt. of India, New Delhi .

Rahman, Hakim Syed Zillur (1996).

AI-Advia al-Qalbia of Ibn Sina . Publication Division, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh.

Rahman, Hakim Syed Zillur.

Ilmul Amraz of Ibn Sina (First edition 1969), Tibbi Academy, Delhi (Second edition 1990), (Third edition 1994), Tibbi Academy, Aligarh .

Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (1986).

Qanoon lbn Sina Aur Uskey Shareheen wa Mutarjemeen . Publication Division, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh.

Rahman, Hakim Syed Zillur (1986), Qānūn-i ibn-i Sīnā aur us ke shārḥīn va mutarajimīn , ʻAlīgaṛh: Pablīkeshan Dīvīzan, Muslim Yūnīvarsiṭī, OL 1374509M Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman (2004).

Qanun Ibn Sina and its Translation and Commentators (Persian Translation; 203pp) . Society for the Appreciation of Cultural Works and Dignitaries, Tehran, Iran.

Shaikh al Rais Ibn Sina (Special number) 1958–59, Ed. Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman, Tibbia College Magazine, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India .

Medicine Browne, Edward G.

Islamic Medicine. Fitzpatrick Lectures Delivered at the Royal College of Physicians in 1919–1920 , reprint: New Delhi: Goodword Books,  2001.

ISBN 81-87570-19-9 Pormann, Peter & Savage-Smith, Emilie .

Medieval Islamic Medicine , Washington: Georgetown University Press, 2007.

Prioreschi, Plinio.

Byzantine and Islamic Medicine , A History of Medicine, Vol. 4, Omaha: Horatius Press, 2001.

Syed Ziaur Rahman . Pharmacology of Avicennian Cardiac Drugs (Metaanalysis of researches and studies in Avicennian Cardiac Drugs along with English translation of Risalah al Adwiya al Qalbiyah), Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences , Aligarh, India, 2020 ISBN 978-93-80610-43-6 Philosophy Amos Bertolacci, The Reception of Aristotle's Metaphysics in Avicenna's Kitab al-Sifa'. A Milestone of Western Metaphysical Thought , Leiden: Brill 2006, (Appendix C contains an Overview of the Main Works by Avicenna on Metaphysics in Chronological Order ).

Dimitri Gutas , Avicenna and the Aristotelian Tradition: Introduction to Reading Avicenna's Philosophical Works , Leiden, Brill 2014, second revised and expanded edition (first edition: 1988), including an inventory of Avicenna' Authentic Works.

Andreas Lammer: The Elements of Avicenna's Physics. Greek Sources and Arabic Innovations . Scientia graeco-arabica 20. Berlin / Boston: Walter de Gruyter, 2018.

Jon McGinnis and David C. Reisman (eds.) Interpreting Avicenna: Science and Philosophy in Medieval Islam: Proceedings of the Second Conference of the Avicenna Study Group , Leiden: Brill, 2004.

(in French) Michot, Jean R., La destinée de l'homme selon Avicenne , Louvain: Aedibus Peeters, 1986, ISBN 978-90-6831-071-9 .

Nader El-Bizri , The Phenomenological Quest between Avicenna and Heidegger , Binghamton, N.Y.: Global Publications SUNY, 2000 (reprinted by SUNY Press in 2014 with a new Preface).

Nader El-Bizri, "Avicenna and Essentialism," Review of Metaphysics , Vol. 54 (June 2001), pp. 753–778.

Nader El-Bizri, "Avicenna's De Anima between Aristotle and Husserl," in The Passions of the Soul in the Metamorphosis of Becoming , ed. Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2003, pp. 67–89.

Nader El-Bizri, "Being and Necessity: A Phenomenological Investigation of Avicenna's Metaphysics and Cosmology," in Islamic Philosophy and Occidental Phenomenology on the Perennial Issue of Microcosm and Macrocosm , ed. Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 2006, pp. 243–261.

Nader El-Bizri, 'Ibn Sīnā's Ontology and the Question of Being', Ishrāq: Islamic Philosophy Yearbook 2 (2011), 222–237 Nader El-Bizri, 'Philosophising at the Margins of 'Sh'i Studies': Reflections on Ibn Sīnā's Ontology', in The Study of Sh'i Islam. History, Theology and Law , eds. F. Daftary and G. Miskinzoda (London: I.B. Tauris, 2014), pp. 585–597.

Reisman, David C. (ed.), Before and After Avicenna: Proceedings of the First Conference of the Avicenna Study Group ,  Leiden: Brill, 2003.

External links Avicenna at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource "Avicenna" at Encyclopædia Iranica Works by Avicenna at Project Gutenberg Works by Avicenna at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Gutas, Dimitri.

"Ibn Sina [Avicenna]" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Lizzini, Olga.

"Ibn Sina's Metaphysics" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Strobino, Riccardo.

"Ibn Sina's Logic" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

McGinnis, Jon.

"Ibn Sina's Natural Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rizvi, Sajjad H.

"Avicenna (Ibn Sina)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Chatti, Saloua.

"Avicenna (Ibn Sina): Logic" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Avicenna (Ibn-Sina) on the Subject and the Object of Metaphysics with a list of translations of the logical and philosophical works and an annotated bibliography Avicenna on In Our Time at the BBC v t e Avicenna Works The Canon of Medicine The Book of Healing Al-isharat wa al-tanbihat Alai Encyclopedia Book of science Al-Nijat Five Treatises On the Science of the Pulse The Book of the Mi'raj Category Commons Associated subjects v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Persian literature Old Behistun Inscription Old Persian inscriptions Ganjnameh Inscription of Xerxes the Great in Van Fortress Achaemenid inscription in the Kharg Island Middle Ayadgar-i Zariran Counsels of Adurbad-e Mahrspandan Dēnkard Book of Jamasp Book of Arda Viraf Karnamak-i Artaxshir-i Papakan Cube of Zoroaster Dana-i Menog Khrat Shabuhragan of Mani Shahrestanha-ye Eranshahr Bundahishn Menog-i Khrad Jamasp Namag Dadestan-i Denig Anthology of Zadspram Warshtmansr Zand-i Wahman yasn Drakht-i Asurig Shikand-gumanig Vizar Classical 800s Muhammad ibn Wasif 900s Rudaki Daqiqi Ferdowsi ( Shahnameh ) Abu Shakur Balkhi Abu Tahir Khosrovani Shahid Balkhi Bal'ami Rabia Balkhi Abusaeid Abolkheir (967–1049) Avicenna (980–1037) Unsuri Asjadi Kisai Marvazi Ayyuqi 1000s Bābā Tāher Nasir Khusraw (1004–1088) Al-Ghazali (1058–1111) Khwaja Abdullah Ansari (1006–1088) Asadi Tusi Qatran Tabrizi (1009–1072) Nizam al-Mulk (1018–1092) Masud Sa'd Salman (1046–1121) Omar Khayyam (1048–1131) Fakhruddin As'ad Gurgani Ahmad Ghazali Hujwiri Manuchehri Ayn-al-Quzat Hamadani (1098–1131) Uthman Mukhtari Abu-al-Faraj Runi Sanai Banu Goshasp Borzu-Nama Afdal al-Din Kashani Abu'l Hasan Mihyar al-Daylami Mu'izzi Mahsati Ganjavi 1100s Athir al-Din Akhsikati Iranshah Suzani Samarqandi Hassan Ghaznavi Faramarz Nama Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi (1155–1191) Adib Sabir Falaki Shirvani Am'aq Najm al-Din Razi Attar (1142– c.1220 ) Khaqani (1120–1190) Anvari (1126–1189) Faramarz-e Khodadad Nizami Ganjavi (1141–1209) Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209) Kamal al-Din Esfahani Shams Tabrizi (d.1248) 1200s Abu Tahir Tarsusi Awhadi Maraghai Shams al-Din Qays Razi Sultan Walad Nasīr al-Dīn al-Tūsī Afdal al-Din Kashani Fakhr-al-Din Iraqi Mahmud Shabistari (1288–1320s) Abu'l Majd Tabrizi Amir Khusrau (1253–1325) Saadi ( Bustan / Golestān ) Bahram-e-Pazhdo Pur-Baha Jami Zartosht Bahram e Pazhdo Rumi Homam Tabrizi (1238–1314) Nozhat al-Majales Khwaju Kermani Badr Shirvani Zu'l-Fiqar Shirvani 1300s Ibn Yamin Shah Ni'matullah Wali Hafez Abu Ali Qalandar Fazlallah Astarabadi Nasimi Emad al-Din Faqih Kermani 1400s Ubayd Zakani Salman Savaji Hatefi Jami Kamal Khujandi Ahli Shirazi (1454–1535) Fuzuli (1483–1556) Ismail I (1487–1524) Baba Faghani 1500s Vahshi Bafqi (1523–1583) Mohtasham Kashani (1500–1588) 'Orfi Shirazi 1600s Taleb Amoli Saib Tabrizi (1607–1670) Asir-e Esfahani (c. 1620–1648) Kalim Kashani Hazin Lāhiji (1692–1766) Saba Kashani Abdul-Qādir Bēdil (1642–1720) Naw'i Khabushani Mohammad Qoli Salim Tehrani Rasa Salim Tehrani 1700s Hatef Esfahani Azar Bigdeli (1722–1781) Neshat Esfahani Abbas Foroughi Bastami (1798–1857) 1800s Yaghma Jandaqi (1782–1859) Mirza Ghalib (1797–1869) Zayn al-Abidin Shirvani (1779–1837) Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat (1800–1871) Mirza Mohammad Taqi Sepehr (1801–1880) Qaani (1808–1854) Mahmud Khan Malek al-Sho'ara (1813–1893) Contemporary Poetry Iran Ahmadreza Ahmadi Mehdi Akhavan-Sales Hormoz Alipour Qeysar Aminpour Mohammad Reza Aslani Aref Qazvini Ahmad NikTalab Aminollah Rezaei Manouchehr Atashi Mahmoud Mosharraf Azad Tehrani Mohammad-Taqi Bahar Reza Baraheni Simin Behbahani Dehkhoda Hushang Ebtehaj Bijan Elahi Parviz Eslampour Parvin E'tesami Forugh Farrokhzad Hossein Monzavi Hushang Irani Iraj Mirza Bijan Jalali Siavash Kasraie Esmail Khoi Shams Langeroodi Mohammad Mokhtari Nosrat Rahmani Yadollah Royaee Tahereh Saffarzadeh Sohrab Sepehri Mohammad-Reza Shafiei Kadkani Mohammad-Hossein Shahriar Ahmad Shamlou Manouchehr Sheybani Nima Yooshij ( She'r-e Nimaa'i ) Fereydoon Moshiri Armenia Edward Haghverdian Afghanistan Nadia Anjuman Wasef Bakhtari Raziq Faani Khalilullah Khalili Youssof Kohzad Massoud Nawabi Abdul Ali Mustaghni Tajikistan Sadriddin Ayni Farzona Iskandar Khatloni Abolqasem Lahouti Gulrukhsor Safieva Loiq Sher-Ali Payrav Sulaymoni Mirzo Tursunzoda Satim Ulugzade Uzbekistan Asad Gulzoda Pakistan Muhammad Iqbal Novels Ali Mohammad Afghani Ghazaleh Alizadeh Bozorg Alavi Reza Amirkhani Mahshid Amirshahi Ghassem Hashemi Nezhad Reza Baraheni Simin Daneshvar Mahmoud Dowlatabadi Soudabeh Fazaeli Reza Ghassemi Mohammad Hanif (Iranian writer) Houshang Golshiri Aboutorab Khosravi Zeyn al-Abedin Maraghei Ahmad Mahmoud Shahriyar Mandanipour Abbas Maroufi Mansour Koushan Iraj Pezeshkzad Short stories Jalal Al-e-Ahmad Shamim Bahar Sadeq Chubak Abolhassan Etessami Javad Mojabi Simin Daneshvar Nader Ebrahimi Ebrahim Golestan Houshang Golshiri Sadegh Hedayat Mohammad-Ali Jamalzadeh Aboutorab Khosravi Mostafa Mastoor Jaafar Modarres-Sadeghi Houshang Moradi Kermani Bijan Najdi Shahrnush Parsipur Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bahram Sadeghi Goli Taraqqi Plays Reza Abdoh Mirza Fatali Akhundzadeh Mohsen Yalfani Bahram Beyzai Bahman Forsi Amir Reza Koohestani Alireza Koushk Jalali Gholam-Hossein Sa'edi Bijan Mofid Hengameh Mofid Abbas Nalbandian Akbar Radi Pari Saberi Mirza Aqa Tabrizi Mohammad Yaghoubi Screenplays Saeed Aghighi Mohammad Reza Aslani Rakhshan Bani-E'temad Bahram Beyzai Hajir Darioush Pouran Derakhshandeh Asghar Farhadi Bahman Farmanara Farrokh Ghaffari Behrouz Gharibpour Bahman Ghobadi Fereydun Gole Ebrahim Golestan Ali Hatami Abolfazl Jalili Ebrahim Hatamikia Abdolreza Kahani Varuzh Karim-Masihi Samuel Khachikian Abbas Kiarostami Majid Majidi Mohsen Makhmalbaf Dariush Mehrjui Reza Mirkarimi Rasoul Mollagholipour Amir Naderi Jafar Panahi Kambuzia Partovi Fereydoun Rahnema Rasul Sadr Ameli Mohammad Sadri Parviz Shahbazi Sohrab Shahid-Saless Translators Amrollah Abjadian Jaleh Amouzgar Najaf Daryabandari Mohammad Ghazi Lili Golestan Sadegh Hedayat Ramak NikTalab Saleh Hosseini Ahmad Kamyabi Mask Ahmad Shamlou Mohammad Moin Ebrahim Pourdavoud Hamid Samandarian Jalal Sattari Jafar Shahidi Ahmad Tafazzoli Abbas Zaryab Children's literature Samad Behrangi Houshang Moradi Kermani Babak NikTalab Hengameh Mofid Poopak NikTalab Farhad Hasanzadeh Ramak NikTalab Essayists Aydin Aghdashloo Ali Latifiyan Mohammad Ebrahim Bastani Parizi Ehsan Yarshater Ahmad Kasravi Contemporary Persian and Classical Persian are the same language, but writers since 1900 are classified as contemporary. At one time, Persian was a common cultural language of much of the non-Arabic Islamic world.  Today it is the official language of Iran , Tajikistan and one of the two official languages of Afghanistan .

v t e Medieval Perso-Arab music Arab music Persian traditional music Origins Achaemenid Karnay Parthian gōsān Rhoptron Sasanian Bamshad Barbad Nagisa Umayyad Ṭuways Nashit Sa'ib Khathir Ibn Misjaḥ al-Gharid Hunain al-Hiri Algharid Ibn Surayj Ma'bad Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Ibn Muhriz Malik al-Ta'i Qiyan Atika bint Shuhda Azza al-Mayla Djamila/Jamila Hababah Ubayda Abbasid Siyat Ibn Jami Ibrahim al-Mawsili Ulayya bint al-Mahdi Yaḥya al-Makki Ibrahim ibn al-Mahdi Mansour Zalzal Mukhariq Ishaq al-Mawsili Allawayh al-Asar Amr ibn Banah Jahzah Ibn al-Tahhan Qiyan Irfan Mahbubah Milh Al-Attara Inan bint Abdallah Shāriyah Faḍl al-Shāʻirah Arib al-Ma'muniyya Sarirah al-Ra’iqiyya Andalusian-Arab Ziryab Avempace Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Theorists‎ Al-Kindi Al-Sarakhsi Al-Farabi Ziryab Avicenna Abu al-Faraj al-Isfahani Avempace Safi al-Din al-Urmawi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Kurr Abu Ahmad Monajjem Works Kitab al-Aghani Kitab al-Musiqa al-Kabir Related Islamic Golden Age Hind bint Utba v t e Ancient anaesthesia Plants / animals Aconitum (aconite) Atropa belladonna (belladonna) Cannabis medical use Castoreum Coca Conium (hemlock) Datura innoxia (thorn-apple) Datura metel (devil's trumpet) Hyoscyamus niger (henbane) Lactucarium Mandragora officinarum (mandrake) Opium Saussurea (saw-wort) Willow Preparations Beer Wine Compounds Ethanol ( medical use ) Aconitine Atropine Cocaine Coniine Hyoscine Δ9-THC Hyoscyamine Morphine Salicylate People Abulcasis Avenzoar Avicenna Celsus Dioscorides Galen Hippocrates Rhazes Sabuncuoğlu Sushrutha Theophrastus Zhang v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐489fk
Cached time: 20250818101557
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.150 seconds
Real time usage: 2.479 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21225/1000000
Revision size: 117642/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 761791/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 154335/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 553736/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.266/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21720336/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2020.363      1 -total
 25.08%  506.775      2 Template:Reflist
 12.66%  255.792      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  9.89%  199.803     42 Template:Cite_book
  9.64%  194.816     23 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.43%  150.199     52 Template:Sfn
  6.80%  137.415     22 Template:Navbox
  5.42%  109.550      1 Template:Navboxes
  4.70%   94.983      1 Template:Short_description
  4.41%   89.097     19 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1130:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818101557 and revision id 1302383475. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Avicenna&oldid=1302383475 " Categories : Avicenna 980s births 1037 deaths 11th-century astronomers 11th-century Persian-language poets 11th-century philosophers 11th-century Iranian physicians Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Aristotelian philosophers Buyid viziers Characters in the Divine Comedy Classical humanists Muslim critics of atheism Epistemologists Iranian music theorists Medieval Islamic philosophers Transoxanian Islamic scholars Logicians People from Bukhara Region Medieval Iranian pharmacologists Music theorists of the medieval Islamic world Ontologists People from Khorasan Medieval Iranian physicists Philosophers of logic Philosophers of psychology Philosophers of religion Philosophers of science Unani medicine Iranian logicians Iranian ethicists Samanid officials Court physicians Iranian courtiers Hidden categories: Articles containing Persian-language text CS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar) Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from February 2015 Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use dmy dates from February 2023 Articles containing Uzbek-language text Articles with hCards Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles that are too technical from January 2014 All articles that are too technical Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2016 Articles containing overly long summaries All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2012 Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2015 Articles needing the year an event occurred from February 2015 CS1: long volume value Pages with login required references or sources Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 02:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Avicenna 157 languages Add topic

