Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Antiquity 1.1.1 Oracles and Greek divination 1.2 Middle Ages and Early Modern period 1.3 Mesoamerica 2 Contemporary divination in Asia Toggle Contemporary divination in Asia subsection 2.1 India and Nepal 2.2 Japan 2.2.1 Personality types 2.2.2 Japanese tarot 2.3 Taiwan 3 Contemporary divination in Africa 4 Divination of demons 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Divination 58 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Li Niha Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Pangcah Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Divining ) Attempt to gain insight into a question or situation For other uses, see Divination (disambiguation) .

"Divining" redirects here. For pseudoscientific attempts to find water or other things, see Dowsing .

A man in Rhumsiki , Cameroon , attempts to tell the future by interpreting the changes in position of various objects as caused by a freshwater crab through the practice of nggàm .

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Anthropology of religion Basic concepts Afterlife Animism Augury Communitas Comparative religion Divination Divine language Evolutionary origin of religion Fetishism Great Spirit Henotheism Initiation Laying on of hands Liminality Magic Mana Monotheism Nympholepsy Oracle Pilgrimage Polytheism Rite of passage Ritual Sacred language Sacred–profane dichotomy Sacred site Shamanism Soul dualism Superstition Theories about religion Totem Transtheism Veneration of the dead Case studies Magic Coral Gardens and Their Magic Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants Neo-Paganism Ritual Angakkuq Babaylan Bobohizan Bomoh Bora Dukun Miko Jhākri Pawang Slametan Wu Revitalization movements Cargo cult Ghost Dance Handsome Lake Related articles The Elementary Forms of the Religious Life Purity and Danger Myth and ritual Archaeology of religion and ritual Poles in mythology Lived religion Elite religion Major theorists Augustin Calmet Akbar S. Ahmed Talal Asad Joseph Campbell Mary Douglas Émile Durkheim Mircea Eliade Arnold van Gennep René Girard E. E. Evans-Pritchard James Frazer Fustel de Coulanges Clifford Geertz Robin Horton Claude Lévi-Strauss Robert Marett Steven Ozment Roy Rappaport Saba Mahmood Marshall Sahlins Melford Spiro Stanley Tambiah Victor Turner Edward Burnett Tylor Daniel Martin Varisco Anthony F. C. Wallace Journals Folklore The Hibbert Journal The Journal of Religion Oceania Religions Ethnic and folk religions Afro-American religion Alaska Native religion Anito Atua Böö mörgöl Chinese folk religion Hanitu Hausa Kejawèn Native American religion Noaidi Shindo Shamanism in Siberia Shinto Tengrism African traditional religions Buddhism Mahayana Nichiren Pure Land Shingon Theravada Tiantai Tibetan Vajrayana Zen Christianity Adventism Anglicanism Armenian Apostolic Church Baptists Calvinism Catholic Church Coptic Orthodoxy Eastern Orthodoxy Ethiopian Orthodoxy Greek Orthodoxy Lutheranism Methodism Nestorianism Oriental Orthodoxy Pentecostalism Protestantism Quakers Russian Orthodoxy Hinduism Hindu denominations Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Vaishnavism Ayyavazhi Islam Ahmadiyya Ibadi Mahdavia Non-denominational Quranists Shia Sufism Sunni Yazdânism Judaism Conservative Haredi Hasidic Haymanot Karaite Orthodox Reform Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sikhism Social and cultural anthropology v t e Part of a series on Magic Background History of magic Magic and religion Psychological theories of magic Forms Apotropaic magic Black magic Ceremonial magic Chaos magic Divination Evocation Goetia Gray magic Invocation Natural magic Necromancy Sex magic Shamanism Sigils Sympathetic magic Thaumaturgy Theurgy White magic Witchcraft Religion Magic and religion Christian views on magic Folk religion Islam and magic Mysticism Shinto Thelema Related topics Divine embodiment Incantation Magical formula Magical organization Occult Western esotericism v t e Part of a series on the Paranormal Main articles Astral projection Astrology Aura Bilocation Breatharianism Clairvoyance Close encounter Cold spot Crystal gazing Conjuration Cryptozoology Demonic possession Demonology Doppelgänger Ectoplasm Electronic voice phenomenon Exorcism Extrasensory perception Forteana Fortune-telling Ghost hunting Haunted locations India UK US Magic Mediumship Miracle Occult Orb Ouija Paranormal fiction Paranormal television Precognition Preternatural Psychic Psychic reading Psychometry Reincarnation Remote viewing Retrocognition Spirit photography Spirit possession Spirit world Spiritualism Stone Tape Supernatural Telekinesis Telepathy Table-turning Ufology Skepticism Cold reading Committee for Skeptical Inquiry Debunking Hoax James Randi Educational Foundation Magical thinking Prizes for evidence of the paranormal Pseudoskepticism Scientific literacy Scientific skepticism Parapsychology Anomalous experiences Apparitional experiences Empath False awakening Hypnosis Ideomotor phenomenon Out-of-body experiences Parapsychology Synchronicity Related Anomalistics Argument from ignorance Argumentum ad populum Bandwagon effect Begging the question Cognitive dissonance Communal reinforcement Fallacy Falsifiability Fringe science Groupthink Hypnosis Junk science Protoscience Pseudoscience Scientific evidence Scientific method Superstition Uncertainty Urban legend v t e Part of a series on Esotericism Key concepts Western esotericism Eastern esotericism Alchemy Astrology Egregore Gnosis Hermeticism Kabbalah Magic Metaphysics Mystical theology Mysticism Occult Tantra Thelema Theosophy Traditionalism Rites Astral projection Body of light Divination Esoteric transmission Evocation Exorcism Initiation Invocation Meditation Propitiation Rite of passage Ritual purification Sacrifice Societies A∴A∴ Élus Coëns Freemasonry Golden Dawn Martinism Ordo Templi Orientis Rosicrucianism Tariqa Typhonian Order UR List of magical organizations Notable figures Ibn Arabi Blavatsky Böhme Burckhardt Crowley Dee Dionysius Evola Faivre Guénon Gurdjieff Hall Hermes Trismegistus Jung Kremmerz Lavey Lévi Mathers Nasr Oldmeadow Papus Paracelsus Pythagoras Schuon Steiner Waite Related topics Anthroposophy Esoteric Hitlerism Gnosticism v t e Divination is the attempt to gain insight into a question or situation by way of an occultic ritual or practice.

[ 2 ] Using various methods throughout history, diviners ascertain their interpretations of how a querent should proceed by reading signs, events, or omens , or through alleged contact or interaction with supernatural agencies [ 3 ] such as spirits , gods, god-like-beings or the "will of the universe ".

[ 4 ] Display on divination, featuring a cross-cultural range of items, in the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford , England Divination can be seen as an attempt to organize what appears to be random so that it provides insight into a problem or issue at hand.

[ 5 ] Some instruments or practices of divination include Tarot-card reading, rune casting , tea-leaf reading , automatic writing , water scrying , and psychedelics like psilocybin mushrooms and DMT .

[ 6 ] If a distinction is made between divination and fortune-telling , divination has a more formal or ritualistic element and often contains a more social character, [ citation needed ] usually in a religious context, as seen in traditional African medicine . Fortune-telling, on the other hand, is a more everyday practice for personal purposes. Particular divination methods vary by culture and religion.

In its functional relation to magic in general, divination can have a preliminary and investigative role: the diagnosis or prognosis achieved through divination is both temporarily and logically related to the manipulative, protective or alleviative function of magic rituals. In divination one finds the cause of an ailment or a potential danger, in magic one subsequently acts upon this knowledge.

[ 7 ] Divination has long attracted criticism. In the modern era, it has been dismissed by the scientific community and by skeptics as being superstitious ; experiments do not support the idea  that divination techniques can actually predict the future more reliably or precisely than would be possible without it.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In antiquity, divination came under attack from philosophers such as the Academic skeptic Cicero in De Divinatione (1st century BCE) and the Pyrrhonist Sextus Empiricus in Against the Astrologers (2nd century CE). The satirist Lucian ( c.

125 – after 180) devoted an essay to Alexander the false prophet .

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Russian peasant girls using chickens for divination; 19th-century lubok .

Antiquity [ edit ] The eternal fire at Nymphaion in southern Illyria (present-day Albania ) also functioned as an oracle. The forms of divination practiced in this natural fire sanctuary with peculiar physical properties were widely known to the ancient Greek and Roman authors.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The Oracle of Amun at the Siwa Oasis was made famous when Alexander the Great visited it after conquering Egypt from Persia in 332 BC.

[ 13 ] Deuteronomy 18:10–12 or Leviticus 19:26 can be interpreted as categorically forbidding divination. But some biblical practices, such as Urim and Thummim , casting lots and prayer , are considered to be divination. Trevan G. Hatch disputes these comparisons because divination did not consult the "one true God" and manipulated the divine for the diviner's self-interest.

[ 14 ] One of the earliest known divination artifacts, a book called the Sortes Sanctorum, is believed to be of Christian roots, and utilizes dice to provide insight into the future.

[ 15 ] Uri Gabbay states that divination was associated with sacrificial rituals in the ancient Near East, including Mesopotamia and Israel. Extispicy was a common example, where diviners would pray to their god(s) before vivisecting a sacrificial animal. Their abdominal organs would reveal a divine message, which aligned with cardiocentric views of the mind.

[ 16 ] Oracles and Greek divination [ edit ] See also: Oracle and Greek divination Both oracles and seers in ancient Greece practiced divination.

Oracles were the conduits for the gods on earth; their prophecies were understood to be the will of the gods verbatim. Because of the high demand for oracle consultations and the oracles’ limited work schedule, they were not the main source of divination for the ancient Greeks. That role fell to the seers ( Greek : μάντεις ).

[ 17 ] Seers were not in direct contact with the gods; instead, they were interpreters of signs provided by the gods. Seers used many methods to explicate the will of the gods including extispicy , ornithomancy , etc. They were more numerous than the oracles and did not keep a limited schedule; thus, they were highly valued by all Greeks, not just those with the capacity to travel to Delphi or other such distant sites.

[ 18 ] The disadvantage of seers was that only direct yes-or-no questions could be answered. Oracles could answer more generalized questions, and seers often had to perform several sacrifices in order to get the most consistent answer. For example, if a general wanted to know if the omens were proper for him to advance on the enemy, he would ask his seer both that question and if it were better for him to remain on the defensive. If the seer gave consistent answers, the advice was considered valid.

[ citation needed ] During battle, generals would frequently ask seers at both the campground (a process called the hiera ) and at the battlefield (called the sphagia ). The hiera entailed the seer slaughtering a sheep and examining its liver for answers regarding a more generic question; the sphagia involved killing a young female goat by slitting its throat and noting the animal's last movements and blood flow. The battlefield sacrifice only occurred when two armies prepared for battle against each other. Neither force would advance until the seer revealed appropriate omens .

[ citation needed ] Because the seers had such power over influential individuals in ancient Greece, many were skeptical of the accuracy and honesty of the seers. The degree to which seers were honest depends entirely on the individual seers. Despite the doubt surrounding individual seers, the craft as a whole was well regarded and trusted by the Greeks, [ 19 ] and the Stoics accounted for the validity of divination in their physics .

Middle Ages and Early Modern period [ edit ] Further information: Medieval magic , Renaissance magic , and Folk Catholicism Part of a series on Artes Prohibitae nigromancy geomancy hydromancy aeromancy pyromancy chiromancy scapulimancy Related Black magic Divination Goetia History of magic Magic and religion Occult Psychological theories of magic Western esotericism v t e The divination method of casting lots ( Cleromancy ) was used by the remaining eleven disciples of Jesus in Acts 1:23–26 to select a replacement for Judas Iscariot . Therefore, divination was arguably an accepted practice in the early church. However, divination became viewed as a pagan practice by Christian emperors during ancient Rome .

[ 20 ] In 692 the Quinisext Council , also known as the "Council in Trullo" in the Eastern Orthodox Church , passed canons to eliminate pagan and divination practices.

[ 21 ] Fortune-telling and other forms of divination were widespread through the Middle Ages .

[ 22 ] In the constitution of 1572 and public regulations of 1661 of the Electorate of Saxony , capital punishment was used on those predicting the future.

[ 23 ] Laws forbidding divination practice continue to this day.

[ 24 ] The Waldensians sect were accused of practicing divination.

[ 25 ] Småland is famous for Årsgång , a practice which occurred until the early 19th century in some parts of Småland. Generally occurring on Christmas and New Year's Eve, it is a practice in which one would fast and keep themselves away from light in a room until midnight to then complete a set of complex events to interpret symbols encountered throughout the journey to foresee the coming year.

[ 26 ] In Islam , astrology ( ‘ilm ahkam al-nujum ), the most widespread divinatory science, is the study of how celestial entities could be applied to the daily lives of people on earth.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] It is important to emphasize the practical nature of divinatory sciences because people from all socioeconomic levels and pedigrees sought the advice of astrologers to make important decisions in their lives.

[ 29 ] Astronomy was made a distinct science by intellectuals who did not agree with the former, although distinction may not have been made in daily practice, where astrology was technically outlawed and only tolerated if it was employed in public. Astrologers, trained as scientists and astronomers, were able to interpret the celestial forces that ruled the "sub-lunar" to predict a variety of information from lunar phases and drought to times of prayer and the foundation of cities. The courtly sanction and elite patronage of Muslim rulers benefited astrologers’ intellectual statures.

[ 30 ] Joseph Enthroned. Folio from the "Book of Omens" ( Falnama ), Safavid dynasty . 1550.

Freer Gallery of Art . This painting would have been positioned alongside a prognostic description of the meaning of this image on the page opposite (conventionally to the left). The reader would flip randomly to a place in the book and digest the text having first viewed the image.

The “science of the sand” ( ‘ilm al-raml ), otherwise translated as geomancy , is “based on the interpretation of figures traced on sand or other surface known as geomantic figures .” [ 31 ] It is a good example of Islamic divination at a popular level. The core principle that meaning derives from a unique occupied position is identical to the core principle of astrology.

Like astronomy, geomancy used deduction and computation to uncover significant prophecies as opposed to omens ( ‘ilm al-fa’l ), which were process of “reading” visible random events to decipher the invisible realities from which they originated. It was upheld by prophetic tradition and relied almost exclusively on text, specifically the Qur’an (which carried a table for guidance) and poetry, as a development of bibliomancy .

[ 31 ] One example for this is this Qur'an from Gwalior, India, which includes a set of instructions to use the Qur’an as a divinatory text. It is the earliest known example of its kind.

[ 32 ] The practice culminated in the appearance of the illustrated “Books of Omens” ( Falnama ) in the early 16th century, an embodiment of the apocalyptic fears as the end of the millennium in the Islamic calendar approached.

[ 33 ] Dream interpretation, or oneiromancy (‘ilm ta’bir al-ru’ya ), is more specific to Islam than other divinatory science, largely because of the Qur’an’s emphasis on the predictive dreams of Abraham , Yusuf , and Muhammad . The important delineation within the practice lies between “incoherent dreams” and “sound dreams,” which were “a part of prophecy” or heavenly message.

[ 34 ] Dream interpretation was always tied to Islamic religious texts, providing a moral compass to those seeking advice. The practitioner needed to be skilled enough to apply the individual dream to general precedent while appraising the singular circumstances.

[ 35 ] The power of text held significant weight in the " science of letters " (‘ilm al-huruf ), the foundational principle being "God created the world through His speech." [ 36 ] The science began with the concept of language, specifically Arabic , as the expression of "the essence of what it signifies." [ 36 ] Once the believer understood this, while remaining obedient to God’s will, they could uncover the essence and divine truth of the objects inscribed with Arabic like amulets and talismans through the study of the letters of the Qur’an with alphanumeric computations.

[ 36 ] In Islamic practice in Senegal and Gambia , just like many other West African countries, diviners and religious leaders and healers were interchangeable because Islam was closely related with esoteric practices (like divination), which were responsible for the regional spread of Islam. As scholars learned esoteric sciences, they joined local non-Islamic aristocratic courts, who quickly aligned divination and amulets with the "proof of the power of Islamic religion." [ 37 ] So strong was the idea of esoteric knowledge in West African Islam, diviners and magicians uneducated in Islamic texts and Arabic bore the same titles as those who did.

[ 38 ] From the beginning of Islam, there "was (and is) still a vigorous debate about whether or not such [divinatory] practices were actually permissible under Islam,” with some scholars like Abu-Hamid al Ghazili (d. 1111) objecting to the science of divination because he believed it bore too much similarity to pagan practices of invoking spiritual entities that were not God.

[ 39 ] [ 27 ] Other scholars justified esoteric sciences by comparing a practitioner to "a physician trying to heal the sick with the help of the same natural principles." [ 40 ] Mesoamerica [ edit ] See also: Mesoamerican religion Divination was a central component of ancient Mesoamerican religious life. Many Aztec gods , including central creator gods , were described as diviners and were closely associated with sorcery .

Tezcatlipoca is the patron of sorcerers and practitioners of magic . His name means "smoking mirror," a reference to a device used for divinatory scrying .

[ 41 ] In the Mayan Popol Vuh , the creator gods Xmucane and Xpiacoc perform divinatory hand casting during the creation of people.

[ 41 ] The Aztec Codex Borbonicus shows the original human couple, Oxomoco and Cipactonal , engaged in divining with kernels of maize. This primordial pair is associated with the ritual calendar, and the Aztecs considered them to be the first diviners.

[ 42 ] Every civilization that developed in pre-Columbian Mexico , from the Olmecs to the Aztecs , practiced divination in daily life, both public and private. Scrying through the use of reflective water surfaces, mirrors , or the casting of lots were among the most widespread forms of divinatory practice.

Visions derived from hallucinogens were another important form of divination, and are still widely used among contemporary diviners of Mexico. Among the more common hallucinogenic plants used in divination are morning glory , jimson weed , and peyote .

[ 41 ] Contemporary divination in Asia [ edit ] India and Nepal [ edit ] Theyyam or "theiyam" in Malayalam is the process by which a devotee invites a Hindu god or goddess to use his or her body as a medium or channel and answer other devotees' questions.

[ 43 ] The same is called "arulvaakku" or "arulvaak" in Tamil , another south Indian language - Adhiparasakthi Siddhar Peetam is famous for arulvakku in Tamil Nadu .

[ 44 ] The people in and around Mangalore in Karnataka call the same, Buta Kola , "paathri" or "darshin"; in other parts of Karnataka, it is known by various names such as, "prashnaavali", "vaagdaana", "asei", "aashirvachana", and so on.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] In Nepal it is known as, "Devta ka dhaamee" or " jhaakri ".

[ 50 ] In English, the closest translation for these is, " oracle ." The Dalai Lama , who lives in exile in northern India, still consults an oracle known as the Nechung Oracle , which is considered the official state oracle of the government of Tibet . The Dalai Lama has according to centuries-old custom, consulted the Nechung Oracle during the new year festivities of Losar .

[ 51 ] Japan [ edit ] Although Japan retains a history of traditional and local methods of divination , such as onmyōdō , contemporary divination in Japan, called uranai , derives from outside sources.

[ 52 ] Contemporary methods of divination in Japan include both Western and Chinese astrology , geomancy or feng shui , tarot cards , I Ching (Book of Changes) divination , and physiognomy (methods of reading the body to identify traits).

[ 52 ] In Japan , divination methods include Futomani from the Shinto tradition.

[ citation needed ] Personality types [ edit ] Personality typing as a form of divination has been prevalent in Japan since the 1980s. Various methods exist for divining personality type. Each attempt to reveal glimpses of an individual's destiny, productive and inhibiting traits, future parenting techniques, and compatibility in marriage. Personality type is increasingly important for young Japanese, who consider personality the driving factor of compatibility, given the ongoing marriage drought and birth rate decline in Japan.

[ 53 ] An import to Japan, Chinese zodiac signs based on the birth year in 12 year cycles (rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog, and boar) are frequently combined with other forms of divination, such as so-called 'celestial types' based on the planets (Saturn, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, or Uranus). Personality can also be divined using cardinal directions, the four elements (water, earth, fire, air), and yin-yang . Names can also lend important personality information under name classification which asserts that names bearing certain Japanese vowel sounds (a, i, u, e, o) share common characteristics.

Numerology , which utilizes methods of divining 'birth numbers' from significant numbers such as birth date, may also reveal character traits of individuals.

[ 53 ] Individuals can also assess their own and others' personalities according to physical characteristics.

Blood type remains a popular form of divination from physiology. Stemming from Western influences, body reading or ninsou , determines personality traits based on body measurements. The face is the most commonly analyzed feature, with eye size, pupil shape, mouth shape, and eyebrow shape representing the most important traits. An upturned mouth may be cheerful, and a triangle eyebrow may indicate that someone is strong-willed.

[ 53 ] Methods of assessment in daily life may include self-taken measurements or quizzes. As such, magazines targeted at women in their early-to-mid twenties feature the highest concentration of personality assessment guides. There are approximately 144 different women's magazines, known as nihon zashi koukoku kyoukai , published in Japan aimed at this audience.

[ 53 ] Japanese tarot [ edit ] The adaptation of the Western divination method of tarot cards into Japanese culture presents a particularly unique example of contemporary divination as this adaptation mingles with Japan's robust visual culture. Japanese tarot cards are created by professional artists, advertisers, and fans of tarot. One tarot card collector claimed to have accumulated more than 1,500 Japan-made decks of tarot cards.

Japanese tarot cards fall into diverse categories such as: Inspiration Tarot ( reikan tarotto ); I-Ching Tarot ( ekisen tarotto ); Spiritual Tarot ( supirichuaru tarotto ); Western Tarot ( seiyō tarotto ); and Eastern Tarot ( tōyō tarotto ).

The images on tarot cards may come from images from Japanese popular culture, such as characters from manga and anime including Hello Kitty , or may feature cultural symbols. Tarot cards may adapt the images of Japanese historical figures, such as high priestess Himiko (170–248CE) or imperial court wizard Abe no Seimei (921–1005CE). Still others may feature images of cultural displacement, such as English knights, pentagrams , the Jewish Torah , or invented glyphs . The introduction of such cards began by the 1930s and reached prominence 1970s. Japanese tarot cards were originally created by men, often based on the Rider-Waite-Smith tarot published by the Rider Company in London in 1909.

[ 54 ] Since, the practice of Japanese tarot has become overwhelmingly feminine and intertwined with kawaii culture. Referring to the cuteness of tarot cards, Japanese model Kuromiya Niina was quoted as saying "because the images are cute, even holding them is enjoyable." [ 55 ] While these differences exist, Japanese tarot cards function similarly to their Western counterparts. Cards are shuffled and cut into piles then used to forecast the future, for spiritual reflection, or as a tool for self-understanding.

[ 54 ] Taiwan [ edit ] A common act of divination in Taiwan is called the Poe . “The Poe” translated to English means “moon boards”. It consists of two wood or bamboo blocks cut into the shape of a crescent moon. The one edge is rounded while the other is flat; the two are mirror images. Both crescents are held out in one's palms and while kneeling, they are raised to the forehead level. Once in this position, the blocks are dropped and the future can be understood depending on their landing. If both fall flat side up or both fall rounded side up, that can be taken as a failure of the deity to agree. If the blocks land one rounded and one flat, the deity indicates "Yes", or positive. “Laughing poe” is when rounded sides land down and they rock before coming to a standstill. “Negative poe” is when the flat sides fall downward and abruptly stop; this indicates "No". When there is a positive fall, it is called “Sacred poe”, although the negative falls are not usually taken seriously. As the blocks are being dropped the question is said in a murmur, and if the answer is yes, the blocks are dropped again. To make sure the answer is definitely a yes, the blocks must fall in a “yes” position three times in a row.

[ citation needed ] A more serious type of divination is the Kiō-á. There is a small wooden chair, and around the sides of the chair are small pieces of wood that can move up and down in their sockets, this causes a clicking sounds when the chair is moved in any way. Two men hold this chair by its legs before an altar, while the incense is being burned, and the deity is invited to descend onto the chair. It is seen that it is in the chair by an onset of motion. Eventually, the chair crashes onto a table prepared with wood chips and burlap. The characters on the table are then traced and these are said to be written by the deity who possessed the chair, these characters are then interpreted for the devotees.

[ 56 ] Contemporary divination in Africa [ edit ] Further information: African divination Divination is widespread throughout Africa. Among many examples it is one of the central tenets of Serer religion in Senegal. Only those who have been initiated as Saltigues (the Serer high priests and priestesses) can divine the future.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] These are the "hereditary rain priests" [ 59 ] whose role is both religious and medicinal.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Divination of demons [ edit ] In his work entitled On the divination of demons , [ 60 ] saint Augustine of Hippo affirms that, most of the time, demons simply predict what they do in the future. However, they also possess a divinatory power essentially deriving from the greater acuity of the senses of their aerial bodies and the experience accumulated during their long lives. This allows them to interpret divine signs of the times in the natural world that humans are unable to grasp and to foretell future events, even those that are not immediate. Furthermore, they can cause illnesses and fantastic visions in people in both a sleeping and waking state.

[ 61 ] The accuracy of the predictions clashes with their evil and deceptive nature, and with God's higher plans that are only known and holy angels can divert and override the signs caught by demons in the natural world.

[ 60 ] See also [ edit ] Astrology Chinese fortune telling Fortune telling Geomancy Jiaobei Kau chim List of occult terms Methods of divination Oneiromancy Prophecy Qimen Dunjia Sandobele Shaobing Song Tengenjutsu (fortune telling) Tui bei tu References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Anthropological Studies of Divination" .

anthropology.ac.uk .

^ "Divination | Religion, History & Practices | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-10-28 .

^ Silva (2016) .

^ "Divination | Religion, History & Practices | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-10-28 .

^ Morgan 2016 , pp. 502–504.

^ "10 Basic Divination Methods to Try" .

Learn Religions . Retrieved 2023-10-28 .

^ Sørensen, Jesper Frøkjær; Petersen, Anders Klostergaard (3 May 2021). "Manipulating the Divine - an Introduction". In Sørensen, Jesper; Petersen, Anders Klostergaard (eds.).

Theoretical and Empirical Investigations of Divination and Magic: Manipulating the Divine . Volume 171 of Numen Book Series: Studies in the history of religions - ISSN 0169-8834. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV. p. 10.

ISBN 9789004447585 . Retrieved 9 December 2023 .

^ Yau, Julianna. (2002).

Witchcraft and Magic . In Michael Shermer .

The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience . ABC-CLIO. pp. 278-282.

ISBN 1-57607-654-7 ^ Regal, Brian. (2009).

Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia . Greenwood. p. 55.

ISBN 978-0-313-35507-3 ^ "Lucian of Samosata : Alexander the False Prophet" .

tertullian.org .

^ Anamali, Skënder (1992). "Santuari di Apollonia". In Stazio, Attilio; Ceccoli, Stefania (eds.).

La Magna Grecia e i grandi santuari della madrepatria: atti del trentunesimo Convegno di studi sulla Magna Grecia . Atti del Convegno di studi sulla Magna Grecia (in Italian). Vol. 31. Istituto per la storia e l'archeologia della Magna Grecia. pp.

127– 136.

pp. 134–135.

^ Larson, Jennifer Lynn (2001).

Greek Nymphs: Myth, Cult, Lore . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-514465-9 .

pp. 162–163.

^ Gardiner, Alan Henderson; Sir, Alan Henderson Gardiner (1961).

Egypt of the Pharaohs: An Introduction . Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-500267-6 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hatch, Trevan G. (2007).

"Magic, Biblical Law, and the Israelite Urim and Thummim" .

Studia Antiqua .

5 (2) – via Scholars Archive.

^ Klingshirn, William E (2002).

"Defining the Sortes Sanctorum : Gibbon, Du Cange, and Early Christian Lot Divination" .

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

10 (1): 77– 130.

doi : 10.1353/earl.2002.0011 .

ISSN 1086-3184 .

^ Gabbay, Uri (2016).

"The Practice of Divination in the Ancient Near East" .

TheTorah.com . Archived from the original on April 14, 2024.

^ "The Seer in Ancient Greece" .

Princeton Classics . Retrieved 28 November 2022 .

^ Flower, Michael A. (2008).

The seer in ancient Greece . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-93400-9 .

OCLC 290580029 .

^ Flower, Michael Attyah.

The Seer in Ancient Greece.

Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008.

^ Bailey, Michael David. (2007).

Magic and Superstition in Europe . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. pp. 52-53.

ISBN 0-7425-3386-7 ^ "Council of Trullo - Apostolic Confraternity Seminary" .

apostolicconfraternityseminary.com . Archived from the original on 2011-07-07.

^ Bailey, Michael David. (2007).

Magic and Superstition in Europe . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc. pp. 88-89.

ISBN 0-7425-3386-7 ^ Ennemoser, Joseph. (1856).

The History of Magic . London: Henry G. Bohn, York Street, Covent Garden. p. 59 ^ "Wiccan Priest Fights Local Ordinance Banning Fortune Telling (Louisiana)" .

pluralism.org . Archived from the original on 2011-07-27 . Retrieved 2009-10-06 .

^ Golden, R.M. (2006).

Encyclopedia of Witchcraft: The Western Tradition . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1-57607-243-1 . Retrieved 2023-05-05 .

^ Kuusela, Tommy (2014).

"Swedish year walk: from folk tradition to computer game. In: Island Dynamics Conference on Folk Belief & Traditions of the Supernatural: Experience, Place, Ritual, & Narrative. Shetland Isles, UK, 24–30 March 2014" .

^ a b Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , p. 13.

^ Greenwood, William, and Andrew Shore. " Seeing Stars: Astrolabes and the Islamic World Archived 2020-10-20 at the Wayback Machine ." Curator's Corner Blog.

The British Museum , 2017.

^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , pp. 10, 16–17.

^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , pp. 13, 16–17.

^ a b Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , p. 21.

^ Sardar, Marika (2020-08-28).

"The Gwalior Qur'an" .

Khamseen: Islamic Art History Online . Retrieved 2025-03-29 .

^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , p. 26.

^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , pp. 26–27.

^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , pp. 26–31.

^ a b c Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , p. 31.

^ Graw (2012) , pp. 19–20.

^ Graw (2012) , p. 19.

^ Francis, Edgar W. "Magic and Divination in the Medieval Islamic Middle East." History Compass 9, no. 8 (2011): 624 ^ Leoni, Lory & Gruber (2016) , p. 17.

^ a b c Miller (2007) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Sandstrom, Alan R. "Divination." In David Carrasco (ed).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Mesoamerican Cultures . : Oxford University Press, 2001.

^ " 'Devakoothu'; the lone woman Theyyam in North Malabar" .

Mathrubhumi . Archived from the original on 2021-06-06 . Retrieved 2021-11-03 .

^ Nanette R. Spina (2017) (28 February 2017), Women's Authority and Leadership in a Hindu Goddess Tradition , Springer, p. 135, ISBN 978-1-1375-8909-5 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Brückner, Heidrun (1987). "Bhuta Worship in Coastal Karnataka: An Oral Tulu Myth and Festival Ritual of Jumadi".

Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik . 13/14: 17– 37.

^ Brückner, Heidrun (1992). "Dhumavati-Bhuta" An Oral Tulu-Text Collected in the 19th Century. Edition, Translation, and Analysis".

Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik . 13/14: 13– 63.

^ Brückner, Heidrun (1995).

Fürstliche Fest: Text und Rituale der Tuḷu-Volksreligion an der Westküste Südindiens . Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz. pp.

199– 201.

^ Brückner, Heidrun (2009a).

On an Auspicious Day, at Dawn … Studies in Tulu Culture and Oral Literature . Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.

^ Brückner, Heidrun (2009b).

"Der Gesang von der Büffelgottheit" in Wenn Masken Tanzen – Rituelles Theater und Bronzekunst aus Südindien edited by Johannes Beltz . Zürich: Rietberg Museum. pp.

57– 64.

^ Gulia, Kuldip Singh (2005).

Human Ecology of Sikkim – A Case Study of Upper Rangit Basin . Delhi, India: Kalpaz Publications. pp.

152– 154, 168.

ISBN 978-81-7835-325-8 .

^ Gyatso, Tenzin (1988).

Freedom in Exile: the Autobiography of the Dalai Lama of Tibet.

Fully revised and updated. Lancaster Place, London, UK: Abacus Books (A Division of Little, Brown and Company UK).

ISBN 0-349-11111-1 . p.233 ^ a b Miller (2014) .

^ a b c d Miller (1997) .

^ a b Miller (2017) .

^ Miller (2011) .

^ Rohsenow, Hill Gates, and David K. Jordan. “Gods, Ghosts, and Ancestors: The Folk Religion of a Taiwanese Village.” The Journal of Asian Studies, vol. 33, no. 3, 1974, p. 478., doi:10.2307/2052956.

^ Sarr, Alioune , « Histoire du Sine-Saloum » (introduction, bibliographie et notes par Charles Becker), in Bulletin de l'IFAN, tome 46, série B, nos 3-4, 1986-1987 pp 31-38 ^ a b Kalis, Simone, "Medecine Traditionnele Religion et Divination Chez Les Seereer Siin du Senegal ", L'Harmattan (1997), pp 11-297 ISBN 2-7384-5196-9 ^ a b Galvan, Dennis Charles, "The State Must be our Master of Fire : How Peasants Craft Culturally Sustainable Development in Senegal", Berkeley, University of California Press, (2004), pp 86-135, ISBN 978-0-520-23591-5 .

^ a b Roger Pearse; Mattias Gassman (British Academy, translator) (June 10, 2020).

"On the divination of demons" .

{{ cite web }} : |author2= has generic name ( help ) (see § 5) ^ Karin Schlapbach; K. Pollmann; W. Otten (2013). "The reception of Augustine, De divinatione daemonum".

Oxford Guide to the Historical Reception of Augustine (PDF) (1st ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 7.

OCLC 5606492572 .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2024 . Retrieved April 9, 2025 .

(at Academia.edu ) Works cited [ edit ] Graw, Knut (2012). "Divination and Islam: Existential Perspectives in the Study of Ritual and Religious Praxis in Senegal and Gambia". In Schielke, Samuli; Debevec, Liza (eds.).

Ordinary Lives and Grand Schemes an Anthropology of Everyday Religion . EASA Series. Vol. 18. New York: Berghahn Books.

Greenbaum, Dorian G. (2015).

The Daimon in Hellenistic Astrology: Origins and Influence . Ancient Magic and Divination. Vol. 11.

Leiden : Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/9789004306219 .

ISBN 978-90-04-30621-9 .

ISSN 1566-7952 .

LCCN 2015028673 .

Leoni, Francesca; Lory, Pierre; Gruber, Christiane (2016).

Power and Protection: Islamic Art and the Supernatural .

Ashmolean Museum .

ISBN 978-1910807095 .

Miller, Laura (1997).

"People Types: Personality Classification in Japanese Women's Magazines" .

The Journal of Popular Culture .

31 (2): 143– 159.

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-3840.1997.00143.x – via Academia.edu.

Miller, Laura (May 2011). "Tantalizing Tarot and Cute Cartomancy in Japan".

Japanese Studies .

31 (1): 73– 91.

doi : 10.1080/10371397.2011.560659 .

S2CID 144749662 .

Miller, Laura (2014).

"The divination arts in girl culture" . In Kawano, Satsuki; Roberts, Glenda S.; Long, Susan Orpett (eds.).

Capturing Contemporary Japan: Differentiation and Uncertainty . Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press. pp.

334– 358 – via Academia.edu.

Miller, Laura (2017).

"Japanese Tarot Cards" .

ASIANetwork Exchange .

24 (1): 1– 28.

doi : 10.16995/ane.244 .

Miller, Mary (2007).

Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico . London: Thames & Hudson.

Silva, Sonia (2016).

"Object and Objectivity in Divination" .

Material Religion .

12 (4): 507– 509.

doi : 10.1080/17432200.2016.1227638 .

ISSN 1743-2200 .

S2CID 73665747 .

Morgan, David (2016-10-27). "Divination, Material Culture, and Chance".

Material Religion .

12 (4): 502– 504.

doi : 10.1080/17432200.2016.1227637 .

ISSN 1743-2200 .

Further reading [ edit ] Beerden, K. 2013.

Worlds full of signs: ancient Greek divination in context . Leiden: Brill .

Engels, D. 2007.

Das römische Vorzeichenwesen (753-27 v.Chr.). Quellen, Terminologie, Kommentar, historische Entwicklung.

Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag .

Evans-Pritchard, E. E.

1976.

Witchcraft, oracles, and magic among the Azande .

Fahd, Toufic. 1966.

La divination arabe; études religieuses, sociologiques et folkloriques sur le milieu natif d’Islam .

Hitti, Philip K.

1968.

Makers of Arab History . Princeton, NJ.

St. Martin's Press . p. 61.

LaGamma, Alisa . 2000. " Art and oracle: African art and rituals of divination ." New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art .

ISBN 9780870999338 .

Loewe, Michael , and Carmen Blacker , eds. 1981.

Oracles and Divination .

Shambhala / Random House .

ISBN 0-87773-214-0 .

Sahagún, Bernardino de.

General History of the Things of New Spain, Book 4, The Soothsayers and Book 5, The Omens . Number 14, parts 5 and 6. Translated by Charles E. Dibble and Arthur J. O. Anderson. Santa Fe, N. M., 1979. This single volume of the Florentine Codex contains books 4 and 5, listing attributes of Aztec days signs and omens.

Tedlock, Barbara.

Time and the Highland Maya . Albuquerque, N.M., 1982. Detailed study of divination techniques using the ritual calendar among Quiché Maya in the Guatemalan Highlands.

Vernant, J. P.

1974.

Divination et rationalité . Paris: Éditions du Seuil .

Watt, W. Montgomery . 1961.

Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman . Edinburgh, UK.

Oxford University Press . pp. 1–2.

External links [ edit ] Divination at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Greek Divination: a study of its methods and principles , William Reginald Halliday, Macmillan, 1913, 309pp - a complete scanned edition of a general treatment of Greek divination (at Google Books ) David Zeitlyn and others on African Divination systems: Africa Divination: Mambila and others Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Divination" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Marika Sardar, “The Gwalior Qur’an,” Khamseen: Islamic Art History Online , published 28 August 2020.

v t e Methods of divination Theriomancy Ailuromancy Alectryomancy Augury Myomancy Myrmomancy Ornithomancy Nggàm Bibliomancy Bible Falnama Homer Rhapsodomancy Virgil Scrying Aspidomancy Catoptromancy Crystal gazing Dowsing Oculomancy Elemental Pyromancy Botanomancy Capnomancy Libanomancy Aeromancy Alomancy Hydromancy Lecanomancy Scyphomancy Cleromancy Acultomancy Aichmomancy Astragalomancy Axinomancy Belomancy Cartomancy Parrot astrology Tarot card reading Cowrie-shell divination Favomancy Kumalak Lithomancy Mengdu Molybdomancy Obi divination Opele Opon Ifá Rhabdomancy Runic magic Sikidy Sortes Sortes Sanctorum Tasseography Necromancy Gastromancy Mediumship Séance Spirit possession Taghairm Somatomancy Anthropomancy Cephalonomancy Haruspex Omphalomancy Oracle bone Palmistry Podomancy Scapulimancy Other Abacomancy African Ifá Nggàm Sikidy Aleuromancy Alphitomancy Årsgång Amniomancy Apophenia Apparition Astrology Ziwei doushu Carromancy Cledonomancy Fortune-telling Geomancy I Ching Mesopotamian Numerology Gematria Isopsephy Omen Onmyodo Oracle Prophecy Revelation Ecstasy Vision Tyromancy v t e Magic and witchcraft Types Region Africa Azande Ghana Witch smeller Asia Jhākri Philippines Europe Italy Akelarre Benandanti Cunning folk Greece and Rome Seiðr Völva Witch-cult hypothesis Anglo-Saxon England Britain Latin America Middle East Oceania Mākutu Form Chaos magic Goetia Hoodoo Medieval Neopagan Wicca Renaissance Solitary practitioner Warlock Witch doctor Practices Animism Apotropaic magic Black magic Ceremonial magic Magical formula Coven Curse Anathema Damnation Jinx Demon Divination Entheogen Evocation Familiar Gray magic Incantation Jinn Love magic Mediumship Moon magic Necromancy Occultism Shamanism Black Regional Yellow Sex magic Sigils Spiritism Spiritualism Sympathetic magic Witches' Sabbath White magic Objects Amulet Athame Broom besom Censer Cloak of invisibility Crystal ball Flying ointment Goofer dust Grimoire Incense Julleuchter Kitchen witch Love charm Magic carpet Magic circle Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Mojo bag Nkisi Nkondi Poppet Potions Sator Square Talisman Wand Witch ball Witch's ladder Folklore and mythology Agamede Aradia Baba Yaga Circe Dayan Drude Elbow witch Hecate Huld Kalku Medea Morgan le Fay Muma Pădurii Nine sorceresses Obayifo Pasiphaë Sebile Sorginak Spearfinger Three Witches Witches of Benevento Witch of Endor Yama-uba Major historic treatises Witchcraft and divination in the Old Testament (8th–2nd centuries BC) Directorium Inquisitorum (1376) De maleficis mulieribus (1440) Formicarius (1475) Summis desiderantes affectibus (1484) Malleus Maleficarum (1487) De Lamiis et Pythonicis Mulieribus (1489) Laienspiegel (1509) De praestigiis daemonum (1563) The Discoverie of Witchcraft (1584) Newes from Scotland (1591) A Dialogue Concerning Witches and Witchcrafts (1593) Daemonolatreiae libri tres (1595) Daemonologie (1597) Magical Investigations (1599) Compendium Maleficarum (1608) A Guide to Grand-Jury Men (1627) The Discovery of Witches (1647) Treatise on the Apparitions of Spirits and on Vampires or Revenants (1751) Persecution Modern Jamyi Witch hiring controversy accusations against children India Nepal Papua New Guinea Witch camp Early Modern Americas Maryland New York Salem Virginia Eastern Europe Hungary Northern Moravia Poland Russia Northern Europe Baltic Denmark England Finland Iceland Norway Scotland Sweden Western Europe France Geneva Italy Spain Basque Classical Witch trials in the Holy Roman Empire Related Witch hunt Witch's mark Pricking List of people executed for witchcraft In popular culture Magic in fiction Witches in fiction Related Witch (word) Witch (archetype) Christian views on magic Magical organization Maleficium Left-hand path and right-hand path Feminist interpretations of witch trials in the early modern period Folk religion Adept v t e Neopagan witchcraft History History of Wicca Etymology of Wicca Wicca and LGBT people Dettmer v. Landon Traditions British Traditional Alexandrian Wicca Blue Star Wicca Central Valley Wicca Chthonioi Alexandrian Wicca Gardnerian Wicca Other 1734 Tradition Celtic Wicca Church and School of Wicca Cochrane's Craft Coven of Atho Dianic Wicca Faery Wicca Feri Georgian Wicca Odyssean Wicca Reclaiming Seax-Wica Stregheria Universal Eclectic Wicca Notable figures Gerald Gardner Doreen Valiente Alex Sanders Maxine Sanders Sybil Leek Dafo Margot Adler Victor Anderson Artemis Gavin Bone Lois Bourne Jack Bracelin Raymond Buckland Eddie Buczynski Zsuzsanna Budapest Charles Cardell Ipsita Roy Chakraverti Patricia Crowther Vivianne Crowley Robert Cochrane Scott Cunningham Phyllis Curott Cerridwen Fallingstar Janet Farrar Stewart Farrar Raven Grimassi Gavin Frost Yvonne Frost Philip Heselton Frederic Lamond Rosaleen Norton Silver RavenWolf Starhawk Joseph Wilson Deities Triple Goddess Horned God Green Man Spirit of nature Holly King / Oak King Mother goddess Key concepts Wicca Wiccan morality Wiccan Rede Rule of Three Wiccan views of divinity Coven Craft name Magic Witchcraft White magic Otherworld The Summerland Reincarnation Karma Skyclad Summoner Watchtower Familiar Animism Rites and ritual Drawing down the Moon Great rite Handfasting Wiccaning Fivefold kiss Magic circle Cone of power Herbal medicine Scrying Spellwork / Incantation Banishing Divination Invocation Initiation Rite of passage Eko Eko Azarak Solitary practitioner Spiral dance Holidays Wheel of the Year Solstice Equinox Imbolc Ostara Beltane Midsummer Lughnasadh Mabon Samhain Yule Esbat Wild Hunt Paraphernalia Magical tools in Wicca Altar Amulet Athame Bell Besom Boline Book of Shadows Candles Cauldron Censer Chalice/Goblet Horn Incense Parchment Pentacle Runes Scourge Statue Talisman Tarot deck Wand Witch's ladder Literature Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches The Meaning of Witchcraft The Spiral Dance What Witches Do Witchcraft Today Charge of the Goddess Enchanted Feminism Related List of Wiccan organisations Bricket Wood coven New Forest coven Neopagan witchcraft Witch-cult hypothesis Left-hand path and right-hand path Cunning folk in Britain European witchcraft Malleus Maleficarum Granny woman Cunning folk Magical alphabets Runes Theban Hebrew Witching hour Witch hunt Witches' Sabbath Flying ointment Museum of Witchcraft and Magic Witchcraft Research Association v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States 2 France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divination&oldid=1304382007 " Categories : Divination Romani religion Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2021 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 18:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divination 58 languages Add topic

