Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Characteristics 3 Uses 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Expanded clay aggregate 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lightweight aggregate made by heating clay at high temperature in a rotary kiln This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Expanded clay aggregate" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Heat-expanded lightweight pebbles.

Lightweight expanded clay aggregate ( LECA ) or expanded clay ( exclay ) is a lightweight aggregate made by heating clay to around  1,200 °C (2,190 °F) in a rotary kiln . The heating process causes gases trapped in the clay to expand, forming thousands of small bubbles and giving the material a porous structure. LECA has an approximately round or oblong shape due to circular movement in the kiln and is available in different sizes and densities. LECA is used to make lightweight concrete products and other uses.

History [ edit ] LECA was developed about 1917 in Kansas City, Missouri , to the production in a rotary kiln of a patented expanded aggregate known as Haydite which was used in the construction of SS Selma , an ocean-going ship launched in 1919. Following in the USA was the development of a series of aggregates known as Gravelite, Perlite , Rocklite, etc. In Europe , LECA commenced in Denmark , Germany , Netherlands , and UK.

Characteristics [ edit ] Root ball of a hydroponically-grown cannabis plant with aggregate embedded in it Cleaned root ball and main stem sitting atop the total amount of aggregate used to grow a single plant LECA is usually produced in different sizes and densities from 0.1 millimetres (0.004 in) up to 25 millimetres (1.0 in), commonly 0–4 mm, 4–10 mm, 10–25 mm and densities of 250, 280, 330, and 510 kg/m 3 . LECA boulder is the biggest size of LECA with 100–500 mm size and 500 kg/m 3 density.

Some characteristics of LECA are lightness, thermal insulation by low thermal conductivity coefficient (as low as 0.097 W/mK [ 1 ] ), soundproofing by high acoustic insulation , moisture impermeability , being incompressible under permanent pressure and gravity loads, not decomposing in severe conditions, fire resistance, a pH of nearly 7, freezing and melting resistance, easy movement and transportation, lightweight backfill and finishing, reduction of construction dead load and earthquake lateral load, being perfect sweet soil for plants, and as a material for drainage and filtration .

Uses [ edit ] Common uses are in concrete blocks , concrete slabs , geotechnical fillings, lightweight concrete , water treatment, hydroponics , aquaponics and hydroculture .

LECA can be easily used for plant-growing substrate .

LECA is a versatile material and is utilized in an increasing number of applications. In the construction industry , it is used extensively in the production of lightweight concrete, blocks and precast or incast structural elements (panels, partitions, bricks and light tiles ). LECA used in structural backfill against foundations , retaining walls , bridge abutments etc., in addition, it can reduce earth pressure by 75% compared with conventional materials, and also increases ground stability while reducing settlement and land deformation . LECA can drain the surface water and groundwater to control groundwater pressure. LECA grout can be used for flooring (finishing) and roofing with thermal and sound insulation .

LECA is also used in water treatment facilities for the filtration and purification of municipal wastewater and drinking water as well as in other filtering processes, including those for dealing with industrial wastewater and fish farms .

LECA has many uses in horticulture , agriculture , and landscapes . Using LECA helps to alter soil mechanics . Using LECA provides many benefits across horticulture . It's commonly used as a growing medium in hydroponics systems since blended with other growing mediums such as soil and peat , it can improve compaction resistance, and drainage , retain water during periods of drought , insulate roots during frost , and provide roots with increased oxygen levels promoting very vigorous growth. LECA can be mixed with heavy soil to improve its aeration and drainage.

In the horticultural practice of hydroponics , LECA is a favored medium for growing plants within; the round shape  provides excellent aeration at the root level, while the LECA clay pieces themselves become saturated with water and plant food, thus giving the roots a consistent supply of both. So-called semi-hydroponics or passive hydroponics (also called "semi-hydro") is a popular, simplified method of hydroponics, most commonly utilized for houseplants and tropical species. A plant is potted in solely LECA (preferably in a container with multiple air holes on the sides and bottom, like an orchid pot) and placed into a second, sealed container, in which a "nutrient reservoir" of water and plant food is maintained. Only the very bottom of the pot needs to touch this reservoir; the LECA, being porous by nature, gradually wicks moisture and nutrients up and becomes saturated, allowing the plant to feed and drink at a consistent rate.

One of the main differences between semi-hydroponics and more advanced hydroponics is the nutrients and water--whether they are consistently being delivered or whether they are sitting beneath each plant, gradually needing to be replaced before evaporating or becoming stagnant. Other differences are elements such as the facilities, the equipment, the types of plants being grown and why, and the consistency of water and nutrient delivery. Hydroponics is often favored by farmers and growers of edible crops on a larger scale. LECA can be used successfully in these settings. Semi-hydroponics is much more popular with individual plant collectors, bearing in mind the need to flush out and replenish the plants' nutrient reservoirs periodically (approx. every 7-10 days); more advanced systems provide constantly flowing, filtered, nutrient-enhanced water over the plants' roots, which typically drains into another reservoir for recycling and reusing.

See also [ edit ] Perlite Aggregate (composite) Vermiculite References [ edit ] ^ "Geotechnical Fill" .

Norlite Lightweight Aggregate . Archived from the original on 2015-05-24 . Retrieved 2015-05-24 .

Tor Arne, Hammer; Klaas van Breugel; Steinar Helland; Ivar Holand; Magne Maage; Jan P. G. Mijnsbergen; Edda Lilja Sveinsdóttir (2000). "Economic Design and Construction with Structural Lightweight Aggregate Concrete".

Materials for Buildings and Structures . EUROMAT 99. Vol. 6. p. 18.

doi : 10.1002/3527606211.ch3 .

ISBN 3527301259 .

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology v t e Hydroculture Historical hydroculture Types Aeroponics Aquaponics Aquascaping Hydroponics passive Subtypes Aquatic garden Bottle garden Deep water culture Kratky method Ebb and flow Fogponics Microponics Nutrient film technique Organic hydroponics Organopónicos Sub-irrigated planter Top drip Substrates Charcoal Coco peat Diatomaceous earth Expanded clay aggregate Gravel Growstones Lava rock Mineral wool Perlite Pumice Rice hulls Sand Vermiculite Wood fibre Accessories Grow light Hydroponic dosers Irrigation sprinkler Leaf sensor Net-pot Spray nozzle Timers Ultrasonic hydroponic fogger Water chiller Related concepts Algaculture Aquaculture of coral Aquaculture of sea sponges Controlled-environment agriculture Historical hydroculture Hydroponicum Paludarium Plant nutrition Plant propagation Rhizosphere Root rot Vertical farming Water aeration Category Commons Wikibooks Wikiversity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Expanded_clay_aggregate&oldid=1303964377 " Categories : Ceramic materials Soil-based building materials Natural materials Sediments Earthworks (engineering) Clay Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Expanded clay aggregate 30 languages Add topic

