Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Linguistic geography 2 Geolinguistic organizations 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Language geography 33 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar Мокшень 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Seeltersk Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the geographic distribution of languages A map of the language divisions within the Byzantine Empire during the reign of Justinian I Greek Greek and native Latin Latin and native Aramaic Coptic Caucasian and Armenian Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Language geography is the branch of human geography that studies the geographic distribution of language(s) or its constituent elements.

Linguistic geography can also refer to studies of how people talk about the landscape. For example, toponymy is the study of place names.

[ 1 ] Landscape ethnoecology, also known as ethnophysiography, is the study of landscape ontologies and how they are expressed in language.

[ 2 ] There are two principal fields of study within the geography of language: geography of languages , which deals with the distribution through history and space of languages, [ 3 ] and/or is concerned with 'the analysis of the distribution patterns and spatial structures of languages in contact'.

[ 4 ] geolinguistics being, when used as a sub-discipline of geography, the study of the 'political, economic and cultural processes that affect the status and distribution of languages'.

[ 5 ] When perceived as a sub-discipline of linguistics that incorporates contact linguistics, one definition appearing has been 'the study of languages and dialects in contact and in conflict with various societal, economic, ideological, political and other contemporary trends with regard to a particular geographic location and on a planetary scale'.

[ 6 ] Various other terms and subdisciplines have been suggested, but none gained much currency, [ 7 ] including: linguistic geography , [ 8 ] which deals with regional linguistic variations within languages, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 7 ] also called dialect geography , which some consider a subdivision of geolinguistics [ 5 ] a division within the examination of linguistic geography separating the studies of change over time and space; [ 13 ] Many studies in what is now called contact linguistics have researched the effect of language contact , [ 14 ] as the languages or dialects (varieties) of peoples have interacted.

[ 7 ] This territorial expansion of language groups has usually resulted in the overlaying of languages upon existing speech areas, rather than the replacement of one language by another. For example, after the Norman Conquest of England , Old French became the language of the aristocracy but Middle English remained the language of a majority of the population.

[ 15 ] Linguistic geography [ edit ] Linguistic geography, as a field, is dominated by linguists rather than geographers .

[ 11 ] Charles W. J. Withers describes the difference as resulting from a focus on "elements of language, and only then with their geographical or social variation, as opposed to investigation of the processes making for change in the extent of language areas." [ 7 ] Peter Trudgill says, "linguistic geography has been geographical only in the sense that it has been concerned with the spatial distribution of linguistic phenomena." [ 12 ] Greater emphasis has been laid upon explanation rather than mere description of the patterns of linguistic change.

[ 11 ] [ 7 ] That move has paralleled similar concerns in geography and language studies.

[ 16 ] Some studies have paid attention to the social use [ 17 ] of language and to variations in dialect within languages in regard to social class or occupation.

[ 18 ] Regarding such variations, lexicographer Robert Burchfield notes that their nature "is a matter of perpetual discussion and disagreement" and notes that "most professional linguistic scholars regard it as axiomatic that all varieties of English have a sufficiently large vocabulary for the expression of all the distinctions that are important in the society using it." He contrasts this with the view of the historian John Vincent , who regards such a view as "a nasty little orthodoxy among the educational and linguistic establishment. However badly you need standard English, you will have the merits of non-standard English waved at you. The more extravagantly your disadvantages will be lauded as 'entirely adequate for the needs of their speakers', to cite the author of Sociolinguistics . It may sound like a radical cry to support pidgin, patois, or dialect, but translated into social terms, it looks more like a ploy to keep Them (whoever Them may be) out of the middle-class suburbs." — John Vincent, The Times [ 19 ] Burchfield concludes, "Resolution of such opposite views is not possible.... future of dialect studies and the study of class-marked distinctions are likely to be of considerable interest to everyone." [ 20 ] In England , linguistic geography has traditionally focused upon rural English, rather than urban English.

[ 21 ] A common production of linguistic investigators of dialects is the shaded and dotted map showing to show where one linguistic feature ends and another begins or overlaps. Various compilations of these maps for England have been issued over the years, including Joseph Wright's English Dialect Dictionary (1896–1905), the Survey of English Dialects (1962–8), and The Linguistic Atlas of England (1978).

[ 22 ] Geolinguistic organizations [ edit ] Most geolinguistic organizations identify themselves as associations of linguists rather than of geographers. This includes the two oldest which both date to 1965 with "Amici Linguarum" (language friends) being founded by Erik V. Gunnemark and The American Society of Geolinguistics by Mario A. Pei . The research in geolinguistics which these organizations and others, which are more geographically oriented, promote is often interdisciplinary, being at times simultaneously both linguistic and geographic, and also being at times linked to other sub-disciplines of linguistics as well as going beyond linguistics to connect to sociology, anthropology, ethnology, history, demographics, political science, studies of cognition and communication, etc.

See also [ edit ] Dialect continuum Language policy Linguistic ecology Linguistic landscape Linguistic map Linguistic rights Sprachbund References [ edit ] ^ Kadmon, Naftali (2000).

Toponymy : the lore, laws, and language of geographical names (1st ed.). New York: Vantage Press.

ISBN 0533135311 .

^ Johnson, Leslie Main; Hunn, Eugene S., eds. (2012).

Landscape Ethnoecology: Concepts of Biotic and Physical Space . New York: Berghahn Books.

^ Delgado de Carvalho, C.M. (1962).

The geography of languages . In Wagner, P.L.; Mikesell, M.W.

Readings in cultural geography.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 75–93.

^ Williams, C.H. (1980). "Language contact and language change in Wales, 1901–1971: a study in historical geolinguistics".

Welsh History Review 10, 207–238.

^ a b Gunnemark, Erik (1991). "What is geolinguistics ?".

Geolinguistics, Journal of the American Society of Geolinguistics .

17 . American Society of Geolinguistics: 12.

ISSN 0190-4671 .

^ "International Conference on multilingual perspectives in geolinguistics, April 11, 2015" .

^ a b c d e Withers, Charles W.J. [1981] (1993). Johnson, R.J.

The Dictionary of Human Geography , Gregory, Derek; Smith, David M., Second edition, Oxford: Blackwell, 252–3.

^ Dell'Aquila, V. (1997).

Mapping the languages of Europe in Herberts K., Laurén C., Laurén U, Strömann S. (Eds.): "Flerspråkighetens dimensioner. Individ, familj och samhälle", Vaasan Yliopiston Julkaisuja: Vaasa/Vasa, 103–131.

^ Pei, M. (1966).

Glossary of linguistic terminology . New York: John Wiley.

^ Trudgill, P. (1974).

Linguistic change and diffusion: description and explanation in sociolinguistic dialect geography.

Language in Society 3:2, 215–46.

^ a b c Trudgill, P. (1983).

On dialect: social and geographical perspectives.

Oxford: Basil Blackwell; New York: New York University Press.

^ a b Trudgill, P. (1975).

Linguistic geography and geographical linguistics.

Progress in Geography 7, 227–52 ^ Iordan, I.; Orr, J. (1970).

An introduction to romance linguistics.

Oxford: Basil Blackwell; Berkeley: University of California Press.

^ Weinrich, U. (1974).

Languages in contact . The Hague: Mouton.

^ Burchfield, Robert [1985] (2003).

The English Language , New York: Oxford University Press, 14.

^ Withers, C.W.J. (1984).

Gaelic in Scotland 1698–1981: the geographical history of a language.

Edinburgh: John Donald; Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.

^ Hult, F.M. (2009). Language ecology and linguistic landscape analysis. In E. Shohamy & D. Gorter (Eds.), Linguistic landscape: Expanding the scenery (pp. 88–104). London: Routledge.

^ Giglioli, P.P. (1972).

Language and social context . Harmondsworth: Penguin.

^ The Times , 23 February 1983, p. 12 ^ Burchfield, Robert [1985] (2003).

The English Language , New York: Oxford University Press, 128–130.

^ In 1985, one could still say, "We still know far more about the distribution of byre/shippon/mistall/cow-stable/cow-house/cow-shed/neat-house/beast-house for 'cow-shed' than we do about urban synonyms for pedestrian crossings, lollipop men, machines used to wash cars, forecourts of petrol stations, bollards, sleeping policemen, pay-out desks, supermarket trolleys, traffic wardens, telephone booths and hundreds of other items found in every city in the United Kingdom." Burchfield, Robert [1985] (2003).

The English Language , New York: Oxford University Press, 128.

^ Burchfield, Robert [1985] (2003).

The English Language , New York: Oxford University Press, 125.

External links [ edit ] Linguistic atlas of the world Archived 2 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine American Society of Geolinguistics Links to related articles v t e Geographical distribution of languages Language geography Romance-speaking world Iberophone Portuguese Lusophone list Spanish list Catalan Other French Francophonie list Italian list Romanian list Germanic-speaking world English Anglophone list German list Dutch list Slavic-speaking world Macedonian Polish Russian list Ukrainian Celtic-speaking world Irish Scottish Gaelic Welsh Other languages Arab world list Sinophone list Persosphere list Indosphere Malay world list Uralic-speaking world Esperantujo Hindustani list Tamil list Swahili list Category v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Language_geography&oldid=1303339305 " Categories : Language geography Human geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 11:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Language geography 33 languages Add topic

