Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 University of Cambridge 1.3 Bishop 1.4 Opposition to Lutheranism 1.5 Defence of Catherine of Aragon 1.6 Henry's attack on church prerogatives 1.6.1 Poisoned porridge and cannonball 1.7 Intrigues with the Holy Roman Emperor 1.8 "The King's Great Matter" 1.9 Succession and supremacy 1.10 Cardinalate and martyrdom 2 Writings 3 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 3.1 Canonisation 3.2 Patronage 3.2.1 Australia 3.2.2 Canada 3.2.3 United Kingdom 3.2.4 United States 4 Personal Toggle Personal subsection 4.1 Portraits 4.2 Relic 4.3 Cinematic and television portrayals 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents John Fisher 35 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 16th-century Bishop of Rochester For other uses, see John Fisher (disambiguation) .

Saint John Fisher Cardinal Bishop of Rochester Depicted by a follower of Hans Holbein the Younger Church Catholic Church in England and Wales Metropolis Canterbury Diocese Rochester See Rochester Appointed 14 October 1504 Installed 24 April 1505 Term ended 2 January 1535 Predecessor Richard FitzJames Successor Nicholas Heath Other post(s) Cardinal-Priest of San Vitale Orders Ordination 17 December 1491 by Thomas Rotherham Consecration 24 November 1504 by William Warham Created cardinal 21 May 1535 by Pope Paul III Rank Bishop, Cardinal-Priest Personal details Born c. 19 October 1469 [ 1 ] Beverley , Yorkshire , Kingdom of England Died 22 June 1535 (1535-06-22) (aged 65) Tower Hill , London , Kingdom of England Motto faciam vos fieri piscatores hominum ("I shall make you fishers of men") Coat of arms Sainthood Feast day 22 June ( Catholic Church ) 6 July ( Church of England ) 9 July (Catholic pre-1969) Venerated in Catholic Church , Anglicanism Title as Saint Bishop and martyr, Bishop of Rochester Beatified 29 December 1886 Rome , Kingdom of Italy , by Pope Leo XIII Canonized 19 May 1935 Vatican City , by Pope Pius XI Patronage Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester ; Rochester, New York Styles of John Fisher Informal style Cardinal Part of a series on the Counter-Reformation Faith, or The Church Triumphant (1665) by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Catholic Reformation and Revival Councils and documents Council of Trent Exsurge Domine Decet Romanum Pontificem Confutatio Augustana Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Roman Catechism Nova ordinantia eclessiastica Defensio Tridentinæ fidei Regnans in Excelsis Ascendente Domino Immensa aeterni Dei Unigenitus Politics Diet of Worms Catholic League Augsburg Interim European wars of religion Dalecarlian rebellions German Peasants' War Wars of Kappel Tyrone's Rebellion Olav Engelbrektsson 's rebellion Pilgrimage of Grace Bigod's rebellion Dacke War Schmalkaldic War Prayer Book Rebellion French Wars of Religion Strasbourg Bishops' War Thirty Years' War Bohemian Revolt Rohan Wars Jacobite rising of 1689 Spirituality Confraternities Devotionalism French school of spirituality Gregorian chant Ignatian spirituality Interior life Mariology Popular piety Rosary Sacred Heart Spanish mysticism Tridentine Mass Transubstantiation Works of mercy Art Schools Mannerism Polyphony Baroque Flemish Baroque Spanish Golden Age Artists Federico Barocci Gian Lorenzo Bernini Caravaggio Annibale Carracci Ludovico Carracci Anthony van Dyck Domenico Fontana Artemisia Gentileschi Luca Giordano El Greco Jacobus de Kerle Giovanni Lanfranco Orlando di Lasso Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina Mattia Preti Andrea Pozzo Scipione Pulzone Guido Reni Jusepe de Ribera Peter Paul Rubens Vincenzo Ruffo Tintoretto Titian Georges de La Tour Juan de Valdés Leal Francisco de Zurbarán People People Teresa of Ávila Thomas More Clergy Robert Bellarmine Charles Borromeo Joseph Calasanz Peter Canisius Erasmus Ignatius of Loyola Johann Eckk John Fisher John of the Cross Lawrence of Brindisi Péter Pázmány Philip Neri Matteo Ricci Cardinal Richelieu Francis de Sales Francisco Suárez Francis Xavier Monarchs Charles V Ferdinand II Leopold I Louis XIV Mary I Maximilian I Catherine de' Medici Philip II Sigismund I Sigismund III William V Popes Leo X Adrian VI Clement VII Pius III Paul III Julius III Paul IV Pius IV Pius V Gregory XIII Sixtus V Inquisition Dicastery for the Doctrine of the Faith Excommunicable offences Index Librorum Prohibitorum Portuguese Inquisition Roman Inquisition Spanish Inquisition Black Legend of the Spanish Inquisition Philosophy and education Collegium Germanicum et Hungaricum Pontifical Gregorian University Second scholasticism School of Salamanca Molinism Religious orders Augustinian Recollects Barnabites Capuchins Discalced Augustinians Discalced Carmelites Jesuits Oratorians Piarists Theatines Ursulines Related topics Catholic literary revival History of Germany Holy Roman Empire Nationalism in the Middle Ages Nation-building Proto-Protestantism Reformation Renaissance Catholic Church portal v t e John Fisher (c. 19 October 1469 – 22 June 1535) was an English Catholic prelate who served as Bishop of Rochester from 1504 to 1535 and as chancellor of the University of Cambridge . He is honoured as a martyr and saint by the Catholic Church.

Fisher was executed by order of Henry VIII during the English Reformation for refusing to accept him as Supreme Head of the Church of England and for upholding the Catholic Church 's doctrine of papal supremacy and the independence of the Church from control by the State. He was named a cardinal shortly before his death.

In answer to a popular petition of English Catholics, Pope Pius XI canonized John Fisher and Thomas More on 19 May 1935 as representatives of the many Catholic martyrs of England. The two martyrs share a common feast day on 22 June in the current General Roman Calendar of the Catholic Church. His name also appears in some Anglican calendars of saints .

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] John Fisher was born at Beverley , Yorkshire in 1469, [ 2 ] the son of Robert Fisher, a prosperous mercer of Beverley, and Agnes, his wife, with whom he had four children. Robert Fisher died in 1477, and was buried in St. Mary's, the parish church; in his will, he made bequests to his children and various poorhouses, churches, and priests, as well as providing Mass stipends.

[ 3 ] John was then eight years old. His widowed mother subsequently married a man named White, to whom she bore four further children.

[ 4 ] Fisher's early education was probably at the school attached to the collegiate church in his home town. He seems to have had close contacts with his extended family all his life.

University of Cambridge [ edit ] Acknowledging Fisher's aptitude for learning, and being financially comfortable, his mother assented to his admission to the University of Cambridge, in 1482, at the age of twelve or thirteen.

The University of Cambridge had regressed and stagnated academically. In an oration delivered before Henry VII in 1506, Fisher recalled: "At the time when your majesty first showed your concern for us, learning had begun to decline among us—this may have been the result of constant litigation with the town, or of the frequent plagues that beset us so that we lost many of our leading scholars, or of the lack of patrons of learning.

[ 5 ] Whatever the cause, we should indeed have been reduced to despair had not your majesty shone down upon us like the rising sun itself." [ 6 ] Fisher studied at the University of Cambridge from 1484, where at Michaelhouse he came under the influence of William Melton , a pastorally-minded theologian open to the new current of reform in studies arising from the Renaissance . Fisher received the Bachelor of Arts degree in 1487. In 1491 he proceeded to a Master of Arts degree and was elected a fellow of his college.

[ 7 ] Also in 1491 Fisher received a papal dispensation to be ordained to the priesthood despite being under the canonical age.

[ 8 ] On 17 December 1491 he was ordained into the priesthood, and appointed (nominal) Vicar of Northallerton , Yorkshire.

[ 9 ] In 1494 he resigned this benefice to become proctor of the University and three years later was appointed master debater and about the same time he was also appointed chaplain and confessor to Margaret Beaufort, Countess of Richmond and Derby , mother of King Henry VII .

On 5 July 1501, he received the degree of doctor of sacred theology and 10 days later was elected Vice-Chancellor of the university . Under Fisher's guidance, his patroness Lady Margaret founded St John's and Christ's Colleges at Cambridge, and a Lady Margaret Professorship of Divinity at each of the two universities at Oxford and Cambridge . Fisher himself becoming the first occupant of the Cambridge chair. From 1505 to 1508 he was also the President of Queens' College . At the end of July 1516 he was at Cambridge for the opening of St John's College and consecrated the chapel.

Fisher's strategy was to assemble funds and attract to Cambridge leading scholars from Europe, promoting the study not only of Classical Latin and Greek authors, but of Hebrew . He placed great weight upon pastoral commitment, above all popular preaching, on the part of the endowed fellows. Fisher had a vision to which he dedicated all his personal resources and energies. Despite occasional opposition, he managed to administer the entire university, one of only two in England, conceiving and seeing through long-term projects.

Fisher's foundations were also dedicated to prayer for the dead, especially through chantry foundations. A stern and austere man, Fisher was known to place a human skull on the altar during Mass and on the table during meals.

[ 10 ] John Fisher as a young man by Pietro Torrigiano.

Erasmus said of John Fisher: "He is the one man at this time who is incomparable for uprightness of life, for learning and for greatness of soul." [ 11 ] Bishop [ edit ] By papal bull dated 14 October 1504, Fisher was appointed bishop of Rochester , at the personal insistence of Henry VII.

[ 12 ] Rochester was then the poorest diocese in England and usually seen as a first step on an episcopal career. Nonetheless, Fisher stayed there, presumably by his own choice, for the remaining 31 years of his life.

At the same time, like any English bishop of his day, Fisher had certain state duties. These included in particular, his role regarding the University of Cambridge, in which he maintained a passionate interest. In 1504 he was elected the university's chancellor. Re-elected annually for 10 years, Fisher ultimately received a lifetime appointment. At this date he is also said to have acted as tutor to the future king, Henry VIII . As a preacher, his reputation was so great that he was appointed to preach the funeral oration for King Henry VII and the Lady Margaret, both of whom died in 1509, the texts being extant. Besides the part he played in the Lady Margaret's foundations, Fisher gave further proof of his zeal for learning by inducing Erasmus to visit Cambridge. The latter attributes it ( "Epistulae" 6:2) to Fisher's protection that the study of Greek was allowed to proceed at Cambridge without the active molestation that it encountered at Oxford.

[ 2 ] Despite his fame and eloquence, it was not long before Fisher came into conflict with the new King, his former pupil. The dispute arose over funds left by the Lady Margaret, the King's grandmother, for financing foundations at Cambridge.

In 1512 Fisher was nominated as one of the English representatives at the Fifth Council of the Lateran , then sitting, but his journey to Rome was postponed, and finally abandoned.

[ 2 ] Opposition to Lutheranism [ edit ] John Fisher was "the first theologian to diagnose justification through faith alone as the founding dogma of the Protestant Reformation." [ 13 ] Fisher has also been named, though without any convincing proof, as the true author of the royal treatise against Martin Luther entitled "Assertio septem sacramentorum" ( Defence of the Seven Sacraments ), published in 1521, which won for King Henry VIII the title "Fidei Defensor" ( Defender of the Faith ). Prior to this date Fisher had denounced various abuses in the Church , urging the need for disciplinary reforms.

In 1523, Fisher published a 200,000 word response to Martin Luther's Latin : Assertio Omnium Articulor (Assertions): Latin : Assertionis Lutheranae Confutatio (Confutation of the Lutheran Assertions). Luther omitted some of the more provocative material from his German version, allowing the view that Fisher (and, the next year, Erasmus ) had misunderstood Luther.

[ 14 ] Luther did not respond to Fisher.

On about 11 February 1526, at the King's command, he preached a famous sermon against Luther at St Paul's Cross , the open-air pulpit outside St Paul's Cathedral in London, as part of a spectacle where some Lutherans would publicly abjure and confiscated Lutheran books would be burnt. In the preface to the printed English version of the sermon, Fisher offered to meet secretly with any Lutheran to "to hear the bottom of his mind, and he shall hear mine again, if it so please him: and I trust
in our lord, that finally we shall so agree, that either he shall make me a Lutheran, or else I shall induce him to be a Catholic, and to follow the doctrine of Christ's
church." [ 15 ] The battle against heterodox teachings increasingly occupied Fisher's later years.

In 1529 Fisher was called to confirm with Thomas Hitton , a follower of William Tyndale arrested for suspected heresy, that the records of his interviews and forthright admissions to Archbishop William Warham were correct and to convince Hitton to abjure.

[ 16 ] : 1149–1151 Failing this, Hitton was handed to the secular authorities and executed at the stake for heresy.

William Tyndale , then living overseas, claimed that Hitton had been tortured by the archbishops, [ 17 ] however Protestant historian John Foxe who was diligent in passing on this kind of claim, does not claim this.

[ 16 ] Defence of Catherine of Aragon [ edit ] When Henry tried to annul his marriage to Catherine of Aragon , Fisher became the Queen's chief supporter.

[ 18 ] As such, he appeared on the Queen's behalf in the legates' court, where he startled the audience by the directness of his language and by declaring that, like St John the Baptist , he was ready to die on behalf of the indissolubility of marriage.

[ 19 ] Henry VIII, upon hearing this, grew so enraged by it that he composed a long Latin address to the legates in answer to the bishop's speech. Fisher's copy of this still exists, with his manuscript annotations in the margin which show how little he feared the royal anger.

[ 20 ] The removal of the cause to Rome brought Fisher's personal involvement to an end, but the King never forgave him for what he had done.

Henry's attack on church prerogatives [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In November 1529, the "Long Parliament" of Henry's reign began encroaching on the Catholic Church's prerogatives. Fisher, as a member of the upper house, the House of Lords , at once warned Parliament that such acts could only end in the utter destruction of the Catholic Church in England. The Commons , through their speaker, complained to the King that Fisher had disparaged Parliament , presumably with Henry prompting them behind the scenes.

[ 21 ] : 433 Henry summoned Fisher before him, demanding an explanation. This being given, Henry declared himself satisfied, leaving it to the Commons to declare that the explanation was inadequate, so that he appeared as a magnanimous sovereign, instead of Fisher's enemy.

[ citation needed ] A year later, in 1530, the continued encroachments on the Church moved Fisher, as bishop of Rochester, along with the bishops of Bath and Ely , to appeal to the Holy See. This gave the King his opportunity and an edict forbidding such appeals was immediately issued, and the three bishops were arrested. Their imprisonment, however, must have lasted only a few months for in February 1531, Convocation met, and Fisher was present. This was the occasion when the clergy were forced, at a cost of 100,000 pounds, to purchase the King's pardon for having recognized Cardinal Wolsey 's authority as legate of the pope; and at the same time to acknowledge Henry as supreme head of the Church in England, to which phrase the addition of the clause "so far as God's law permits" was made through Fisher's efforts.

This yere was a coke boylyd in a cauderne in Smythfeld for he wolde a powsyned the bishop of Rochester Fycher with dyvers of hys servanttes, and he was lockyd in a chayne and pullyd up and downe with a gybbyt at dyvers tymes tyll he was dede.

Chronicle of the Grey Friars of London , 1531 Poisoned porridge and cannonball [ edit ] A few days later, several of Fisher's household were taken ill after eating some porridge served to the household and two died: however Fisher was fasting that day.

Henry VIII had parliament enact a retroactive bill that allowed the cook, Richard Roose , without a public trial, to be executed by the state by being boiled alive for the crime of poisoning.

On another occasion in 1530, a cannonball fired from across the Thames hit Fisher's house, narrowly missing his study.

[ 22 ] : 218 This was rumoured to be a warning or assassination attempt from the Boleyn family .

[ 23 ] Intrigues with the Holy Roman Emperor [ edit ] Fisher also engaged in secret activities to overthrow Henry. As early as 1531 he began secretly communicating with foreign diplomats. In September 1533 communicating secretly through the imperial ambassador Eustace Chapuys he encouraged Holy Roman Emperor Charles V to invade England and depose Henry in combination with a domestic uprising.

[ 24 ] "The King's Great Matter" [ edit ] Main article: The King's Great Matter John Fisher by Gerard Valck , after Adriaen van der Werff , 1697.

Matters now moved rapidly. In May 1532, Sir Thomas More resigned the chancellorship and, in June, Fisher preached publicly against the annulment. In August, William Warham , Archbishop of Canterbury, died and Thomas Cranmer was at once proposed by Henry to the Pope as his successor. In January of the next year, Henry secretly went through a form of marriage with Anne Boleyn . Cranmer's consecration as a bishop took place in March 1533, and, a week later, Fisher was arrested. It seems that the purpose of this arrest was to prevent him from opposing the annulment which Cranmer pronounced in May, or the coronation of Anne Boleyn which followed on 1 June, for Fisher was set at liberty again within a fortnight of the latter event, no charge being made against him.

In the autumn of 1533, various arrests were made in connection with the so-called revelations of the Holy Maid of Kent, Elizabeth Barton , but as Fisher was taken seriously ill in December, proceedings against him were postponed for a time. However, in March 1534, a special Bill of Attainder against Fisher and others for complicity in the matter of the Maid of Kent was introduced in Parliament and passed. By this, Fisher was condemned to forfeit all his personal estate and to be imprisoned during the King's pleasure. Subsequently, a pardon was granted him on payment of a fine of 300 pounds.

Succession and supremacy [ edit ] The same session of Parliament passed the First Succession Act , by which all who should be called upon to do so were compelled to take an oath of succession, acknowledging the issue of Henry and Anne as legitimate heirs to the throne, under pain of being guilty of misprision of treason . Fisher refused the oath and was imprisoned in the Tower of London on 26 April 1534.

[ 12 ] Several efforts were made to induce him to submit, but without effect, and in November he was attained of misprision of treason a second time, his goods being forfeited as from the previous 1 March, and the See of Rochester being declared vacant as of 2 June following. He was to remain in the Tower for over a year, and while he was allowed food and drink sent by friends, and a servant, he was not allowed a priest, even to the very end. A long letter exists, written from the Tower by Fisher to Thomas Cromwell , speaking of the severity of his conditions of imprisonment.

Like Thomas More, Bishop Fisher believed that, because the statute condemned only those speaking maliciously against the King's new title, there was safety in silence. However, on 7 May he fell into a trap laid for him by Richard Rich , who was to perjure himself to obtain Thomas More's conviction. Rich told Fisher that for his own conscience's sake the King wished to know, in strict secrecy, Fisher's real opinion. Fisher, once again, declared that the King was not Supreme Head of the Church of England.

[ 11 ] Cardinalate and martyrdom [ edit ] Memorial space at the Tower Hill public execution site In May 1535, the newly elected Pope Paul III created Fisher Cardinal Priest of San Vitale , apparently in the hope of inducing Henry to ease Fisher's treatment. The effect was precisely the reverse: [ 11 ] Henry forbade the cardinal's hat to be brought into England, declaring that he would send the head to Rome instead.

In June a special commission for Fisher's trial was issued, and on Thursday, 17 June, he was arraigned in Westminster Hall before a court of seventeen, including Thomas Cromwell , Anne Boleyn 's father , and ten justices. The charge was treason , in that he denied that the King was the Supreme Head of the Church of England. Since he had been deprived of his position of Bishop of Rochester by the Act of Attainder , he was treated as a commoner, and tried by jury. The only testimony was that of Richard Rich. John Fisher was found guilty and condemned to be hanged, drawn and quartered at Tyburn .

The Bell Tower, where John Fisher was held during his prison time together with Thomas More , though imprisoned separately therein.

However, a public outcry was brewing among the London populace who saw a sinister irony in the parallels between the conviction of Fisher and that of his patronal namesake, Saint John the Baptist , who was executed by King Herod Antipas for challenging the validity of Herod's marriage to his brother's divorcée Herodias . For fear of John Fisher's living through his patronal feast day , that of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist on 24 June, and of attracting too much public sympathy, the king commuted the sentence to that of beheading , to be accomplished before 23 June, the Vigil of the feast of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist.

He was executed on Tower Hill on 22 June 1535.

[ 25 ] The execution had the opposite effect from that which Henry VIII intended, as it created yet another parallel with that of the martyrdom of St. John the Baptist, who was also beheaded; his death also happened on the feast day of Saint Alban , the first martyr of Britain.

[ 25 ] Fisher met death with a calm dignified courage which profoundly impressed those present. His body was treated with particular rancour, apparently on Henry's orders, being stripped and left on the scaffold until the evening, [ 11 ] when it was taken on pikes and thrown naked into a rough grave in the churchyard of All Hallows' Barking, also known as All Hallows-by-the-Tower . There was no funeral prayer. A fortnight later, his body was laid beside that of Sir Thomas More in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula within the Tower of London . Fisher's head was stuck upon a pole on London Bridge but its ruddy and lifelike appearance excited so much attention that, after a fortnight, it was thrown into the Thames , its place being taken by that of Sir Thomas More, whose execution, also at Tower Hill, occurred on 6 July.

[ 2 ] "Catholic piety conventionally explains the scarlet robes that Cardinals wear as a sign of their readiness to shed their blood for the sake of the Christian gospel. This is an edifying thought: but as a matter of fact, in the whole millenium-long history of the cardinalate, only one member of the Sacred College has actually ever suffered martyrdom. That man was John Fisher. (...) — Eamon Duffy [ 26 ] : 150 Writings [ edit ] A list of John Fisher's writings is found in Joseph Gillow 's Bibliographical Dictionary of the English Catholics (London, s.d.), II, 262–270. There are twenty-six works in all, printed and manuscript, mostly ascetical or controversial treatises, several of which have been reprinted many times. The original editions are very rare and valuable. The principal are: Treatise concernynge ... the seven penytencyall Psalms (London, 1508) Sermon ... agayn ye pernicyous doctrin of Martin Luther (London, 1521) Assertionis Lutheranae Confutatio (Confutation of the Lutheran Assertions) (1523) Defensio Henrici VIII (Cologne, 1525) De Veritate Corporis et Sanguinis Christi in Eucharistia, adversus Johannem Oecolampadium (Cologne, 1527) De Causa Matrimonii ... Henrici VIII cum Catharina Aragonensi (Alcalá de Henares, 1530) The Wayes to Perfect Religion (London, 1535) A Spirituall Consolation written ... to hys sister Elizabeth (London, 1735) Legacy [ edit ] Canonisation [ edit ] Saint John Fisher Bishop of Rochester Bishop and Martyr Born 19 October 1469 Beverley , Yorkshire , Kingdom of England Died 22 June 1535 (aged 65) Tower Hill , Tower of London , London , Kingdom of England Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 29 December 1886, Rome by Leo XIII Canonized 19 May 1935, Vatican City by Pius XI Feast 22 June John Fisher was beatified by Pope Leo XIII with Thomas More and 52 other English Martyrs on 29 December 1886. In the Decree of Beatification, the greatest place was given to Fisher.

He was canonised , with Thomas More , on 19 May 1935 by Pope Pius XI ,after the presentation of a petition by English Catholics.

[ 27 ] His feast day, for celebration jointly with St Thomas More , is on 22 June (the date of Fisher's execution). In 1980, despite being an opponent of the English Reformation , Fisher was added to the Church of England's calendar of Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church , jointly with Thomas More, to be commemorated every 6 July [ 28 ] (the date of More's execution) as "Thomas More, Scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535".

[ 29 ] He is also listed along with Thomas More in the calendar of saints of some of the other Churches of the Anglican Communion , such as The Anglican Church of Australia .

[ 30 ] Patronage [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] St John Fisher College at the University of Tasmania in Hobart St John Fisher Catholic High school in Bracken Ridge, Queensland [ 31 ] St John Fisher Church (Kurnell), Sydney, Australia St John Fisher Church (Tarragindi), Brisbane, Queensland [ 32 ] Canada [ edit ] St. John Fisher Catholic School, Scarborough Fisher Hall, one of the residence halls at Saint Michael's College at the University of Toronto St. John Fisher R.C. School, Forest, Ontario [ 33 ] St. John Fisher Parish, Bramalea (Brampton), Ontario [ 34 ] St. John Fisher Elementary School, Pointe-Claire, Quebec [ 35 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] The University of Cambridge : Fisher House, the Cambridge University Catholic Chaplaincy .

[ 36 ] Fisher Building, a student accommodation at Queens' College , where Fisher was president from 1505 to 1508 [ 37 ] The Fisher Building, conference centre and meeting rooms in St John's College [ 38 ] Schools: St John Fisher Catholic College in Newcastle-under-Lyme , Staffordshire [ 39 ] St John Fisher Catholic High School in Harrogate , North Yorkshire [ 40 ] St John Fisher Catholic High School in Peterborough , Cambridgeshire .

[ 41 ] St John Fisher Catholic High School , Wigan, Lancashire [ 42 ] St John Fisher Catholic School in Chatham, Kent.

[ 43 ] St John Fisher Catholic Voluntary Academy in Dewsbury , West Yorkshire [ 44 ] Ss John Fisher and Thomas More Roman Catholic High School , Colne, Lancashire [ 45 ] The John Fisher School located in Purley , Surrey [ 46 ] St John Fisher Catholic Primary School, Loughton, Essex Churches: Saint John Fisher parish, Kidbrooke, London [ 47 ] Saint John Fisher Roman Catholic Church , Merton , London [ 48 ] Saint John Fisher Roman Catholic Church, Harrow, London Saint John Fisher Roman Catholic Church, Shepperton, London Saint John Fisher Roman Catholic Church, Rochester, Kent John Fisher R.C. Church, Scarthoe, Great Grimsby, Lincolnshire. (Closed 2017) Saint John Fisher R.C. Church, Priory Crescent, Southend on Sea, Essex Saint John Fisher Church, Cambourne , Cambridgeshire Other: St John Fisher House, Reading – the headquarters of the FSSP in England and Wales .

[ 49 ] The football teams Fisher Athletic F.C.

(1908–2009) and Fisher F.C.

(founded 2009) of Rotherhithe , south-east London [ 50 ] United States [ edit ] Fisher is the patron of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester in New York State, so named by Pope John XXIII in 1961.

[ 51 ] Due to his status as the Bishop of Rochester, Fisher has been adopted as a patron of several institutions in other cities named Rochester, including: St. John Fisher Catholic Church near Rochester , Michigan [ 52 ] St. John Fisher University in Rochester , New York [ 53 ] St. John of Rochester Catholic Church near Rochester, New York A number of other parishes are also dedicated to St. John Fisher, including those in: Rancho Palos Verdes , California [ 54 ] Marlborough , Connecticut [ 55 ] Chicago , Illinois [ 56 ] Newtown , Ohio Tulsa , Oklahoma Portland , Oregon [ 57 ] Boothwyn , Pennsylvania [ 58 ] Churchill , Pennsylvania [ 59 ] Galveston , Texas [ 60 ] And the St. John Fisher Seminary Residence in the Catholic Diocese of Bridgeport , Connecticut.

Personal [ edit ] Portraits [ edit ] Several portraits of John Fisher exist, the most prominent being by Hans Holbein the Younger in the Royal Collection; and a few secondary relics are extant.

Relic [ edit ] Fisher's walking-staff is in the possession of the Eyston family of East Hendred , in Oxfordshire (formerly Berkshire ).

[ 61 ] Cinematic and television portrayals [ edit ] John Fisher was portrayed by veteran actor Joseph O'Conor in the film Anne of the Thousand Days (1969), by Bosco Hogan in the series The Tudors , by Geoffrey Lewis in the 1971 miniseries The Six Wives of Henry VIII and by Richard Durden in the 2015 miniseries Wolf Hall .

References [ edit ] ^ Based upon his baptismal date as taken from "Lives of the Saints, For Every Day of the Year," edited by the Rev. Hugo Hoever OSB Cist, New York: Catholic Book Publishing Co., 1951 ^ a b c d "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: St. John Fisher" .

newadvent.org . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ To "a number of churches and almshouses and to two priests. To a monastery at Hagnaby in Lincolnshire he left ten shillings for a trental of Masses for the repose of his soul, and to a church at Holtoft not far away in the same county, he left a small sum for the upkeep of the fabric. Robert senior may have been a native of that part of Lincolnshire. Four children are referred to in the will but not named. We know the names of two, John and his brother Robert who was later steward at Rochester. One of the other children was a daughter who married an Edward White. The fourth child may have been the Ralph Fisher whose name comes in a list of debts owing to John Fisher at his attainder. An early manuscript version of John Fisher's life says that he was the eldest son, but this, too, lacks confirmation." Reynolds, E.E. (1995).

St. John Fisher . Mediatrix Press. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-0692546772 .

^ Neither White's Christian name nor his occupation is known. Of his children by Agnes, John and Thomas became merchants; the third, Richard, became a priest and Elizabeth White entered the Dominican nunnery at Dartford, Kent.

^ Some similar forces had also affected the University of Oxford.

^ "Martyr-in-Waiting – Martyrs of Henry VIII: Repression, Defiance, Sacrifice" .

erenow.org . Retrieved 26 October 2023 .

^ "Fisher, John (FSR487J)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Reynolds, Ernest Edwin (1955).

Saint John Fisher . Anthony Clarke Books. p. 6.

^ Saywell, Joseph Lemuel (1885). "Appendix".

The history and annals of Northallerton, Yorkshire . London: Simpkin and Marshall. p. xliv (298).

OCLC 1045936128 .

^ Seward, Desmond (2007).

The Wars of the Roses . Constable and Robinson. p. 437.

^ a b c d Foley OFM, Leonard, "St. John Fisher", Saint of the Day, Lives, Lessons, and Feast , (revised by Pat McCloskey OFM), Franciscan Media ISBN 978-0-86716-887-7 ^ a b "Catholic Culture Library: Bishop John Fisher" . Retrieved 3 July 2016 .

^ Marc’hadour, Germain (December 2010).

"Review of Eramus' Defence of his De libero arbitrio" .

Moreana .

47 ( 181– 182): 299.

doi : 10.3366/more.2010.47.3-4.17 .

^ Scheck, Thomas P. (2013).

"Bishop John Fisher's Response To Martin Luther" .

Franciscan Studies .

71 : 463– 509.

ISSN 0080-5459 .

JSTOR 43855981 .

^ D'Alton, Craig W. (April 2003). "The Suppression of Lutheran Heretics in England, 1526–1529".

The Journal of Ecclesiastical History .

54 (2): 228– 253.

doi : 10.1017/S0022046902005675 .

^ a b Foxe, John (1851).

Fox's Book of Martyrs: The Acts and Monuments of the Church . G. Virtue.

^ Brian Moynahan, God's Messenger ^ Bridgett, Thomas Edward (1890).

Life of Blessed John Fisher: Bishop of Rochester, Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church and Martyr Under Henry VIII . Burns & Oates. p.

165 .

^ Bridgett, Thomas Edward (1890).

Life of Blessed John Fisher: Bishop of Rochester, Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church and Martyr Under Henry VIII . Burns & Oates. p.

170 .

^ Bridgett, Thomas Edward (1890).

Life of Blessed John Fisher: Bishop of Rochester, Cardinal of the Holy Roman Church and Martyr Under Henry VIII . Burns & Oates. p.

172 .

^ "Chapter XIII: Henry VIII.".

The Cambridge Modern History, Volume 2, Ch 13 .

^ Coleridge, Hartley (1852).

Lady Anne Clifford. Roger Ascham. John Fisher. The Rev. William Mason. Sir Richard Arkwright . E. Moxon.

^ Moore, James (31 October 2016).

The Tudor Murder Files . Pen and Sword.

ISBN 978-1-4738-5704-9 .

^ Bradshaw, Brendan (26 January 1989).

Humanism, Reform and the Reformation: The Career of Bishop John Fisher . CUP Archive. pp.

156– 7.

ISBN 9780521340342 .

^ a b Fuller, Thomas. The Church History of Britain, Vol 2. London: Thomas Tegg, 1842. pp. 61-63.

^ Duffy, Eamon (2012).

Saints, sacrilege and sedition: religion and conflict in the Tudor reformations . London: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1441181176 .

^ "Saint John Fisher | English priest" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church's Year .

Church of England . 2000 . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ An Australian Prayer Book : for use together with the Book of Common Prayer (1662) . Sydney: Anglican Information Office (published 1992). 1978. p. 300.

ISBN 9780909827793 .

JULY 2 Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary 6 John Fisher, bishop (1468-1535) and Thomas More (1478-1535), scholars and martyrs for conscience' sake ^ "St John Fisher College – Bracken Ridge" .

stjohnfishercollege.qld.edu.au . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Life experience makes Fr Bryan a Youngcare fan" .

Archdiocese of Brisbane . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Home – St. John Fisher" .

st-clair.net . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "St. John Fisher Parish, Bramalea" .

stjohnfisherbr.archtoronto.org . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "St. John Fisher Elementary School, Pointe Claire" .

stjohnfisher.lbpsb.qc.ca/ . Retrieved 13 January 2023 .

^ "About Fisher House" . 18 October 2002. Archived from the original on 18 October 2002 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Fisher Building history" .

queens.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 19 December 2019 .

^ "The Cripps Building" . St John's College, Cambridge . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to St John Fisher Catholic College" . St John Fisher Catholic College . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to St John Fisher Catholic High School" . St John Fisher Catholic High School . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to our School" . St. John Fisher High School . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to St John Fisher Catholic High School!" . St John Fisher Catholic High School . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "About Us" . St John Fisher Catholic Comprehensive School. 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to St John Fisher Catholic Voluntary Academy" . St John Fisher Catholic Voluntary Academy . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Home" . Ss John Fisher and Thomas More RC High School . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Our School" . The John Fisher School . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Southwark Parish Directory" .

directory.rcsouthwark.co.uk . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "John Fisher Merton" . John Fisher Merton . Retrieved 8 June 2025 .

^ "FSSP" . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "About Us" . Fisher FC . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Our Parish History" . Archived from the original on 3 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 .

^ "Our History" .

^ "History of Fisher" . St. John Fisher University, Rochester, NY . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Welcome to St. John Fisher Catholic Church" .

St. John Fisher Catholic Church . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "St. John Fisher Roman Catholic Church" .

stjfchurch.org . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Under Construction" .

stjohnfisher.org . Archived from the original on 25 June 2013 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "SJF church Portland" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2015 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "St. John Fisher Church" .

St. John Fisher Church . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ "Saint John Fisher, Churchill" .

^ "Home – Archdiocese of Galveston-Houston" .

archgh.org . Archived from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ The Berkshire Book , Berkshire Federation of Women's Institutes (1951) Further reading [ edit ] "The English Works of John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester (1469–1535): Sermons and other Writings, 1520–1535," edited by Cecilia A. Hatt, Oxford University Press, 2002.

B. Bradshaw & Eamon Duffy (ed.) "Humanism, Reform and the Reformation: The Career of Bishop John Fisher," Cambridge University Press, 1989.

MacNabb, Vincent (2015).

St. John Fisher . Mediatrix Press.

ISBN 978-1953746337 .

Vincent Nichols , "St John Fisher: Bishop and Theologian in Reformation and Controversy", Alive Publishing, 2011.

E. E. Reynolds, "Saint John Fisher," Wheathampstead: Anthony Clarke, 1972.

Richard Rex , "The Theology of John Fisher," Cambridge University Press Edward Surtz , "The Works and Days of John Fisher," Boston: Harvard University Press, 1967.

Friedrich Wilhelm Bautz (1990). "Fisher, John". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 2. Hamm: Bautz. cols. 42–43.

ISBN 3-88309-032-8 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Fisher .

"St. John Fisher" in the Catholic Encyclopedia Wikiquote has quotations related to John Fisher .

John Fisher and Thomas More: Martyrs of England and Wales Texts on Wikisource: " Fisher, John ".

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

Hudleston, Gilbert Roger (1913). " Bl. John Fisher ".

Catholic Encyclopedia .

" Fisher, John ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

" Fisher, John ", A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature , 1910 – via Wikisource Mullinger, James Bass (1889). " Fisher, John (1459?-1535) ".

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 19.

" Fisher, John ".

The American Cyclopædia . 1879.

"John Fisher" .

Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney.

Literature by and about John Fisher in the German National Library catalogue Catholic Church titles Preceded by Richard FitzJames Bishop of Rochester 1504–1535 Succeeded by John Hilsey Academic offices Preceded by Henry Babington Vice-Chancellors of the University of Cambridge 1501 Succeeded by Humphrey Fitzwilliam Preceded by Thomas Wilkynson President of Queens' College, Cambridge 1505–1508 Succeeded by Robert Bekensaw v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e Bishops of Rochester Pre-Conquest Justus Romanus Paulinus of York Ithamar Damianus Putta Cwichelm Gebmund Tobias Aldwulf Dunn Eardwulf Diora Waermund (I) Beornmod Tatnoth Badenoth Waermund (II) Cuthwulf Swithwulf Ceolmund Cyneferth Burgric Beorhtsige Ælfstan Godwine (I) Godwine (II) Siward Conquest to Reformation Arnost Gundulf Ralph d'Escures Ernulf John (I) John (II) Ascelin Walter Waleran Gilbert Glanvill Benedict of Sausetun Henry Sandford Richard Wendene Lawrence of St Martin Walter de Merton John Bradfield John Kirkby Thomas Ingoldsthorpe Thomas Wouldham Hamo Hethe John Sheppey William Whittlesey Thomas Trilleck Thomas Brinton William Bottlesham John Bottlesham Richard Young John Kemp John Langdon Thomas Brunce William Wells John Low Thomas Rotherham John Alcock John Russell Edmund Audley Thomas Savage Richard FitzJames John Fisher Post-Reformation John Hilsey Nicholas Heath Henry Holbeach Nicholas Ridley John Ponet John Scory Maurice Griffith Edmund Allen Edmund Gheast Edmund Freke John Piers John Young William Barlow Richard Neile John Buckeridge Walter Curle John Bowle John Warner Episcopacy abolished ( Commonwealth ) John Warner John Dolben Francis Turner Thomas Sprat Francis Atterbury Samuel Bradford Joseph Wilcocks Zachary Pearce John Thomas Samuel Horsley Thomas Dampier Walker King Hugh Percy George Murray Joseph Wigram Thomas Legh Claughton Anthony Thorold Randall Davidson Edward Talbot John Harmer Linton Smith Christopher Chavasse David Say Michael Turnbull Michael Nazir-Ali James Langstaff Jonathan Gibbs v t e Presidents of Queens' College, Cambridge Andrew Dokett Thomas Wilkynson John Fisher Robert Bekensaw John Jenyn Thomas Forman William Franklyn Simon Haynes William May William Glyn John Stokes William Chaderton Humphrey Tyndall John Davenant John Mansell Edward Martin Herbert Palmer Thomas Horton Anthony Sparrow William Wells Henry James John Davies William Sedgwick Robert Plumptre Isaac Milner Henry Godfrey Joshua King George Phillips William Campion Herbert Edward Ryle Frederic Chase Thomas Fitzpatrick John Archibald Venn Arthur Armitage Derek Bowett Ronald Oxburgh John Polkinghorne Lord Eatwell Mohamed A. El-Erian v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Chancellors of the University of Cambridge Richard of Wetheringsett Hugh de Hotton Reginald Gerninghall Stephen Hepworth William de Ludham Richard de Gedney Richard Dryfield John de Asgarby John Hooke Roger de Fulbourn Andrew de Gisleham Thomas Sheringham Stephen Hepworth Ralph de Leicester Henry de Boyton John de Bradenham Thomas de Sheringham Stephen Hepworth Stephen Haslingfield Stephen de Segrace Stephen Haslingfield Richard de Ashton Roger Northburgh Richard de Badew Thomas de Foxton Robert de Winwick Robert de Winwick John de Langley Robert de Mildenhall Henry de Herwarden Richard Harling Robert de Claydon Thomas de Northwood Thomas de Northwood John de Crakhall Thomas de Grantchester William de Lymbergh Richard Harling Anthony of Grantchester William Tynkell Thomas Sutton Richard de Wetherset Michael de Haynton Michael de Causton William de Gotham Thomas de Stewkley John de Donwich Adam de Lakenheath John de Donwich William de Gotham Richard Scrope Eudo Zouche John Cavendish Guy Zouche John de Bromyard John of Neketon John de Burgh Thomas Hetherset John de Burgh William Colvile Richard Dereham William Colvile John de Neketon William Colvile Guy Zouche Richard Billingford Richard Dereham Richard Billingford Stephen le Scrope John de Rickingale Thomas of Cobham Robert Fitzhugh William Wymbell Marmaduke Lumley John Holeroke William Lascells Richard Billingford Richard Cawdray John Langton Nicholas Kenton John Langton Robert Ascogh Nicholas Close William Percy Lawrence Booth William Wilflete Robert Woodlark Richard Scroope Robert Woodlark John Booth William Wilflete John Harrison William Wilflete Edward Story Thomas Rotherham (or Scot) Edward Story Thomas Rotherham John Boynton Thomas Rotherham Thomas Cosyn John Blythe George Fitzhugh Thomas Rotherham Richard Fox George Fitzhugh Thomas Ruthall (or Rowthall) John Fisher Thomas Cromwell Stephen Gardiner Edward Seymour The Duke of Northumberland Stephen Gardiner Reginald Pole The Lord Burghley The Earl of Essex The Earl of Salisbury The Earl of Northampton The Earl of Suffolk The Duke of Buckingham The Earl of Holland The Earl of Manchester Oliver St John The Duke of Manchester The Duke of Buckingham The Duke of Monmouth The Duke of Albemarle The Duke of Somerset The Duke of Newcastle The Duke of Grafton HRH The Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh The Marquess Camden The Duke of Northumberland HRH The Prince Consort The Duke of Devonshire The Duke of Devonshire The Lord Rayleigh The Earl of Balfour The Earl Baldwin of Bewdley Jan Smuts The Lord Tedder The Lord Adrian HRH The Duke of Edinburgh The Lord Sainsbury of Turville Portals : Saints Biography Catholicism England Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n9f4n
Cached time: 20250817224737
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.198 seconds
Real time usage: 1.471 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10456/1000000
Revision size: 49591/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 334191/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25265/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 279647/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.676/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24804739/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1111.927      1 -total
 24.57%  273.180      1 Template:Reflist
 12.72%  141.448     37 Template:Cite_web
  7.57%   84.214     16 Template:Cite_book
  7.31%   81.264      1 Template:Catholic_Counter-Reformation
  7.30%   81.137      2 Template:Langx
  7.18%   79.788      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.80%   75.652      1 Template:Quote_box
  6.15%   68.431      3 Template:Infobox
  5.75%   63.882      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:70441:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817224737 and revision id 1304282441. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Fisher&oldid=1304282441 " Categories : 1460s births 1535 deaths 16th-century Christian saints 16th-century English writers 16th-century English male writers 16th-century English cardinals 16th-century Roman Catholic martyrs Bishops of Rochester Burials at the Church of St Peter ad Vincula Chancellors of the University of Cambridge Christian martyrs executed by decapitation English Renaissance humanists English Roman Catholic saints Executions at the Tower of London Martyred Roman Catholic bishops People educated at Beverley Grammar School People executed by Tudor England by decapitation People executed under Henry VIII Executed people from Berkshire People executed under the Tudors for treason against England People from Beverley Presidents of Queens' College, Cambridge Vice-chancellors of the University of Cambridge Yorkshire saints Catholic martyrs of England and Wales Lady Margaret's Professors of Divinity Anglican saints Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2024 Use British English from September 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from October 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from SBDEL Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Fisher 35 languages Add topic

