Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Transcendent sovereignty 2 Self-aggrandizement 3 The social contract 4 Public goods 5 Political ideologies Toggle Political ideologies subsection 5.1 Arguments against a State 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Justification for the state 3 languages हिन्दी Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Source of authority for the state or government This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Justification for the state" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The justification of the state refers to the source of legitimate authority for the state or government . Typically, such a justification explains why the state should exist, and to some degree scopes the role of government – what a legitimate state should or should not be able to do.

There is no single, universally accepted justification of the state. In fact, anarchists believe that there is no justification for the state at all, and that human societies would be better off without it. However, most political ideologies have their own justifications, and thus their own vision of what constitutes a legitimate state. Indeed, a person's opinions regarding the role of government often determine the rest of their political ideology. Thus, discrepancy of opinion in a wide array of political matters is often directly traceable back to a discrepancy of opinion in the justification for the state.

The constitutions of various countries codify views as to the purposes, powers, and forms of their governments, but they tend to do so in rather vague terms, which particular laws, courts, and actions of politicians subsequently flesh out. In general, various countries have translated vague talk about the purposes of their governments into particular state laws, bureaucracies, enforcement actions, etc.

The following are just a few examples.

Transcendent sovereignty [ edit ] In feudal Europe the most widespread justification of the state was the emerging idea of the divine right of kings , which stated that kings derived their authority from God and could not therefore be held accountable for their actions by any earthly authority such as a parliament.

[ 1 ] The legitimacy of the state's lands derived from the lands being the personal possession of the monarch. The divine-right theory, combined with primogeniture , became a theory of hereditary monarchy in the nation states of the early modern period.

[ citation needed ] The Holy Roman Empire was not a state in that [ which?

] sense, and was not a true theocracy , but rather a federal entity.

The political ideas current in China at that time involved the idea of the mandate of heaven . It resembled the theory of divine right in that it placed the ruler in a divine position, as the link between Heaven and Earth, but it differed from the divine right of kings in that it did not assume a permanent connection between a dynasty and the state. Inherent in the concept was that a ruler held the mandate of heaven only as long as he provided good government. If he did not, heaven would withdraw its mandate and whoever restored order would hold the new mandate. This is true theocracy; [ citation needed ] the power and wisdom to govern is granted by a higher power, not by human political schemes, and can be equally removed by heaven . This has similarities to the idea presented in the Judeo-Christian Bible from the time when Israel requests "a king like the nations" [ 2 ] through to Christ himself telling his contemporary leaders that they only had power because God gave it to them.

[ citation needed ] The classic Biblical example comes in the story of King Nebuchadnezzar , who according to the Book of Daniel ruled the Babylonian empire because God ordained his power, but who later ate grass like an ox for seven years because he deified himself [ citation needed ] instead of acknowledging God. Nebuchadnezzar is restored when he again acknowledges God as the true sovereign.

Self-aggrandizement [ edit ] In Renaissance Italy , contemporary theoreticians saw the primary purpose of the less-overtly monarchical Italian city-states as civic glory.

[ 3 ] The social contract [ edit ] In the period of the eighteenth century, usually called the Enlightenment , a new justification of the European state developed. Jean-Jacques Rousseau's social contract theory states that governments draw their power from the governed, its 'sovereign' people (usually a certain ethnic group, and the state's limits are legitimated theoretically as that people's lands, although that is often not, rarely exactly, the case), that no person should have absolute power, and that a legitimate state is one which meets the needs and wishes of its citizens. These include security, peace, economic development and the resolution of conflict. Also, the social contract requires that an individual gives up some of his natural rights in order to maintain social order via the rule of law. Eventually, the divine right of kings fell out of favor and this idea ascended; it formed the basis for modern democracy .

Public goods [ edit ] While a market system may allow self-interested firms to create and allocate many goods optimally, there exists a class of "collective" – or "public goods" that are not produced adequately in a market system, such as infrastructure or social services. Market forces may not be sufficient to incentivize rational individuals to adequately produce these public goods; therefore, coercive institutions must intervene and guarantee the production of such public goods, whether by assuming their production under the state (e.g., the building of public roads) or by introducing market forces to incentivize their production in the private sector (e.g., providing subsidies for electric vehicles).

Political ideologies [ edit ] It is on those questions that one can find the differences between conservatism , socialism , liberalism , libertarianism , fascism , especially the latter, and other political ideologies. There are also two ideologies – anarchism and communism – which argue that the existence of the state is ultimately unjustified and harmful. For this reason, the kind of society they aim to establish would be stateless.

Arguments against a State [ edit ] Anarchism claims that the community of those fighting to create a new society must themselves constitute a stateless society .

Communism wishes to immediately or eventually replace the communities, unities and divisions that things such as work, money, exchange, borders, nations, governments, police, religion, and race create with the universal community possible when these things are replaced.

[ 4 ] State socialism states that the degree to which a state is working class is the degree to which it fights government, class, work, and rule. The degree to which it wins such a fight is held to be the degree to which it is communist instead of capitalist, socialist, or the state.

Anarcho-capitalism argues that taxes are theft, that government and the business community complicit in governance is organized crime and is equivalent to the criminal underworld, and that defense of life and property is just another industry, which must be privatized.

Anarcho-communism and anarcho-collectivism says that taxes , being theft, are just property , which is also theft, and that the state is inherently capitalist and will never result in a transition to communism, and says that those fighting against capitalism and the state to produce a communist society must themselves already form such a community. However, the majority of viewpoints agree that the existence of some kind of government is morally justified. What they disagree about is the proper role and the proper form of that government.

[ citation needed ] There are several ways to conceive of the differences between these different political views. For example, one might ask in what areas should the government have jurisdiction, to what extent it may intervene in those areas, or even what constitutes intervention in the first place.  Some institutions can be said to exist only because the government provides the framework for their existence; for instance, Marxists argue that the institution of private property only exists due to government.  The intervention debate can be framed in terms of big government versus small government .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism Consequentialist justifications of the state Constitutional economics Monopoly on the legitimate use of physical force Rechtsstaat Rule of law Rule according to higher law Philosophy of law Political philosophy Political philosophy of Immanuel Kant References [ edit ] ^ "Divine right of kings | Definition, History, & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-25 . Retrieved 2022-12-18 .

^ 1 Samuel 8:5 ^ Reus-Smit, Christian (2 November 2009). "4: Renaissance Italy".

The Moral Purpose of the State: Culture, Social Identity, and Institutional Rationality in International Relations . Princeton Studies in International History and Politics. Princeton University Press (published 2009). p. 73.

ISBN 9781400823253 . Retrieved 2017-11-18 .

From the middle of the thirteenth century until the beginning of the sixteenth, the pursuit of civic glory [...] was celebrated as the city-state's primary raison d'etre.

^ "Prole.info" . Archived from the original on 2007-03-12 . Retrieved 2007-05-16 .

External links [ edit ] "Public Goods and the Justification for the State", from Humane Studies Review Vol. 7, No. 2 – Dan Garrett's review of David Schmidtz's "The Limits of Government: An Essay on the Public Goods Argument" (Boulder: Westview Press, 1991) on the Wayback Machine v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Justification_for_the_state&oldid=1275564206 " Categories : Concepts in political philosophy Libertarian theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2010 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from September 2010 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 13 February 2025, at 19:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Justification for the state 3 languages Add topic

