Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Africa 2.2 Americas 2.2.1 Indigenous cultures 2.2.2 Canada 2.2.3 Mexico 2.2.4 United States 2.3 Asia 2.3.1 East Asia 2.3.2 North Asia 2.3.3 South Asia 2.4 Europe 2.4.1 Classical period 2.4.2 Renaissance 2.4.3 Modern period 2.5 Middle East 2.5.1 Pre-Islamic period 2.6 South Pacific 3 Sexuality and identity Toggle Sexuality and identity subsection 3.1 Behavior and desire 3.2 Sexual identity 3.3 Sexual fluidity 3.4 Same-sex relationships 3.5 Coming out of the closet 4 Demographics 5 Psychology Toggle Psychology subsection 5.1 Sexual orientation change efforts 6 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 6.1 Prenatal hormones 6.2 Genes 6.3 Evolution 7 Parenting 8 Health Toggle Health subsection 8.1 Physical 8.2 Mental 8.3 Gay and lesbian youth 9 Law and politics Toggle Law and politics subsection 9.1 Legality 9.2 Laws against sexual orientation discrimination 9.2.1 United States 9.2.2 European Union 9.3 Political activism 9.4 Military service 10 Society and sociology Toggle Society and sociology subsection 10.1 Public opinion 10.2 Relationships 10.3 Religion 11 Discrimination Toggle Discrimination subsection 11.1 Gay bullying 11.2 Heterosexism and homophobia 11.3 Violence against homosexuals 12 Homosexual behavior in other animals 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Books 15.2 Journal articles 15.3 Online articles 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Homosexuality 155 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 گیلکی ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Attraction between people of the same sex or gender "Homosexual" redirects here. For the album, see Homosexual (album) .

This article is about homosexuality in humans. For homosexuality in other species, see Homosexual behavior in animals .

Zephyr and Hyacinthus Attic red-figure cup from Tarquinia , 480 BC ( Boston Museum of Fine Arts ) Sexual orientation Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Gay men Lesbian Related terms Achillean & Sapphism Allosexual Androphilia & Gynephilia Bi-curious Fictosexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Plurisexual Queer Queer heterosexual Research Biological Birth order Epigenetic Handedness Neuroscientific Prenatal hormones Demographics Environment Female Male Kinsey scale Klein Grid Queer studies Sexology Timeline Transgender sexuality Non-human animals Animal sexual behavior Non-reproductive Homosexual List Related topics Aromanticism Criminalization Rights by country Men who have sex with men Questioning Rights Romantic orientation Sexual fluidity Situational Split attraction model Women who have sex with women Category v t e Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e Homosexuality is romantic attraction , sexual attraction , or sexual behavior between people of the same sex or gender .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] As a sexual orientation , homosexuality is "an enduring pattern of emotional, romantic, and/or sexual attractions" exclusively to people of the same sex or gender.

[ 4 ] [ failed verification ] It also denotes identity based on attraction, related behavior, and community affiliation.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Along with bisexuality and heterosexuality , homosexuality is one of the three main categories of sexual orientation within the heterosexual–homosexual continuum .

[ 5 ] Although no single theory on the cause of sexual orientation has yet gained widespread support, scientists favor biological theories .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] There is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes of sexual orientation than social ones, especially for males.

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] A major hypothesis implicates the prenatal environment , specifically the organizational effects of hormones on the fetal brain.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] [ 12 ] There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role in developing a sexual orientation.

[ 7 ] [ 13 ] Scientific research shows that homosexuality is a natural and normal variation in human sexuality and is not in and of itself a source of negative psychological effects.

[ 5 ] [ 14 ] Major mental health organizations overwhelmingly reject sexual orientation change efforts (such as conversion therapy ) as ineffective, scientifically unsupported , potentially harmful, and rooted in stigma rather than evidence.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The most common terms for homosexual people are lesbian for females and gay for males , but the term gay also commonly refers to both homosexual females and males. The number of people who are gay or lesbian is difficult for researchers to estimate reliably, as many gay and lesbian people do not openly identify as such due to discrimination or prejudice such as heterosexism or homophobia .

[ 17 ] Homosexual behavior has also been documented in many non-human animal species , [ 23 ] though domestic sheep are the only conclusively documented example of nonhuman animals exhibiting exclusive same-sex orientation.

[ 7 ] Many gay and lesbian people are in committed same-sex relationships. These relationships are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential psychological respects.

[ 6 ] Homosexual relationships and acts have been admired as well as condemned throughout recorded history, depending on the form they took and the culture in which they occurred.

[ 24 ] Since the end of the 20th century, there has been a global movement towards freedom and equality for gay people, including the introduction of anti-bullying legislation to protect gay children at school, legislation ensuring non-discrimination, equal ability to serve in the military , equal access to health care , equal ability to adopt and parent , and the establishment of marriage equality .

Etymology "Poof" redirects here. For other uses, see Poof (disambiguation) .

Main article: Terminology of homosexuality The word homosexual is a Greek and Latin hybrid , with the first element derived from Greek ὁμός homos , "same" (not related to the Latin homo , "man", as in Homo sapiens ), thus connoting sexual acts and affections between members of the same sex, including lesbianism.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The first known appearance of homosexual in print is found in an 1868 letter to Karl Heinrich Ulrichs by the Austrian-born novelist Karl-Maria Kertbeny [ 27 ] [ 28 ] arguing against a Prussian anti- sodomy law .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In 1886, the psychiatrist Richard von Krafft-Ebing used the terms homosexual and heterosexual in his book Psychopathia Sexualis . Krafft-Ebing's book was so popular among both laymen and doctors that the terms heterosexual and homosexual became the most widely accepted terms for sexual orientation.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Many modern style guides in the U.S. recommend against using homosexual as a noun, instead using gay man or lesbian .

[ 32 ] [ citation needed ] Similarly, some recommend completely avoiding usage of homosexual as it has a negative, clinical history and because the word only refers to one's sexual behavior (as opposed to romantic feelings) and thus it has a negative connotation .

[ 32 ] Gay and lesbian are the most common alternatives. The first letters are frequently combined to create the initialism LGBT (sometimes written as GLBT), in which B and T refer to bisexual and transgender people.

Gay especially refers to male homosexuality, [ 33 ] but may be used in a broader sense to refer to all LGBTQ people. In the context of sexuality, lesbian refers only to female homosexuality. The word lesbian is derived from the name of the Greek island Lesbos , where the poet Sappho wrote largely about her emotional relationships with young women.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Although early writers also used the adjective homosexual to refer to any single-sex context (such as an all-girls school), today the term is used exclusively in reference to sexual attraction, activity, and orientation. The term homosocial is now used to describe single-sex contexts that are not specifically sexual. There is also a word referring to same-sex love, homophilia .

[ citation needed ] Some synonyms for same-sex attraction or sexual activity include men who have sex with men or MSM (used in the medical community when specifically discussing sexual activity) and homoerotic (referring to works of art).

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Pejorative terms in English include queer , faggot , fairy , poof , poofter [ 38 ] and homo .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Beginning in the 1990s, some of these have been reclaimed as positive words by gay men and lesbians, as in the usage of queer studies , queer theory , and even the popular American television program Queer Eye for the Straight Guy .

[ 43 ] The word homo occurs in many other languages without the pejorative connotations it has in English.

[ 44 ] As with ethnic slurs and racial slurs , the use of these terms can still be highly offensive. The range of acceptable use for these terms depends on the context and speaker.

[ 45 ] Conversely, gay , a word originally embraced by homosexual men and women as a positive, affirmative term (as in gay liberation and gay rights ), [ 46 ] came into widespread pejorative use among young people in the early 2000s.

[ 47 ] History Main article: History of homosexuality Further information: LGBT history and Timeline of LGBT history Same-sex relations are documented throughout history and varied in acceptance depending on time and place.

[ 48 ] However, many historians and anthropologists warn against using terms like "homosexuality" to describe these practices, because that may draw false equivalencies between acts that, while technically similar, may have been viewed as completely different acts. In many cultures, same-sex relations were not always considered sexual in the same way that "reproductive" sex between men and women was—particularly lesbian sex.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Modern-style homosexual partnerships, including marriages, are even more uncommon, probably because marriages have almost always been oriented around producing children.

[ 50 ] Other scholars argue that there are significant continuities between historical and modern homosexuality.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Burning of two homosexuals (the knight Richard von Hohenburg and his squire Anton Mätzler) at the stake outside Zürich , 1482 (from the Spiezer Schilling chronicle) In cultures influenced by Abrahamic religions , the law and the church established sodomy as a transgression against divine law or a crime against nature . The condemnation of anal sex between males, however, predates Christian belief. Throughout the majority of Christian history , most Christian theologians and denominations have considered homosexual behavior as immoral or sinful .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Condemnation was frequent in ancient Greece; [ citation needed ] for instance Plato, in his Laws, described the idea of homosexuality as 'unnatural' and argued for its prohibition, [ 55 ] while Socrates advocated for platonic love over sexual pederasty [ 56 ] Many historical figures, including Socrates , Lord Byron , Edward II , and Hadrian , [ 57 ] have had terms such as gay or bisexual applied to them. Some scholars have regarded uses of such modern terms on people from the past as an anachronistic introduction of a contemporary construction of sexuality that would have been foreign to their times.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Other scholars see continuity instead.

[ 60 ] [ 52 ] [ 51 ] In social science, there has been a dispute between "essentialist" and "constructionist" views of homosexuality. The debate divides those who believe that terms such as "gay" and "straight" refer to objective, culturally invariant properties of persons from those who believe that the experiences they name are artifacts of unique cultural and social processes. "Essentialists" typically believe that sexual preferences are determined by biological forces, while "constructionists" assume that sexual desires are learned.

[ 61 ] The philosopher of science Michael Ruse has stated that the social constructionist approach, which is influenced by Foucault, is based on a selective reading of the historical record that confuses the existence of homosexual people with the way in which they are labelled or treated.

[ 62 ] Africa The first record of a possible homosexual couple in history is commonly regarded as Khnumhotep and Niankhkhnum , an ancient Egyptian male couple, who lived around 2400 BCE. The pair are portrayed in a nose-kissing position, the most intimate pose in Egyptian art , surrounded by what appear to be their heirs. The anthropologists Stephen Murray and Will Roscoe reported that women in Lesotho engaged in socially sanctioned "long term, erotic relationships" called motsoalle .

[ 63 ] The anthropologist E. E. Evans-Pritchard also recorded that male Azande warriors in the northern Congo routinely took on young male lovers between the ages of twelve and twenty, who helped with household tasks and participated in intercrural sex with their older husbands.

[ 64 ] Some scholars have criticized labeling relationships like these "homosexual", because these relationships were temporary arrangements designed to prepare young men for full manhood, rather than the permanent sexual orientation implied by the word "homosexual".

[ 50 ] Evans-Pritchard also recorded information about sexual relationships between women, based on reports from male Azande. According to male Azande, women would take female lovers and that partners would penetrate each other using bananas or other food items carved into the shape of a phallus. They also reported that the daughter of a ruler may be given a female slave as a sexual partner. Evans-Pritchard also recorded that the male Azande were fearful of women taking on female lovers, as they might view men as unnecessary.

[ 65 ] Americas Indigenous cultures Dance to the Berdache Sac and Fox Nation ceremonial dance to celebrate the two-spirit person. George Catlin (1796–1872); Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.

Illustration of two Aztec homosexual men talking, from the Florentine Codex (1577) As is true of many other non-Western cultures, it is difficult to determine the extent to which Western notions of sexual orientation and gender identity apply to Pre-Columbian cultures. Evidence of homoerotic sexual acts and transvestism has been found in many pre- conquest civilizations in Latin America , such as the Aztecs , Mayas , Quechuas , Moches , Zapotecs , the Incas , and the Tupinambá of Brazil.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] The Spanish conquerors were horrified to discover sodomy openly practiced among native peoples, and attempted to crush it out by subjecting the berdaches (as the Spanish called them) under their rule to severe penalties, including public execution , burning and being torn to pieces by dogs.

[ 69 ] The Spanish conquerors talked extensively of sodomy among the natives to depict them as savages and hence justify their conquest and forceful conversion to Christianity. As a result of the growing influence and power of the conquerors, many native cultures started condemning homosexual acts themselves.

[ citation needed ] Among some of the indigenous peoples of the Americas in North America prior to European colonization, a relatively common form of same-sex sexuality centered around the figure of the Two-Spirit individual (the term itself was coined only in 1990).

[ citation needed ] Typically, this individual was recognized early in life, given a choice by the parents to follow the path and, if the child accepted the role, raised in the appropriate manner, learning the customs of the gender it had chosen. Two-Spirit individuals were commonly shamans and were revered as having powers beyond those of ordinary shamans. Their sexual life was with the ordinary tribe members of the same sex.

[ citation needed ] During the colonial times following the European invasion, homosexuality was prosecuted by the Inquisition , sometimes leading to death sentences on the charges of sodomy, and the practices became clandestine. Many homosexual individuals went into heterosexual marriages to maintain appearances, and many joined the (unmarried) Catholic clergy to escape public scrutiny of their lack of interest in the opposite sex.

[ citation needed ] Canada During the colonial period, both the French and the British criminalised same-sex sexual relations. Anal sex between males was a capital offence.

[ 70 ] Post-Confederation, anal sex and acts of "gross indecency" continued to be criminal offences, but were no longer capital offences.

[ 71 ] Individuals were prosecuted for same-sex sexual activity as late as the 1960s, which led to the federal Parliament amending the Criminal Code in 1969 to provide that anal sex between consenting adults in private (defined as only two persons) was not a criminal offence. In advocating for the law, the then-Minister of Justice, Pierre Trudeau , said: "The state has no place in the bedrooms of the nation." [ 72 ] In 1995, the Supreme Court of Canada held that sexual orientation is a protected personal characteristic under the equality clause of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .

[ 73 ] The federal Parliament and provincial legislatures began to amend their laws to treat same-sex relations in the same way as opposite-sex relations. Beginning in 2003, the courts in Canada began to rule that excluding same-sex couples from marriage violated the equality clause of the Charter . In 2005, the federal Parliament enacted the Civil Marriage Act , which legalised same-sex marriage across Canada.

[ 74 ] Canada has been referred to as the most gay-friendly country in the world, ranked first in the Gay Travel Index chart in 2018, and among the five safest in Forbes magazine in 2019.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] It was also ranked first in Asher & Lyric's LGBTQ+ Danger Index in a 2021 update.

[ 77 ] Mexico Anthropologist Joseph Carrier found in the 1990s that same-gender sexual relations were relatively common in many neighborhoods in Mexico City . While long-term partnerships were not acceptable, and queer men were still expected to marry and have children, it was acceptable for men to have "discreet" relations with other men as long as they took on the active, penetrative role. Taking the passive role was considered detrimental to one's masculinity.

[ 78 ] United States See also: LGBT history in the United States During the Victorian era, same-sex desire was viewed as a common sin. Anyone was capable of "succumbing" to same-sex attraction, and various sexual and non-sexual acts—including masturbation—were considered possible ways that someone could be "turned" queer. Queer people were often viewed as predators, exclusively attracted to heterosexuals, and therefore a danger to society.

[ 50 ] Same-sex relationships were generally stigmatized throughout the 20th century, and hate crimes were commonly carried out, especially against men. Most queer people lived out these relationships in secret, often while still having opposite-sex marriages and families. Anti-gay sentiment surged after the Cold War , when homosexuals were seen as a threat to American society and were rooted out of organizations across the country.

[ 50 ] Homosexuality was declassified as a disease by the American Psychiatric Association in 1973.

[ 50 ] In 1986, the Supreme Court of the United States ruled in Bowers v. Hardwick that a state could criminalize sodomy , but, in 2003, overturned itself in Lawrence v. Texas and thereby legalized homosexual activity throughout the United States of America .

It is only since the 2010s that census forms and political conditions have facilitated the visibility and enumeration of same-sex relationships.

[ 79 ] Same-sex marriage in the United States expanded from one state in 2004 to all 50 states in 2015, through various state court rulings, state legislation, direct popular votes ( referendums and initiatives ), and federal court rulings.

Asia East Asia Anal sex between two males being watched, Qing dynasty . Painting. 18th Century In East Asia , same-sex love has been referred to since the earliest recorded history.

Homosexuality in China , known as the passions of the cut peach and various other euphemisms, has been recorded since approximately 600 BCE. Homosexuality was mentioned in many famous works of Chinese literature. The instances of same-sex affection and sexual interactions described in the classical novel Dream of the Red Chamber seem as familiar to observers in the present as do equivalent stories of romances between heterosexual people during the same period. Keith McMahon suggests that homosexual relationships between men in Ming stories such as Bian er chai was described as more harmonious and enjoyable than heterosexual relationships.

[ 80 ] Writings from the Liu Song dynasty by Wang Shunu claimed that homosexuality was as common as heterosexuality in the late 3rd century.

[ 81 ] Opposition to homosexuality in China originates in the medieval Tang dynasty (618–907), attributed to the rising influence of Christian and Islamic values, [ 82 ] but did not become fully established until the Westernization efforts of the late Qing dynasty and the Republic of China .

[ 83 ] North Asia Early Russian ethnographers observed that Chukchi shamans in Siberia were sometimes said to called by mystical forces to engage in a form of ritualized homosexual relations with other men. This ritual typically involved a gender change -- a religious ceremony that, it was believed, transformed his genitalia into that of a female. After the change, he might dress in women's clothing and behave in feminine ways. He was then believed to "lose" masculine traits like hunting skill, and instead take on "feminine" traits, like healing and nurturing. Some of these shamans would take male lovers, and could even marry other men, and the shaman would take on a "wifely" role. Homosexual relations outside of this specialized role were reportedly not tolerated.

[ 50 ] [ 84 ] South Asia See also: Homosexuality in India , Hinduism and LGBT topics , and Buddhism and sexual orientation South Asia has a recorded and verifiable history of homosexuality going back to at least 1200 BC. Hindu medical texts written in India from this period document homosexual acts and attempt to explain the cause in a neutral/scientific manner.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] Numerous artworks and literary works from this period also describe homosexuality.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] [ 91 ] Several ancient hindu texts have passages that condemn homosexuality. For example, Manu-smṛti (11.174) says that if a man has sex with another man, then he should take a shower with clothes on. The implication of the statement is that sex between two men is not considered normal.

[ 92 ] Pali Cannon, written in Sri Lanka between 600 BC and 100 BC, states that sexual relations, whether of homosexual or of heterosexual nature, is forbidden in the monastic code, and states that any acts of soft homosexual sex (including masturbation and interfumeral sex) does not entail a punishment but must be confessed to the monastery. These codes apply to monks only and not to the general population.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The Kama Sutra written in India around 200 AD also described numerous homosexual sex acts.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Prior to early modern period and colonialism, there were no strict laws against homosexuality and transexuality. However certain dharmic moral codes forbade sexual misconduct (of both heterosexual and homosexual nature) among the upper class of persists and monks, and religious codes of foreign religions such as Christianity and Islam imposed homophobic rules on their populations.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] Hinduism describes a third gender that is equal to other genders and documentation of the third gender are found in ancient Hindu and Buddhist medical texts.

[ 99 ] There are certain characters in the Mahabharata who, according to some versions of the epic, change genders, such as Shikhandi , who is sometimes said to be born as a female but identifies as male and eventually marries a woman.

Bahuchara Mata is the goddess of fertility, worshipped by hijras as their patroness.

[ citation needed ] Europe Classical period Further information: Homosexuality in ancient Greece , Homosexuality in ancient Rome , Timeline of LGBT history in the United Kingdom , and Homosexuality in medieval Europe The earliest Western documents (in the form of literary works, art objects, and mythographic materials ) concerning same-sex relationships are derived from ancient Greece .

Same-sex relationships were a social institution constructed differently over time and from one city to another. The formal practice, an erotic yet often restrained relationship between a free adult male and a free adolescent, was valued for its pedagogic benefits and as a means of population control, though occasionally blamed for causing disorder. In his Symposium , Plato has Phaedras praising its benefits whilst having Socrates encouraging platonic relationships between older and younger men [ 100 ] (the literal origin of the term, platonic love). In his later work, Laws , he has an Athenian stranger propose prohibition of sexual relationships between men entirely saying that it is unnatural.

[ 101 ] Aristotle argues that some homosexual men become that way through habituation, as in being a victim of hubris (rape) in childhood, and others due to being born that way.

[ 102 ] Some scholars argue that there are examples of homosexual love in ancient literature, such as Achilles and Patroclus in the Iliad .

[ 103 ] Female youths are depicted surrounding Sappho in this painting of Lafond "Sappho sings for Homer", 1824.

Little is known of female homosexuality in antiquity.

Sappho , born on the island of Lesbos , was included by later Greeks in the canonical list of nine lyric poets . The adjectives deriving from her name and place of birth ( Sapphic and Lesbian) came to be applied to female homosexuality beginning in the 19th century.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Sappho's poetry centers on passion and love for various personages and both genders. The narrators of many of her poems speak of infatuations and love (sometimes requited, sometimes not) for various females, but descriptions of physical acts between women are few and subject to debate.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Sappho reading to her companions on an Attic vase constructed c. 435 BC In Ancient Rome , the kind of homosexuality seen took the form of pederastic relationships, where older free men took on an active role and slaves or freed youths took the receptive/passive role in sex. Romans saw passivity as generally unmanly, and as incompatible with the warrior ethos expected of men serving the expansionist Roman state.

[ 108 ] In his letter addressed to the Christian community in Rome, Paul the Apostle writes of people engaging in idolatry ("[they] exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images made to look like a mortal human being and birds and animals and reptiles") who eventually become infatuated with a person of the same sex in a "suffering of dishonour".

[ 109 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Pederastic attentions were legitimate only when directed toward current or former slaves. The Hellenophile emperor Hadrian is renowned for his relationship with Antinous , but the Christian emperor Theodosius I decreed a law on 6 August 390, condemning passive males to be burned at the stake. Notwithstanding these regulations taxes on brothels with boys available for homosexual sex continued to be collected until the end of the reign of Anastasius I in 518.

Justinian , towards the end of his reign, expanded the proscription to the active partner as well (in 558), warning that such conduct can lead to the destruction of cities through the "wrath of God".

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Renaissance During the Renaissance , wealthy cities in northern Italy — Florence and Venice in particular—were renowned for their widespread practice of same-sex love, engaged in by a considerable part of the male population and constructed along the classical pattern of Greece and Rome.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] But even as many of the male population were engaging in same-sex relationships, the authorities, under the aegis of the Officers of the Night court, were prosecuting, fining, and imprisoning a good portion of that population.

From the second half of the 13th century, death was the punishment for male homosexuality in most of Europe.

[ 114 ] The relationships of socially prominent figures, such as King James I and the Duke of Buckingham , served to highlight the issue, including in anonymously authored street pamphlets: "The world is chang'd I know not how, For men Kiss Men, not Women now;...Of J. the First and Buckingham: He, true it is, his Wives Embraces fled, To slabber his lov'd Ganimede" ( Mundus Foppensis, or The Fop Display'd , 1691).

Modern period Photograph of the Finnish artist Touko Laaksonen (1920–1991) alias Tom of Finland , well known for his stylized and highly masculinized homoerotic art, playing the piano in late 1950s. In the background, his partner Veli Mäkinen ( left ) and his sister Kaija ( right ).

Love Letters Between a Certain Late Nobleman and the Famous Mr. Wilson was published in 1723 in England, and is presumed by some modern scholars to be a novel. The 1749 edition of John Cleland 's popular novel Fanny Hill includes a homosexual scene, but this was removed in its 1750 edition. Also in 1749, the earliest extended and serious defense of homosexuality in English, Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplified , written by Thomas Cannon , was published, but was suppressed almost immediately. It includes the passage, "Unnatural Desire is a Contradiction in Terms; downright Nonsense. Desire is an amatory Impulse of the inmost human Parts." [ 115 ] Around 1785 Jeremy Bentham wrote another defense, but this was not published until 1978.

[ 116 ] Executions for sodomy continued in the Netherlands until 1803, and in England until 1835, James Pratt and John Smith being the last Englishmen to be so hanged.

[ citation needed ] Between 1864 and 1880 Karl Heinrich Ulrichs published a series of 12 tracts, which he collectively titled Research on the Riddle of Man-Manly Love.

In 1867, he became the first self-proclaimed homosexual person to speak out publicly in defense of homosexuality when he pleaded at the Congress of German Jurists in Munich for a resolution urging the repeal of anti-homosexual laws.

[ 17 ] Sexual Inversion by Havelock Ellis , published in 1896, challenged theories that homosexuality was abnormal, as well as stereotypes , and insisted on the ubiquity of homosexuality and its association with intellectual and artistic achievement.

[ 117 ] Although medical texts like these (written partly in Latin to obscure the sexual details) were not widely read by the general public, they did lead to the rise of Magnus Hirschfeld 's Scientific-Humanitarian Committee , which campaigned from 1897 to 1933 against anti-sodomy laws in Germany , as well as a much more informal, unpublicized movement among British intellectuals and writers, led by such figures as Edward Carpenter and John Addington Symonds . Beginning in 1894 with Homogenic Love , Socialist activist and poet Edward Carpenter wrote a string of pro-homosexual articles and pamphlets, and "came out" in 1916 in his book My Days and Dreams . In 1900, Elisar von Kupffer published an anthology of homosexual literature from antiquity to his own time, Lieblingminne und Freundesliebe in der Weltliteratur .

[ citation needed ] Middle East Further information: LGBT in Islam and LGBT rights in Israel An illustration from the 19th-century book Sawaqub al-Manaquib depicting homosexual anal sex with a wine boy There are a handful of accounts by Arab travelers to Europe during the mid-1800s. Two of these travelers, Rifa'ah al-Tahtawi and Muhammad as-Saffar, show their surprise that the French sometimes deliberately mistranslated love poetry about a young boy, instead referring to a young female, to maintain their social norms and morals.

[ 118 ] Israel is considered the most tolerant country in the Middle East and Asia to homosexuals, [ 119 ] with Tel Aviv being named "the gay capital of the Middle East" [ 120 ] and considered one of the most gay friendly cities in the world.

[ 121 ] The annual Pride Parade in support of homosexuality takes place in Tel Aviv.

[ 122 ] On the other hand, many governments in the Middle East often ignore, deny the existence of, or criminalize homosexuality. Homosexuality is illegal in almost all Muslim countries.

[ 123 ] Same-sex intercourse officially carries the death penalty in several Muslim nations: Saudi Arabia, Iran, Mauritania , northern Nigeria , and Yemen .

[ 124 ] Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , during his 2007 speech at Columbia University , asserted that there were no gay people in Iran. However, the probable reason is that they keep their sexuality a secret for fear of government sanction or rejection by their families.

[ 125 ] Pre-Islamic period Further information: Homosexuality and Judaism and The Bible and homosexuality Shah Abbas I of Persia with a boy. By Muhammad Qasim (1627).

[ 126 ] In ancient Sumer , a set of priests known as gala worked in the temples of the goddess Inanna , where they performed elegies and lamentations.

[ 127 ] : 285 Gala took female names, spoke in the eme-sal dialect, which was traditionally reserved for women, and appear to have engaged in homosexual intercourse.

[ 128 ] The Sumerian sign for gala was a ligature of the signs for "penis" and "anus".

[ 128 ] One Sumerian proverb reads: "When the gala wiped off his ass [he said], 'I must not arouse that which belongs to my mistress [i.e., Inanna].'" [ 128 ] In later Mesopotamian cultures, kurgarrū and assinnu were servants of the goddess Ishtar (Inanna's East Semitic equivalent), who dressed in female clothing and performed war dances in Ishtar's temples.

[ 128 ] Several Akkadian proverbs seem to suggest that they may have also engaged in homosexual intercourse.

[ 128 ] Anal intercourse was depicted in figurative art in Uruk , Assur , Babylon , and Susa from the 3rd millennium BC , which showed that the sex act was practiced as part of religious ritual .

[ 129 ] It is thought that ancient Assyria (2nd millennium BC to 1st millennium AD) viewed homosexuality as negative and at least criminal, [ 130 ] with the religious codes of Zoroastrianism forbidding homosexuality.

[ 131 ] Some religious texts contain prayers for divine blessings on homosexual relationships. The Almanac of Incantations contained prayers favoring on an equal basis the love of a man for a woman, of a woman for a man, and of a man for man.

[ 129 ] South Pacific In some societies of Melanesia , especially in Papua New Guinea , traditional practices required a prepubertal boy to be paired with an older adolescent who would become his mentor and who would "inseminate" him (orally, anally, or topically, depending on the tribe) over a number of years in order for the younger to also reach puberty.

[ 132 ] This practice among the Simbari people occurred due to local belief that semen was necessary for male growth. The practice did not appear to affect male sexual orientation; nearly all males were happy to move on to relationships with women once permitted.

[ 133 ] A small minority of males remain bachelors and continue to engage in homosexual relations, and are considered unusual and ridiculed by other tribesmen.

[ 134 ] Many Melanesian societies have abandoned this practice since the introduction of Christianity via European missionaries .

[ 132 ] Sexuality and identity Behavior and desire "Homosexual desire" redirects here. Not to be confused with the book, Homosexual Desire .

The American Psychological Association , the American Psychiatric Association , and the National Association of Social Workers identify sexual orientation as "not merely a personal characteristic that can be defined in isolation. Rather, one's sexual orientation defines the universe of persons with whom one is likely to find the satisfying and fulfilling relationships": [ 6 ] Sexual orientation is commonly discussed as a characteristic of the individual, like biological sex, gender identity, or age. This perspective is incomplete because sexual orientation is always defined in relational terms and necessarily involves relationships with other individuals. Sexual acts and romantic attractions are categorized as homosexual or heterosexual according to the biological sex of the individuals involved in them, relative to each other. Indeed, it is by acting—or desiring to act—with another person that individuals express their heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. This includes actions as simple as holding hands with or kissing another person. Thus, sexual orientation is integrally linked to the intimate personal relationships that human beings form with others to meet their deeply felt needs for love, attachment, and intimacy. In addition to sexual behavior, these bonds encompass nonsexual physical affection between partners, shared goals and values, mutual support, and ongoing commitment.

[ 6 ] The Kinsey scale , also called the Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale, [ 135 ] attempts to describe a person's sexual history or episodes of his or her sexual activity at a given time. It uses a scale from 0, meaning exclusively heterosexual , to 6, meaning exclusively homosexual. In both the Male and Female volumes of the Kinsey Reports , an additional grade, listed as "X", has been interpreted by scholars to indicate asexuality .

[ 136 ] Sexual identity Main article: Sexual identity Often, sexual orientation and sexual identity are not distinguished, which can impact accurately assessing sexual orientation. According to Bailey et al. "sexual identity, is one’s self-conception (sometimes disclosed to others and sometimes not) as a homosexual, bisexual, or heterosexual person". One's sexual identity label may not align with one's sexual behavior or sexual orientation (e.g. in the case of homosexual persons who may present themselves as heterosexual).

[ 7 ] : 48, 89 Sexual fluidity Main article: Sexual fluidity While sexual orientation is a stable attribute that is an innate characteristic and an immutable trait, some research suggests that some people may experience change in their sexual orientation identity over the course of their lives, and this is more likely for females than for males .

[ 137 ] The American Psychological Association distinguishes between sexual orientation (an innate attraction) and sexual orientation identity (which may change at any point in a person's life).

[ 138 ] Same-sex relationships Main article: Same-sex relationship Male homosexuality symbol Female homosexuality symbol People with a homosexual orientation can express their sexuality in a variety of ways, and may or may not express it in their behaviors.

[ 5 ] Many have sexual relationships predominantly with people of their own sex , though some have sexual relationships with those of the opposite sex, bisexual relationships, or none at all ( celibacy ).

[ 5 ] Studies have found same-sex and opposite-sex couples to be equivalent to each other in measures of satisfaction and commitment in relationships, that age and sex are more reliable than sexual orientation as a predictor of satisfaction and commitment to a relationship, and that people who are heterosexual or homosexual share comparable expectations and ideals with regard to romantic relationships.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] Coming out of the closet Main article: Coming out Coming out ( of the closet ) is a phrase referring to one's disclosure of their sexual orientation or gender identity, and is described and experienced variously as a psychological process or journey.

[ 142 ] Generally, coming out is described in three phases. The first phase is that of "knowing oneself", and the realization emerges that one is open to same-sex relations.

[ 143 ] This is often described as an internal coming out. The second phase involves one's decision to come out to others, e.g. family, friends, or colleagues. The third phase more generally involves living openly as an LGBT person.

[ 144 ] In the United States today, people often come out during high school or college age. At this age, they may not trust or ask for help from others, especially when their orientation is not accepted in society. Sometimes their own families are not even informed.

Outing is the practice of publicly revealing the sexual orientation of a closeted person.

[ 145 ] Notable politicians, celebrities, military service people, and clergy members have been outed, with motives ranging from malice to political or moral beliefs. Many commentators oppose the practice altogether, [ 146 ] while some encourage outing public figures who use their positions of influence to harm other gay people.

[ 147 ] Demographics Main article: Demographics of sexual orientation In their 2016 literature review, Bailey et al.

stated that they "expect that in all cultures ... a minority of individuals are sexually predisposed (whether exclusively or non-exclusively) to the same sex." They state that there is no persuasive evidence that the demographics of sexual orientation have varied much across time or place.

[ 7 ] Men are more likely to be exclusively homosexual than to be equally attracted to both sexes, while the opposite is true for women.

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Surveys in Western cultures find, on average, that about 93% of men and 87% of women identify as completely heterosexual, 4% of men and 10% of women as mostly heterosexual, 0.5% of men and 1% of women as evenly bisexual, 0.5% of men and 0.5% of women as mostly homosexual, and 2% of men and 0.5% of women as completely homosexual.

[ 7 ] An analysis of 67 studies found that the lifetime prevalence of sex between men (regardless of orientation) was 3–5% for East Asia, 6–12% for South and South East Asia, 6–15% for Eastern Europe, and 6–20% for Latin America.

[ 148 ] The International HIV/AIDS Alliance estimates that worldwide between 3 and 16% of men have had some form of sex with another man at least once during their lifetime.

[ 149 ] According to major studies, 2% to 11% of people have had some form of same-sex sexual contact within their lifetime; [ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] this percentage rises to 16–21% when either or both same-sex attraction and behavior are reported.

[ 153 ] According to the 2021 United States Census , there were about 1.2 million same-sex couple households.

[ 154 ] In the United States , according to a report by The Williams Institute in April 2011, 3.5% or approximately 9 million of the adult population identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.

[ 155 ] A 2013 study by the CDC, in which over 34,000 Americans were interviewed, puts the percentage of self-identifying lesbians and gay men at 1.6%, and of bisexuals at 0.7%.

[ 156 ] In October 2012, Gallup started conducting annual surveys to study the demographics of LGBT people, determining that 3.4% (±1%) of adults identified as LGBT in the United States.

[ 157 ] It was the nation's largest poll on the issue at the time.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] In 2017, the percentage was estimated to have risen to 4.5% of adults, with the increase largely driven by millennials . The poll attributes the rise to greater willingness of younger people to reveal their sexual identity.

[ 160 ] Measuring the prevalence of homosexuality presents difficulties. It is necessary to consider the measuring criteria that are used, the cutoff point and the time span taken to define a sexual orientation.

[ 17 ] Many people, despite having same-sex attractions, may be reluctant to identify themselves as gay or bisexual. The research must measure some characteristic that may or may not be defining of sexual orientation. The number of people with same-sex desires may be larger than the number of people who act on those desires, which in turn may be larger than the number of people who self-identify as gay, lesbian, or bisexual.

[ 161 ] Reliable data as to the size of the gay and lesbian population are of value in informing public policy.

[ 161 ] For example, demographics are of help in calculating the costs and benefits of domestic partnership benefits , of the impact of legalizing gay adoption , and of the impact of the U.S. military's former Don't Ask Don't Tell policy.

[ 161 ] Further, knowledge of the size of the "gay and lesbian population holds promise for helping social scientists understand a wide array of important questions—questions about the general nature of labor market choices, accumulation of human capital, specialization within households, discrimination, and decisions about geographic location." [ 161 ] Psychology Main article: Homosexuality and psychology This section has an unclear citation style . The reason given is: it uses multiple citation styles.

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The American Psychological Association , the American Psychiatric Association , and the National Association of Social Workers state: In 1952, when the American Psychiatric Association published its first Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , homosexuality was included as a disorder. Almost immediately, however, that classification began to be subjected to critical scrutiny in research funded by the National Institute of Mental Health . That study and subsequent research consistently failed to produce any empirical or scientific basis for regarding homosexuality as a disorder or abnormality, rather than a normal and healthy sexual orientation. As results from such research accumulated, professionals in medicine, mental health, and the behavioral and social sciences reached the conclusion that it was inaccurate to classify homosexuality as a mental disorder and that the DSM classification reflected untested assumptions based on once-prevalent social norms and clinical impressions from unrepresentative samples comprising patients seeking therapy and individuals whose conduct brought them into the criminal justice system.

In recognition of the scientific evidence, [ 162 ] the American Psychiatric Association removed homosexuality from the DSM in 1973, stating that "homosexuality per se implies no impairment in judgment, stability, reliability, or general social or vocational capabilities." After thoroughly reviewing the scientific data, the American Psychological Association adopted the same position in 1975, and urged all mental health professionals "to take the lead in removing the stigma of mental illness that has long been associated with homosexual orientations." The National Association of Social Workers has adopted a similar policy.

Thus, mental health professionals and researchers have long recognized that being homosexual poses no inherent obstacle to leading a happy, healthy, and productive life, and that the vast majority of gay and lesbian people function well in the full array of social institutions and interpersonal relationships.

[ 6 ] The consensus of research and clinical literature demonstrates that same-sex sexual and romantic attractions, feelings, and behaviors are normal and positive variations of human sexuality.

[ 163 ] There is now a large body of research evidence that indicates that being gay, lesbian or bisexual is compatible with normal mental health and social adjustment.

[ 13 ] The World Health Organization 's ICD-9 (1977) listed homosexuality as a mental illness; it was removed from the ICD-10 , endorsed by the Forty-third World Health Assembly on 17 May 1990.

[ 164 ] [ 165 ] [ 166 ] Like the DSM-II, the ICD-10 added ego-dystonic sexual orientation to the list, which refers to people who want to change their gender identities or sexual orientation because of a psychological or behavioral disorder ( F66.1 ). The Chinese Society of Psychiatry removed homosexuality from its Chinese Classification of Mental Disorders in 2001 after five years of study by the association.

[ 167 ] According to the Royal College of Psychiatrists , "[t]his unfortunate history demonstrates how marginalisation of a group of people who have a particular personality feature (in this case homosexuality) can lead to harmful medical practice and a basis for discrimination in society." [ 13 ] Most lesbian, gay, and bisexual people who seek psychotherapy do so for the same reasons as heterosexual people (stress, relationship difficulties, difficulty adjusting to social or work situations, etc.); their sexual orientation may be of primary, incidental, or no importance to their issues and treatment. Whatever the issue, there is a high risk for anti-gay bias in psychotherapy with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients.

[ 168 ] Psychological research in this area has been relevant to counteracting prejudicial (" homophobic ") attitudes and actions, and to the LGBT rights movement generally.

[ 169 ] The appropriate application of affirmative psychotherapy is based on the following scientific facts: [ 163 ] Same-sex sexual attractions, behavior, and orientations per se are normal and positive variants of human sexuality; in other words, they are not indicators of mental or developmental disorders.

Homosexuality and bisexuality are stigmatized, and this stigma can have a variety of negative consequences (e.g., minority stress ) throughout the life span (D'Augelli & Patterson, 1995; DiPlacido, 1998; Herek & Garnets, 2007; Meyer, 1995, 2003).

Same-sex sexual attractions and behavior can occur in the context of a variety of sexual orientations and sexual orientation identities (Diamond, 2006; Hoburg et al., 2004; Rust, 1996; Savin-Williams, 2005).

Gay men, lesbians, and bisexual individuals can live satisfying lives as well as form stable, committed relationships and families that are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential respects (APA, 2005c; Kurdek, 2001, 2003, 2004; Peplau & Fingerhut, 2007).

There are no empirical studies or peer-reviewed research that support theories attributing same-sex sexual orientation to family dysfunction or trauma (Bell et al., 1981; Bene, 1965; Freund & Blanchard, 1983; Freund & Pinkava, 1961; Hooker, 1969; McCord et al., 1962; D. K. Peters & Cantrell, 1991; Siegelman, 1974, 1981; Townes et al., 1976).

Sexual orientation change efforts Main article: Sexual orientation change efforts There are no studies of adequate scientific rigor that conclude that sexual orientation change efforts work to change a person's sexual orientation. Those efforts have been controversial due to tensions between the values held by some faith-based organizations, on the one hand, and those held by LGBT rights organizations and professional and scientific organizations and other faith-based organizations, on the other.

[ 15 ] The longstanding consensus of the behavioral and social sciences and the health and mental health professions is that homosexuality per se is a normal and positive variation of human sexual orientation, and therefore not a mental disorder.

[ 15 ] The American Psychological Association says that "most people experience little or no sense of choice about their sexual orientation".

[ 170 ] Some individuals and groups have promoted the idea of homosexuality as symptomatic of developmental defects or spiritual and moral failings and have argued that sexual orientation change efforts, including psychotherapy and religious efforts, could alter homosexual feelings and behaviors. Many of these individuals and groups appeared to be embedded within the larger context of conservative religious political movements that have supported the stigmatization of homosexuality on political or religious grounds.

[ 15 ] No major mental health professional organization has sanctioned efforts to change sexual orientation and virtually all of them have adopted policy statements cautioning the profession and the public about treatments that purport to change sexual orientation. These include the American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, American Counseling Association, National Association of Social Workers in the U.S., [ 171 ] the Royal College of Psychiatrists, [ 172 ] and the Australian Psychological Society .

[ 173 ] The American Psychological Association and the Royal College of Psychiatrists expressed concerns that the positions espoused by NARTH are not supported by the science and create an environment in which prejudice and discrimination can flourish.

[ 172 ] [ 174 ] The American Psychiatric Association says "individuals maybe become aware at different points in their lives that they are heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or bisexual" and "opposes any psychiatric treatment, such as 'reparative' or 'conversion' therapy , which is based upon the assumption that homosexuality per se is a mental disorder, or based upon a prior assumption that the patient should change his/her homosexual orientation". They do, however, encourage gay affirmative psychotherapy .

[ 175 ] Similarly, the American Psychological Association is doubtful about the effectiveness and side-effect profile of sexual orientation change efforts, including conversion therapy.

[ 176 ] The American Psychological Association "encourages mental health professionals to avoid misrepresenting the efficacy of sexual orientation change efforts by promoting or promising change in sexual orientation when providing assistance to individuals distressed by their own or others' sexual orientation and concludes that the benefits reported by participants in sexual orientation change efforts can be gained through approaches that do not attempt to change sexual orientation".

[ 15 ] Causes Main articles: Biology and sexual orientation and Environment and sexual orientation Scientists have come to favor biological causes of sexual orientation.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] There is considerably more evidence supporting nonsocial, biological causes of sexual orientation than social ones, especially for males.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] There is no substantive evidence which suggests parenting or early childhood experiences play a role with regard to sexual orientation.

[ 13 ] [ 8 ] [ 7 ] The American Academy of Pediatrics stated in Pediatrics in 2004: There is no scientific evidence that abnormal parenting, sexual abuse, or other adverse life events influence sexual orientation. Current knowledge suggests that sexual orientation is usually established during early childhood.

[ 8 ] The American Psychological Association , American Psychiatric Association , and National Association of Social Workers stated in 2006: Currently, there is no scientific consensus about the specific factors that cause an individual to become heterosexual, homosexual, or bisexual—including possible biological, psychological, or social effects of the parents' sexual orientation. However, the available evidence indicates that the vast majority of lesbian and gay adults were raised by heterosexual parents and the vast majority of children raised by lesbian and gay parents eventually grow up to be heterosexual.

[ 5 ] Prenatal hormones Main article: Prenatal hormones and sexual orientation The prenatal hormonal theory of homosexuality posits that variations in exposure to sex hormones, particularly androgens and estrogens, during critical periods of early brain development play a central role in shaping sexual orientation. Evidence from natural experiments in humans and animal studies have found that elevated prenatal androgens are associated with increased attraction to females, while reduced androgen signaling or increased prenatal estrogen exposure may be linked to increased attraction to males.

[ 12 ] [ 177 ] [ 7 ] Genes Main article: Biology and sexual orientation Despite numerous attempts, no "gay gene" has been identified. However, there is substantial evidence for a genetic basis of homosexuality, especially in males, based on twin studies ; some association with regions of Chromosome 8 , the Xq28 locus on the X chromosome , and other sites across many chromosomes.

[ 178 ] v t e List of chromosomal locations associated with sexual orientation Chromosome Location Associated genes Sex Study 1 Origin Note X chromosome Xq28 Speculative MAGEA11 MECP2 IRAK1 male only Hamer et al.

1993 Sanders et al.

2015 genetic Chromosome 1 1p36 Rh system RHCE RHAG RHBG RHCG RHD both sexes Ellis et al.

2008 potential genetic linkage 2 Chromosome 4 4p14 female only Ganna et al.

2019 Chromosome 7 7q31 both sexes Ganna et al.

2019 Chromosome 8 8p12 NKAIN3 male only Mustanski et al.

2005 Sanders et al.

2015 Sanders et al.

2017 Chromosome 9 9q34 ABO both sexes Ellis et al.

2008 potential genetic linkage 2 Chromosome 11 11q12 OR51A7 (speculative) male only Ganna et al.

2019 Olfactory system in mating preferences Chromosome 12 12q21 both sexes Ganna et al.

2019 Chromosome 13 13q31 SLITRK6 male only Sanders et al.

2017 Diencephalon -associated gene Chromosome 14 14q31 TSHR male only Sanders et al.

2017 Chromosome 15 15q21 TCF12 male only Ganna et al.

2019 1 Reported primary studies are not conclusive evidence of any relationship.

2 Not believed to be causal.

Starting in the 2010s, potential epigenetic factors have become a topic of increased attention in genetic research on sexual orientation. A study presented at the ASHG 2015 Annual Meeting found that the methylation pattern in nine regions of the genome appeared very closely linked to sexual orientation, with a resulting algorithm using the methylation pattern to predict the sexual orientation of a control group with almost 70% accuracy.

[ 179 ] [ 180 ] Evolution Since homosexuality tends to lower reproductive success , it is unclear how it is maintained in the population at a relatively high frequency.

[ 181 ] There are many proposed explanations, such as genes predisposing to homosexuality also conferring advantage in heterosexuals (sexual antagonism), [ 7 ] a kin selection effect, [ 182 ] self-domestication , [ 183 ] and more.

Parenting Main article: Same-sex parenting Scientific research has been generally consistent in showing that lesbian and gay parents are as fit and capable as heterosexual parents, and their children are as psychologically healthy and well-adjusted as children reared by heterosexual parents.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 6 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] Some research has examined the sexual orientation of children raised by same-sex couples. A 2005 review of studies by Charlotte J. Patterson for the American Psychological Association did not find higher rates of homosexuality among the children of lesbian or gay parents.

[ 190 ] According to Bailey et al. 2016, available data do not suggest higher rates of non-heterosexuality among children of same-sex couples. However, they state that even given a modest heritability of sexual orientation, it would be expected that biological children of non-heterosexuals would be more likely to have a non-heterosexual orientation due to genes alone.

[ 191 ] According to a 2011 data, 80% of the children being raised by same-sex couples in the US are their own biological children.

[ 192 ] In addition, accepting social environments may facilitate the open expression of individuals same-sex attraction.

[ 193 ] Thus, it is necessary to control for various confounding factors.

[ 191 ] One study by Bailey et al. found that the sexual orientation of sons raised by gay men was not related to length of time they had lived with their fathers (social theories of homosexuality would predict sons who lived with a gay father the longest would be most likely to be gay).

[ 194 ] The Bailey et al. review conclude that social environmental influence on male sexual orientation is not well supported, while it remains more plausible for female sexual orientation.

[ 193 ] Health Further information: Lesbian § Health Physical Blood donation policies for men who have sex with men – Men who have sex with men may donate blood; No deferral – Men who have sex with men may donate blood; Temporary deferral – Men who have sex with men may not donate blood; Permanent deferral – No Data The terms " men who have sex with men " (MSM) and " women who have sex with women " (WSW) refer to people who engage in sexual activity with others of the same sex regardless of how they identify themselves—as many choose not to accept social identities as lesbian, gay and bisexual.

[ 195 ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] These terms are often used in medical literature and social research to describe such groups for study, without needing to consider the issues of sexual self-identity. The terms are seen as problematic by some, however, because they "obscure social dimensions of sexuality; undermine the self-labeling of lesbian, gay, and bisexual people; and do not sufficiently describe variations in sexual behavior".

[ 200 ] In contrast to its benefits, sexual behavior can be a disease vector .

Safe sex is a relevant harm reduction philosophy.

[ 201 ] Many countries currently prohibit men who have sex with men from donating blood ; the policy of the United States Food and Drug Administration states that "they are, as a group, at increased risk for HIV , hepatitis B and certain other infections that can be transmitted by transfusion." [ 202 ] Mental When it was first described in medical literature, homosexuality was often approached from a view that sought to find an inherent psychopathology as its root cause. Much literature on mental health and homosexual patients centered on their depression , substance abuse , and suicide. Although these issues exist among people who are non-heterosexual , discussion about their causes shifted after homosexuality was removed from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM) in 1973. Instead, social ostracism, legal discrimination, internalization of negative stereotypes, and limited support structures indicate factors homosexual people face in Western societies that often adversely affect their mental health.

[ 203 ] Stigma, prejudice, and discrimination stemming from negative societal attitudes toward homosexuality lead to a higher prevalence of mental health disorders among lesbians, gay men, and bisexuals compared to their heterosexual peers.

[ 204 ] Evidence indicates that the liberalization of these attitudes is associated with a decrease in such mental health risks among younger sexual minority people.

[ 205 ] Gay and lesbian youth See also: Suicide among LGBT youth Gay and lesbian youth bear an increased risk of suicide, substance abuse, school problems, and isolation because of a "hostile and condemning environment, verbal and physical abuse, rejection and isolation from family and peers".

[ 206 ] Further, LGBT youths are more likely to report psychological and physical abuse by parents or caretakers, and more sexual abuse. Suggested reasons for this disparity are that (1) LGBT youths may be specifically targeted on the basis of their perceived sexual orientation or gender non-conforming appearance, and (2) that "risk factors associated with sexual minority status, including discrimination, invisibility, and rejection by family members...may lead to an increase in behaviors that are associated with risk for victimization, such as substance abuse, sex with multiple partners, or running away from home as a teenager." [ 207 ] Crisis centers in larger cities and information sites on the Internet have arisen to help youth and adults.

[ 208 ] The Trevor Project , a suicide prevention helpline for gay youth, was established following the 1998 airing on HBO of the Academy Award winning short film Trevor .

[ 209 ] Law and politics Main article: LGBT rights by country or territory Legality v t e Worldwide laws regarding same-sex intercourse, unions and expression Same-sex intercourse illegal.

Penalties: Death Prison; death not enforced Death under militias Prison, with arrests or detention Prison, not enforced 1 Same-sex intercourse legal.

Recognition of unions: Marriage Extraterritorial marriage 2 Civil unions Limited domestic Limited foreign Optional certification None Restrictions of expression, not enforced Restrictions of association with arrests or detention 1 No imprisonment in the past three years [ timeframe?

] or moratorium on law.

2 Marriage not available locally. Some jurisdictions may perform other types of partnerships.

Part of a series on LGBTQ rights Lesbian ∙ Gay ∙ Bisexual ∙ Transgender ∙ Queer Overview Rights Movements Student Germany (pre-1933) United States Intersex rights Social attitudes Transgender rights Legal status Movement Aspects Decriminalization Gender self-identification Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Legal status Timeline Migration Military service Organizations List Parenting Adoption Pinkwashing Relationship Recognition Right to sexuality Union Opposition Censorship Conversion therapy Corrective rape Discrimination Criminalization of homosexuality Execution Opposition Propaganda Rhetoric Violence Organizations LGBTQ Bisexual Intersex Community centre Medical Military and Veteran Rights Transgender United States Religious Christian Jewish Muslim Politics Anarchism Bisexual politics Communism Conservatism Ecology Homonationalism Liberation Libertarianism Nationalism Radicalism Sexual revolution Socialism Transfeminism Political parties affiliates Political ideologies regarding LGBTQ Timeline Years List Category Related Discrimination Freedom Index Human rights Minority rights Legality of conversion therapy LGBTQ people in prison Right to privacy LGBTQ portal v t e Main article: Criminalization of homosexuality Most nations do not prohibit consensual sex between unrelated persons above the local age of consent . Some jurisdictions further recognize identical rights, protections, and privileges for the family structures of same-sex couples, including marriage . Some countries and jurisdictions mandate that all individuals restrict themselves to heterosexual activity and disallow homosexual activity via sodomy laws . Offenders can face the death penalty in Islamic countries and jurisdictions ruled by sharia . There are, however, often significant differences between official policy and real-world enforcement.

Although homosexual acts were decriminalized in some parts of the Western world , such as Poland in 1932, Denmark in 1933, Sweden in 1944, and England and Wales in 1967, it was not until the mid-1970s that the gay community first began to achieve limited civil rights in some developed countries . A turning point was reached in 1973 when the American Psychiatric Association , which previously listed homosexuality in the DSM-I in 1952, removed homosexuality in the DSM-II , in recognition of scientific evidence.

[ 6 ] In 1977, Quebec became the first state-level jurisdiction in the world to prohibit discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. During the 1980s and 1990s, several developed countries enacted laws decriminalizing homosexual behavior and prohibiting discrimination against lesbian and gay people in employment, housing, and services. On the other hand, many countries today in the Middle East and Africa, as well as several countries in Asia, the Caribbean and the South Pacific, outlaw homosexuality. In 2013, the Supreme Court of India upheld Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code , [ 210 ] but in 2018, overturned its previous ruling and legalized homosexual activity in India.

[ 211 ] Ten countries or jurisdictions, all of which are predominantly Islamic and governed according to sharia law, have imposed the death penalty for homosexuality . These include Afghanistan, Iran, Brunei, Mauritania, Saudi Arabia, and several regions in Nigeria and Jubaland.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] [ 214 ] [ 215 ] [ 216 ] [ 217 ] Laws against sexual orientation discrimination United States Employment discrimination refers to discriminatory employment practices such as bias in hiring, promotion, job assignment, termination, and compensation, and various types of harassment.

In the United States there is "very little statutory, common law, and case law establishing employment discrimination based upon sexual orientation as a legal wrong." [ 218 ] Some exceptions and alternative legal strategies are available. President Bill Clinton 's Executive Order 13087 (1998) prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation in the competitive service of the federal civilian workforce, [ 219 ] and federal non-civil service employees may have recourse under the Due Process Clause of the U.S. Constitution .

[ 220 ] Private sector workers may have a Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 action under a quid pro quo sexual harassment theory, [ 221 ] a " hostile work environment " theory, [ 222 ] a sexual stereotyping theory, [ 223 ] or others.

[ 218 ] Housing discrimination refers to discrimination against potential or current tenants by landlords. In the United States, there is no federal law against such discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity, but at least thirteen states and many major cities have enacted laws prohibiting it.

[ 224 ] Hate crimes are crimes motivated by homophobia , or bias against an identifiable social group , usually groups defined by race (human classification) , religion , sexual orientation, disability , ethnicity , nationality , age, gender , gender identity , or political affiliation . In the United States, 45 states and the District of Columbia have statutes criminalizing various types of bias-motivated violence or intimidation (the exceptions are AZ , GA , IN , SC , and WY ). Each of these statutes covers bias on the basis of race, religion, and ethnicity; 32 of them cover sexual orientation, 28 cover gender, and 11 cover transgender/gender-identity.

[ 225 ] In October 2009, the Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act , which "...gives the Justice Department the power to investigate and prosecute bias-motivated violence where the perpetrator has selected the victim because of the person's actual or perceived race, color, religion, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity or disability", was signed into law and makes hate crime based on sexual orientation, amongst other offenses, a federal crime in the United States.

[ 226 ] European Union In the European Union , discrimination of any type based on sexual orientation or gender identity is illegal under the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .

[ 227 ] Political activism Further information: LGBT social movements This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Since the 1960s, many LGBT people in the West, particularly those in major metropolitan areas, have developed a so-called gay culture . To many, [ who?

] gay culture is exemplified by the gay pride movement, with annual parades and displays of rainbow flags. Yet not all LGBT people choose to participate in "queer culture", and many gay men and women specifically decline to do so. To some [ who?

] it seems to be a frivolous display, perpetuating gay stereotypes.

[ citation needed ] Original Rainbow Pride Flag in San Francisco , designed by Gilbert Baker in 1978 With the outbreak of AIDS in the early 1980s, many LGBT groups and individuals organized campaigns to promote efforts in AIDS education, prevention, research, patient support, and community outreach, as well as to demand government support for these programs.

[ citation needed ] The death toll wrought by the AIDS epidemic at first seemed to slow the progress of the gay rights movement, but in time it galvanized some parts of the LGBT community into community service and political action, and challenged the heterosexual community to respond compassionately. Major American motion pictures from this period that dramatized the response of individuals and communities to the AIDS crisis include An Early Frost (1985), Longtime Companion (1990), And the Band Played On (1993), Philadelphia (1993), and Common Threads: Stories from the Quilt (1989).

[ citation needed ] Publicly gay politicians have attained numerous government posts, even in countries that had sodomy laws in their recent past. Examples include Guido Westerwelle , Germany's Vice-Chancellor ; Pete Buttigieg , the United States Secretary of Transportation , Peter Mandelson , a British Labour Party cabinet minister and Per-Kristian Foss , formerly Norwegian Minister of Finance .

[ citation needed ] LGBT movements are opposed by a variety of individuals and organizations. Some social conservatives believe that all sexual relationships with people other than an opposite-sex spouse undermine the traditional family [ 228 ] and that children should be reared in homes with both a father and a mother.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] Some argue that gay rights may conflict with individuals' freedom of speech, [ 231 ] [ 232 ] religious freedoms in the workplace, [ 233 ] [ 234 ] the ability to run churches, [ 235 ] charitable organizations [ 236 ] [ 237 ] and other religious organizations [ 238 ] in accordance with one's religious views, and that the acceptance of homosexual relationships by religious organizations might be forced through threatening to remove the tax-exempt status of churches whose views do not align with those of the government.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] [ 241 ] [ 242 ] Military service U.S. President Barack Obama signs into law the Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 .

Main article: Sexual orientation and military service Policies and attitudes toward gay and lesbian military personnel vary widely around the world. Some countries allow gay men, lesbians, and bisexual people to serve openly and have granted them the same rights and privileges as their heterosexual counterparts. Many countries neither ban nor support LGB service members. A few countries continue to ban homosexual personnel outright.

[ citation needed ] Most Western military forces have removed policies excluding sexual minority members. Of the 26 countries that participate militarily in NATO , more than 20 permit openly gay, lesbian and bisexual people to serve. Of the permanent members of the United Nations Security Council , three ( United Kingdom , France and United States ) do so. The other two generally do not: China bans gay and lesbian people outright, Russia excludes all gay and lesbian people during peacetime but allows some gay men to serve in wartime (see below).

Israel is the only country in the Middle East region that allows openly LGB people to serve in the military.

[ citation needed ] According to the American Psychological Association , empirical evidence fails to show that sexual orientation is relevant to military effectiveness including unit cohesion , morale, recruitment and retention.

[ 243 ] Society and sociology Further information: Societal attitudes toward homosexuality Public opinion 2019 Pew Global Research Poll: Should homosexuality be accepted in society? Percentage of responders that answered accept : 0–10% 11–20% 21–30% 31–40% 41–50% 51–60% 61–70% 71–80% 81–90% 91–100% No data Societal acceptance of non-heterosexual orientations such as homosexuality is lowest in Asian, African and Eastern European countries, [ 244 ] [ 245 ] and is highest in Western Europe, Australia, and the Americas. Western society has become increasingly accepting of homosexuality since the 1990s. In 2017, Professor Amy Adamczyk contended that these cross-national differences in acceptance can be largely explained by three factors: the relative strength of democratic institutions, the level of economic development, and the religious context of the places where people live.

[ 246 ] These stereotypical beliefs of the people against the LGBTQ+ community have caused rejection and discriminatory behavior against them. Various researches have shown that LGBTQ+ people in societies that do not recognize homosexuality as a sexual identity of such group feel insecure, psychological pressure and isolated from the society.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] Kameel Ahmady , an anthropologist and social researcher , who along with team conducted a fieldwork study in Iran with the aim of understanding the attitude of the Iranian LGBTQ+ community towards their position in the Iranian society, believes that the traditional and religious structure of the society, along with the legal obstacles and restrictions, has caused this groups not to be able to express themselves and often suppressing their gender identity.

[ 251 ] [ 252 ] [ 253 ] [ 254 ] [ 255 ] [ 256 ] Legal restrictions such as imprisonment, fear of execution , not been to allowed employment in governmental jobs, along with informal restrictions such as sexual abuse in society, exclusion from family and social groups, verbal and public humiliation, etc., have all made life difficult for the LGBTQ+ groups.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 252 ] A 2024 study found that 12.8% of the world population oppose having gay neighbours.

[ 260 ] Relationships In 2006, the American Psychological Association , American Psychiatric Association and National Association of Social Workers stated in an amicus brief presented to the Supreme Court of California : "Gay men and lesbians form stable, committed relationships that are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential respects. The institution of marriage offers social, psychological, and health benefits that are denied to same-sex couples. By denying same-sex couples the right to marry, the state reinforces and perpetuates the stigma historically associated with homosexuality. Homosexuality remains stigmatized, and this stigma has negative consequences. California's prohibition on marriage for same-sex couples reflects and reinforces this stigma". They concluded: "There is no scientific basis for distinguishing between same-sex couples and heterosexual couples with respect to the legal rights, obligations, benefits, and burdens conferred by civil marriage." [ 6 ] Religion Main article: Homosexuality and religion Though the relationship between homosexuality and religion is complex, current authoritative bodies and doctrines of the world's largest religions view homosexual behaviour negatively.

[ citation needed ] This can range from quietly discouraging homosexual activity, to explicitly forbidding same-sex sexual practices among adherents and actively opposing social acceptance of homosexuality. Some teach that homosexual desire itself is sinful, [ 261 ] others state that only the sexual act is a sin, [ 262 ] while others are completely accepting of gays and lesbians .

[ 263 ] Some claim that homosexuality can be overcome through religious faith and practice. On the other hand, voices exist within many of these religions that view homosexuality more positively, and liberal religious denominations may bless same-sex marriages . Some view same-sex love and sexuality as sacred, and a mythology of same-sex love can be found throughout the world.

[ 264 ] Discrimination LGBT activists at Cologne Pride in 2015 carrying a banner with the flags of 70 countries where homosexuality is illegal Gay bullying Main article: Gay bullying Gay bullying can be the verbal or physical abuse against a person who is perceived by the aggressor to be lesbian , gay , bisexual , transgender , or generally queer, including persons who are actually heterosexual or of non-specific or unknown sexual orientation . In the US, teenage students heard anti-gay slurs such as "homo", "faggot" and "sissy" about 26 times a day on average, or once every 14 minutes, according to a 1998 study by Mental Health America (formerly National Mental Health Association).

[ 265 ] Heterosexism and homophobia Further information: Heterosexism and Homophobia Protests in New York City against Uganda 's Anti-Homosexuality Bill In many cultures, homosexual people are frequently subject to prejudice and discrimination. A 2011 Dutch study concluded that 49% of Holland's youth and 58% of youth foreign to the country reject homosexuality.

[ 266 ] Similar to other minority groups they can also be subject to stereotyping . These attitudes tend to be due to forms of homophobia and heterosexism (negative attitudes , bias, and discrimination in favor of opposite-sex sexuality and relationships). Heterosexism can include the presumption that everyone is heterosexual or that opposite-sex attractions and relationships are the norm and therefore superior.

Homophobia is a fear of, aversion to, or discrimination against homosexual people. It manifests in different forms, and a number of different types have been postulated, among which are internalized homophobia, social homophobia, emotional homophobia, rationalized homophobia, and others.

[ 267 ] Similar is lesbophobia (specifically targeting lesbians) and biphobia (against bisexual people). When such attitudes manifest as crimes they are often called hate crimes and gay bashing .

Negative stereotypes characterize LGB people as less romantically stable and more likely to abuse children, but there is no scientific basis to such assertions. Gay men and lesbians form stable, committed relationships that are equivalent to heterosexual relationships in essential respects.

[ 6 ] Sexual orientation does not affect the likelihood that people will abuse children.

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] Claims that there is scientific evidence to support an association between being gay and being a pedophile are based on misuses of those terms and misrepresentation of the actual evidence.

[ 269 ] Violence against homosexuals Main article: Violence against LGBT people Further information: Rape In the United States, the FBI reported that 20.4% of hate crimes reported to law enforcement in 2011 were based on sexual orientation bias. 56.7% of these crimes were based on bias against homosexual men. 11.1% were based on bias against homosexual women. 29.6% were based on anti-homosexual bias without regard to gender.

[ 271 ] The 1998 murder of Matthew Shepard , a gay student, is a notorious such incident in the U.S. LGBT people, especially lesbians, may become the victims of " corrective rape ", a violent crime with the supposed aim of making them heterosexual. In certain parts of the world, LGBT people are also at risk of " honor killings " perpetrated by their families or relatives, [ 272 ] [ 273 ] [ 274 ] or violence perpetrated by the state.

[ 275 ] Homosexual behavior in other animals Main article: Homosexual behavior in animals Roy and Silo , two New York Central Park Zoo male chinstrap penguins similar to those pictured, became internationally known when they coupled and later were given an egg that needed hatching and care, which they successfully provided.

[ 276 ] Homosexual and bisexual behaviors occur in a number of other animal species. Such behaviors include sexual activity , courtship , affection , pair bonding , and parenting , [ 21 ] and are widespread; a 1999 review by researcher Bruce Bagemihl shows that homosexual behavior has been documented in about 500 species, ranging from primates to gut worms .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Animal sexual behavior takes many different forms, even within the same species. The motivations for and implications of these behaviors have yet to be fully understood, since most species have yet to be fully studied.

[ 277 ] According to Bagemihl, "the animal kingdom [does] it with much greater sexual diversity—including homosexual, bisexual and nonreproductive sex—than the scientific community and society at large have previously been willing to accept".

[ 278 ] According to Bailey et al., domestic sheep are the only conclusively documented example of animals to exhibit an exclusively homosexual orientation, besides humans.

[ 7 ] A review paper by N. W. Bailey and Marlene Zuk looking into studies of same-sex sexual behaviour in animals challenges the view that such behaviour lowers reproductive success, citing several hypotheses about how same-sex sexual behavior might be adaptive; these hypotheses vary greatly among different species.

[ 279 ] In October 2023, biologists reported studies of animals (over 1,500 different species) that found same-sex behavior (not necessarily related to human orientation) may help improve social stability by reducing conflict within the groups studied.

[ 280 ] [ 281 ] See also LGBTQ portal LGBT rights by country or territory LGBT rights at the United Nations Anti-LGBT rhetoric Biology and sexual orientation Fraternal birth order and male sexual orientation Gender dysphoria Hate speech Human male sexuality List of nonfiction books about homosexuality List of gay, lesbian or bisexual people Religion and sexuality Riddle homophobia scale Sexual practices between men Sexual practices between women Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures LGBT music Notes ^ "Definitions Related to Sexual Orientation and Gender Diversity in APA Documents" (PDF) .

American Psychological Association . 2015. p. 6. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2022 . Retrieved 6 February 2020 .

Sexual orientation refers to the sex of those to whom one is sexually and romantically attracted. ... [It is] one's enduring sexual attraction to male partners, female partners, or both. Sexual orientation may be heterosexual, samesex (gay or lesbian), or bisexual. ... A person may be attracted to men, women, both, neither, or to people who are genderqueer, androgynous, or have other gender identities. Individuals may identify as lesbian, gay, heterosexual, bisexual, queer, pansexual, or asexual, among others. ... Categories of sexual orientation typically have included attraction to members of one's own sex (gay men or lesbians), attraction to members of the other sex (heterosexuals), and attraction to members of both sexes (bisexuals). While these categories continue to be widely used, research has suggested that sexual orientation does not always appear in such definable categories and instead occurs on a continuum .... Some people identify as pansexual or queer in terms of their sexual orientation, which means they define their sexual orientation outside of the gender binary of 'male' and 'female' only.

^ Eric B. Shiraev; David A. Levy (2016).

Cross-Cultural Psychology: Critical Thinking and Contemporary Applications, Sixth Edition .

Taylor & Francis . p. 216.

ISBN 978-1134871315 .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

Sexual orientation refers to romantic or sexual attraction to people of a specific sex or gender. ... Heterosexuality, along with bisexuality and homosexuality are at least three main categories of the continuum of sexual orientation. ... Homosexuality is a romantic or sexual attraction between persons of the same sex or gender.

^ James R. Lehman; Kristine Diaz; Henry Ng; Elizabeth M. Petty; Meena Thatikunta; Kristen Eckstrand, eds. (2019).

The Equal Curriculum: The Student and Educator Guide to LGBTQ Health .

Springer Nature . p. 5.

ISBN 978-3030240257 .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

Homosexual, literally meaning "same sex", is used as an adjective to describe same-sex or same-gender attraction. ... The term introduces ambiguity because is often applied as an identity label to a person or group based on their behaviors, not because of self-identified sexual orientation or sexual desires. ... in addition to having potentially negative connotations, homosexual is unclear as to what group of people it describes...

^ "General Definitions" .

LGBT Resource Center . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ a b c d e f "Sexual orientation, homosexuality and bisexuality" .

American Psychological Association . Archived from the original on 8 August 2013 . Retrieved 10 August 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Case No. S147999 in the Supreme Court of the State of California, In re Marriage Cases Judicial Council Coordination Proceeding No. 4365... – APA California Amicus Brief — As Filed" (PDF) . p. 30.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 December 2010 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Bailey JM, Vasey PL, Diamond LM, Breedlove SM , Vilain E, Epprecht M (2016).

"Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science" .

Psychological Science in the Public Interest .

17 (21): 45– 101.

doi : 10.1177/1529100616637616 .

PMID 27113562 .

^ a b c d Frankowski BL; American Academy of Pediatrics Committee on Adolescence (June 2004).

"Sexual orientation and adolescents" .

Pediatrics .

113 (6): 1827– 32.

doi : 10.1542/peds.113.6.1827 .

ISSN 0031-4005 .

PMID 15173519 .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2013 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 .

^ a b c Bogaert, Anthony F.; Skorska, Malvina N. (1 March 2020).

"A short review of biological research on the development of sexual orientation" .

Hormones and Behavior .

119 104659.

doi : 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2019.104659 .

ISSN 0018-506X .

PMID 31911036 .

^ a b LeVay, Simon (2017).

Gay, Straight, and the Reason Why: The Science of Sexual Orientation . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-029737-4 .

OL 26246092M – via Open Library .

^ a b Balthazart, Jacques (2012).

The Biology of Homosexuality . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199838820 .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

^ a b Swift-Gallant, Ashlyn; Aung, Toe; Rosenfield, Kevin; Dawood, Khytam; Puts, David (2023).

"Organizational Effects of Gonadal Hormones on Human Sexual Orientation" .

Adaptive Human Behavior and Physiology .

9 (4): 344– 370.

doi : 10.1007/s40750-023-00226-x .

ISSN 2198-7335 .

^ a b c d "Submission to the Church of England's Listening Exercise on Human Sexuality" . The Royal College of Psychiatrists.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2015 . Retrieved 13 June 2013 .

^ " 'Therapies' to change sexual orientation lack medical justification and threaten health" . Pan American Health Organization. Archived from the original on 23 May 2012 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ a b c d e "Resolution on Appropriate Affirmative Responses to Sexual Orientation Distress and Change Efforts" .

American Psychological Association . 2009.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ "Psychological practices that attempt to change sexual orientation: Position statement" .

Australian Psychological Society .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 28 January 2020 .

^ a b c LeVay, Simon (1996).

Queer Science: The Use and Abuse of Research into Homosexuality Archived 13 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine .

Cambridge: The MIT Press ISBN 0-262-12199-9 ^ "Same-sex Behavior Seen in Nearly All Animals, Review Finds" .

ScienceDaily .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2009 . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ " 1,500 animal species practice homosexuality .

The Medical News , 23 October 2006" . Archived from the original on 10 February 2011.

^ Sommer, Volker & Paul L. Vasey (2006), Homosexual Behaviour in Animals, An Evolutionary Perspective.

Cambridge University Press , Cambridge.

ISBN 0-521-86446-1 ^ a b c ( Bagemihl 1999 ) ^ a b Harrold, Max (16 February 1999).

"Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity" .

The Advocate . Regent Media.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2023 – via TheFreeLibrary .

^ [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] ^ Sexual Orientation Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

American Psychiatric Association .

^ Room, Adrian (1986).

A Dictionary of True Etymologies . Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0710203403 .

^ Statt, David A. (2004).

A Student's Dictionary of Psychology . Psychology Press. p.

93 .

ISBN 978-1841693422 .

^ Endres, Nikolai (2004).

"Kertbeny, Károly Mária (1824-1882)" (PDF) .

glbtq Encyclopedia .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ a b "Karl-Maria Kertbeny: The Coinage and Dissemination of the Term" , glbtq.com , archived from the original on 27 September 2012 , retrieved 12 June 2012 ^ Feray Jean-Claude; Herzer Manfred (1990). "Homosexual Studies and Politics in the 19th Century: Karl Maria Kertbeny".

Journal of Homosexuality .

19 (1): 23– 47.

doi : 10.1300/j082v19n01_02 .

PMID 2187922 .

^ "Krafft-Ebing, Richard von (1840–1902)" .

glbtq.com . Archived from the original on 9 April 2012.

^ "Psychopathia Sexualis" .

Kino.com . Archived from the original on 4 October 2007 . Retrieved 7 September 2007 .

^ a b "GLAAD Media Reference Guide - Glossary of Terms: LGBTQ" .

GLAAD . 24 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ "gay" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Archived from the original on 27 August 2016 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 .

(Of a person, especially a man) homosexual.

^ Johnson, Marguerite; Ryan, Terry, November 5- (2005).

Sexuality in Greek and Roman society and literature : a sourcebook . Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-203-64582-6 .

OCLC 252815648 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Lesbian | Define Lesbian at Dictionary.com" . Dictionary.reference.com.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ "UNAIDS: Men who have sex with men" (PDF) . UNAIDS. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ Younger, John G. (2005).

Sex in the ancient world from A to Z (1st published. ed.). London: Routledge. p.

38 .

ISBN 0-415-24252-5 .

^ " 'I don't want a poofter to play me in a film': Sir Stirling Moss is embroiled in homophobia row after 'offensive' comments" .

The Independent . 14 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 10 August 2022 . Retrieved 10 August 2022 .

^ The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language, Fourth Edition . Houghton Mifflin. 2000.

ISBN 0-618-70172-9 .

^ Spears, Richard A. (2007).

"Fag" .

Dictionary of American Slang and Colloquial Expressions .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ Dalzell, Tom, ed. (25 July 2008).

The Routledge Dictionary of Modern American Slang and Unconventional English . Routledge. p. 1104.

doi : 10.4324/9780203895139 .

ISBN 978-0-203-89513-9 .

^ "Dictionary of Sexual Terms" . Sex-lexis.com. Archived from the original on 15 October 2004 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ Taylor, Marvin J.

"Queer Things from Old Closets: Libraries Gay and Lesbian Studies – Queer Theory" (PDF) .

Association of College and Research Libraries .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 January 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ eds, Marc Wolinsky (1993).

Gays and the military: Joseph Steffan versus the United States ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press . pp.

49– 55.

ISBN 0691033072 .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ eds, Marc Wolinsky ... (1993).

Gays and the military: Joseph Steffan versus the United States ([Online-Ausg.]. ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press . pp.

40– 48.

ISBN 0691033072 .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ Murray, Stephen O. (2000).

Homosexualities . Chicago: University of Chicago Press . p. 394.

ISBN 9780226551944 .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2022 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ Denise Winterman (18 March 2008).

"How 'gay' became children's insult of choice" . BBC News.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2009 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ Hubbard, Thomas K. (2003). "Introduction".

Homosexuality in Greece and Rome: a Sourcebook of Basic Documents . University of California Press. p.

1 .

ISBN 0520234308 .

The term "homosexuality" is itself problematic when applied to ancient cultures, inasmuch as neither Greek nor Latin possesses any one word covering the same semantic range as the modern concept. The term is adopted in this volume not out of any conviction that a fundamental identity exists between ancient and modern practices or self-conceptions, but as a convenient shorthand linking together a range of different phenomena involving same-gender love and/or sexual activity. To be sure, classical antiquity featured a variety of discrete practices in this regard, each of which enjoyed differing levels of acceptance depending on the time and place.

^ Blank, Hanne (2012).

Straight: the surprisingly short history of heterosexuality . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-4443-8 .

^ a b c d e f g Herdt, Gilbert H. (1998).

Same Sex, Different Cultures: Exploring Gay And Lesbian Lives . Boulder: Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-3164-5 .

^ a b Norton, Rictor (2016).

Myth of the Modern Homosexual . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 9781474286923 .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 July 2019 .

The author has made adapted and expanded portions of this book available online as A Critique of Social Constructionism and Postmodern Queer Theory Archived 30 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

^ a b Boswell, John (1989).

"Revolutions, Universals, and Sexual Categories" (PDF) . In Duberman, Martin Bauml; Vicinus, Martha; Chauncey, George Jr. (eds.).

Hidden From History: Reclaiming the Gay and Lesbian Past . Penguin Books. pp.

17– 36.

S2CID 34904667 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2019.

^ Gnuse, Robert K. (May 2015). "Seven Gay Texts: Biblical Passages Used to Condemn Homosexuality".

Biblical Theology Bulletin .

45 (2).

SAGE Publications on behalf of Biblical Theology Bulletin Inc.: 68– 87.

doi : 10.1177/0146107915577097 .

ISSN 1945-7596 .

S2CID 170127256 .

^ Koenig, Harold G.; Dykman, Jackson (2012).

Religion and Spirituality in Psychiatry . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 9780521889520 .

the overwhelming majority of Christian churches have maintained their positions that homosexual behavior is sinful ^ Plato; Saunders, Trevor J. (1970).

The laws . Harmondsworth, Eng.: Penguin. p. 340.

ISBN 0-14-044222-7 .

OCLC 94283 .

... sow illegitimate and bastard seed in courtesans, or sterile seed in males in defiance of nature.

^ Love And Friendship In Plato And Aristotle .

^ Williams, Craig A. (1999).

Roman homosexuality : ideologies of masculinity in classical antiquity . Oxford. p. 60.

ISBN 0-19-511300-4 .

OCLC 55720140 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ ( Foucault 1986 ) ^ Buxton, Richard (2004). "Same-Sex Eroticism".

The Complete World of Greek Mythology . London: Thames and Hudson. p. 174.

ISBN 0500251215 .

As scholars have increasingly come to recognize, the ancient Greek world did not know of the modern 'life-style' category-distinction between homosexuality and heterosexuality, according to which those terms are used to designate contrasting psychological or behavioral profiles.

^ Hubbard Thomas K (22 September 2003). "Review of David M. Halperin, How to Do the History of Homosexuality.

".

Bryn Mawr Classical Review .

^ Halperin, David M. (1990).

One Hundred Years of Homosexuality: And Other Essays on Greek Love . New York: Routledge. pp.

41–42 .

ISBN 0-415-90097-2 .

^ Ruse, Michael (2005). Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 399.

ISBN 0-19-926479-1 .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ Murray, Stephen ; Roscoe, Will (1998).

Boy Wives and Female Husbands: Studies of African Homosexualities . New York: St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 0-312-23829-0 .

^ Evans-Pritchard, E. E.

(1970).

"Sexual Inversion among the Azande" .

American Anthropologist .

72 (6): 1428– 1434.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1970.72.6.02a00170 .

S2CID 162319598 .

^ Rupp, Leila J. (2009).

Sapphistries: a global history of love between women . Intersections: transdisciplinary perspectives on genders and sexualities. New York, NY: Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-8147-7726-8 .

^ Pablo, Ben (2004).

"Latin America: Colonial" .

glbtq.com . Archived from the original on 11 December 2007 . Retrieved 1 August 2007 .

^ Murray, Stephen (2004).

"Mexico" . In Claude J. Summers (ed.).

glbtq: An Encyclopedia of Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer Culture .

glbtq.com . Archived from the original on 2 November 2007 . Retrieved 1 August 2007 .

^ Sigal, Pete (2003).

Infamous Desire: Male Homosexuality in Colonial Latin America . The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226757049 .

^ Anghiera, Pietro Martire d'; Torres Asensio, Joaquín. (2012).

Décadas del nuevo mundo (in Spanish). Valladolid: Maxtor.

ISBN 978-84-9001-301-4 .

OCLC 1057902726 .

Coello de la Rosa, Alexandre (23 June 2001).

" "Good Indians", "Bad Indians", "What Christians?": The Dark Side of the New World in Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y Valdés (1478–1557)" .

Delaware Review of Latin American Studies .

3 (2).

Archived from the original on 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 18 August 2022 .

^ Hamish (19 August 2007).

" 'Sodomites' in Canada before 1841" .

The Drummer's Revenge .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2015 .

^ Hamish (9 September 2007).

"The End to the Death Penalty for "Sodomy" in Canada" .

The Drummer's Revenge .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2015 .

^ "Trudeau: 'There's no place for the state in the bedrooms of the nation' " .

CBC Archives . Archived from the original on 3 January 2018 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ "Egan v. Canada" .

Supreme Court of Canada . 25 May 1995.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2021.

^ Civil Marriage Act , SC 2005, c. 33 ^ "SPARTACUS Gay Travel Index 2019" . 25 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ "FORBES LGBTQ+ Danger Index 2019" .

Forbes . 21 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ "LGBTQ+ Travel Safety – 150 Best & Worst Countries Ranked (2021)" .

Asher & Lyric .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2021 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ Carrier, Joseph (1995).

De los otros: intimacy and homosexuality among Mexican men . Between men - between women. New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-09693-5 .

^ * Census statistics show quarter of California same-sex couples raising kids Archived 26 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine Region Saw Increase In Same-Sex Households Archived 29 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Census 2010: One Quarter of Gay Couples Raising Children Archived 1 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine Minnesota Sees 50% Rise in Number of Gay Couples Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Census:Dutchess, Ulster Gay Households Increase Archived 19 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine Same Sex Couples' Numbers Soar In N.Y, 2010 Census Finds Archived 30 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine 87% Increase in Same-Sex Nevada Households Since 2000 Archived 26 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine 2010 Census indicates increase among same-sex homeowners in Oklahoma Spike In Number of City's Same-Sex Couples Archived 27 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kang, Wenqing.

Obsession: male same-sex relations in China, 1900–1950 , Hong Kong University Press. Page 2 ^ Song Geng (2004).

The fragile scholar: power and masculinity in Chinese culture . Hong Kong University Press. p. 144.

ISBN 978-962-209-620-2 .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 .

^ Hinsch, Bret. (1990).

Passions of the Cut Sleeve . University of California Press. pp.77-78.

^ Kang, Wenqing.

Obsession: male same-sex relations in China, 1900–1950 , Hong Kong University Press. Page 3 ^ Murray, Stephen O.; Pilling, Arnold R. (1992).

Oceanic homosexualities . Garland reference library of social science ; Garland gay and lesbian studies. New York: Garland Pub.

ISBN 978-0-8240-7227-8 .

^ Pattanaik, Devdutt.

"Would ancient India have supported Section 377?" .

Rediff . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ Raveenthiran, Venkatachalam (November 2011).

"Knowledge of ancient Hindu surgeons on Hirschsprung disease: evidence from Sushruta Samhita of circa 1200-600 bc" .

Journal of Pediatric Surgery .

46 (11): 2204– 2208.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2011.07.007 .

ISSN 0022-3468 .

PMID 22075360 .

^ "Know all about Sushruta, the first ever plastic surgeon who was Indian" .

India Today . July 2019 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ Mitra Varuna Archived 2013-08-27 at the Wayback Machine , The Gay and Lesbian Vaishnava Association ^ "Live Blog: Supreme Court Rules Gay Sex Illegal" .

The Wall Street Journal . 11 December 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2023 .

^ Shastri, Hari Prasad, Tr.

The Ramayana Of Valmiki Vol. 2 . Digital Library of India Item 2015.39881 . Retrieved 19 April 2023 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Mehrotra, Deepanshi (22 October 2017).

" The Pre-Colonial History of Homosexuality in India: Why Love Is Not Western (Part I/III)" .

Lawctopus .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2023 .

^ Malatimanjari (28 April 2019).

"The Vedic View on Homosexuality" .

Jiva Institute of Vedic Studies . Retrieved 8 May 2025 .

^ De Silva, A. L.

"Homosexuality and Theravada Buddhism" .

BuddhaNet . Archived from the original on 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ "Pali canon | Definition, Contents, & Facts" .

Britannica . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ Mitta, Manoj (27 June 2009).

"Ancient India didn't think homosexuality was against nature" .

The Times of India .

ISSN 0971-8257 . Retrieved 6 February 2023 .

^ "Homosexuality in ancient India: 10 instances" .

India Today . 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 19 July 2025 .

^ "LGBT rights were accepted in ancient India, Sec 377 must be repealed: Amish Tripathi" .

Hindustan Times . 4 September 2017 . Retrieved 27 December 2023 .

^ "Stances of Faiths on LGBTQ+ Issues: Hinduism" .

Human Rights Campaign . Retrieved 27 December 2023 .

^ Srinivasan, Shiva Prakash; Chandrasekaran, Sruti (2020).

"Transsexualism in Hindu Mythology" .

Indian Journal of Endocrinology and Metabolism .

24 (3): 235– 236.

doi : 10.4103/ijem.IJEM_152_20 .

ISSN 2230-8210 .

PMC 7539026 .

PMID 33083261 .

^ Love And Friendship In Plato And Aristotle .

^ Plato, Laws, 636D & 835E ^ Verstraete, Beert C. (2005).

Same-sex Desire and Love in Greco-Roman Antiquity and in the Classical Tradition of the West . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-56023-604-7 .

^ Morales, Manuel Sanz; Mariscal, Gabriel Laguna (2003).

"The Relationship between Achilles and Patroclus according to Chariton of Aphrodisias" .

The Classical Quarterly .

53 (1): 292– 295.

doi : 10.1093/cq/53.1.292 .

ISSN 0009-8388 .

JSTOR 3556498 .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 November 2020 .

^ Douglas Harper (2001).

"Lesbian" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 February 2009 .

^ Douglas Harper (2001).

"Sapphic" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2017 . Retrieved 7 February 2009 .

^ Denys Page, Sappho and Alcaeus , Oxford UP, 1959, pp.142–146.

^ Campbell, David A., ed. (1982). "Introduction".

Greek Lyric I:Sappho and Alcaeus . Cambridge, Mass. pp.

xi– xii.

ISBN 0-674-99157-5 .

OCLC 8805576 .

Her way of life has been the subject of much speculation. Her poetry gives unmistakable evidence of strong homosexual feelings, and this was used by later writers for inferences about her character and indeed her profession: cf. the Oxyrhynchus biography: 'she has been accused by some of being irregular in her ways and a woman-lover'; or the Suda : ' she got a bad name for her impure friendship towards Atthis, Telesippa and Megara'; Ovid made her speak of her low reputation, and about the same time Didymus Bronze-Guts addressed himself to the question, 'Was Sappho a prostitute or not?', and Horace spoke ambiguously of 'masculine Sappho'. Voices were raised in defence of her character: a commentator inferred from her poetry that she was 'a good housekeeper and industrious'. The case-history is complicated by the evidence, usually neglected, that she was married and spoke lovingly of her daughter in her poetry, and by the story, however it arose, that she died of unrequited love for Phaon.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hubbard, Thomas K. (31 March 2020), "Historical Views of Homosexuality: Roman Empire" , Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics , doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.1243 , ISBN 978-0-19-022863-7 , retrieved 29 April 2025 ^ "Römer 1 - Einheitsübersetzung - www.die-bibel.de" .

www.die-bibel.de .

^ "The Novels of Justinian : Novel 77 ( Bailey )" .

Roman Law Library . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ Bailey, Derrick Sherwin (1975).

Homosexuality and the Western Christian tradition . Archon Books.

ISBN 978-0-208-01492-4 .

^ Rocke, Michael, (1996), Forbidden Friendships: Homosexuality and male Culture in Renaissance Florence , ISBN 0-19-512292-5 ^ Ruggiero, Guido, (1985), The Boundaries of Eros , ISBN 0-19-503465-1 ^ Kurtz, Lester R. (1999).

Encyclopedia of violence, peace, & conflict . Academic Press. p. 140.

ISBN 0-12-227010-X .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2015 .

^ Gladfelder, Hal (May 2006) In Search of Lost Texts: Thomas Cannon's 'Ancient and Modern Pederasty Investigated and Exemplified" , Institute of Historical Research ^ Published in two parts: Bentham, Jeremy; Crompton, Louis (4 August 1978). "Offences Against One's Self: Paederesty (Part 1)".

Journal of Homosexuality .

3 (4). Informa UK Limited: 389– 406.

doi : 10.1300/j082v03n04_07 .

ISSN 0091-8369 .

PMID 353189 .

Bentham, Jeremy; Crompton, Louis (22 November 1978). "Jeremy Bentham's Essay on 'Paederasty': Part 2".

Journal of Homosexuality .

4 (1). Informa UK Limited: 91– 107.

doi : 10.1300/j082v04n01_07 .

ISSN 0091-8369 .

PMID 363935 .

^ Ellis, Havelock; Symonds, John Addington (1975), Sexual Inversion , Arno Press, ISBN 0-405-07363-1 (reprint) ^ El-Rouayheb, Khaled (2005).

Before Homosexuality in the Arab-Islamic World, 1500–1800 . The University of Chicago Press. p.

2 .

ISBN 0-226-72988-5 .

^ "The five most improved places for gay tolerance" .

The Independent . London. 17 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 May 2009 .

Israel is the only Middle-Eastern country to support gay rights legislation, and the country attracts gay people from Palestine and Lebanon.

^ James Kirchick. "Was Arafat Gay?".

Out .

^ "The world's most gay-friendly places".

Calgary Herald . 29 June 2011.

^ Grant, Anthony (2 July 2010).

"Gay Tel Aviv" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 October 2012 .

^ Steven Eke (28 July 2005).

"Iran 'must stop youth executions' " . BBC News.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 21 October 2010 .

^ "7 countries still put people to death for same-sex acts" . ILGA. Archived from the original on 29 October 2009 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Fathi, Nazila (30 September 2007).

"Despite Denials, Gays Insist They Exist, if Quietly, in Iran" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2009 . Retrieved 1 October 2007 .

^ Nahavandi and Bomati, illustration opposite p.162 ^ Leick, Gwendolyn (2013) [1994].

Sex and Eroticism in Mesopotamian Literature . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-92074-7 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ a b c d e Roscoe, Will; Murray, Stephen O. (1997).

Islamic Homosexualities: Culture, History, and Literature . New York: New York University Press. pp.

65– 66.

ISBN 0-8147-7467-9 .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ a b Bruce L. Gerig.

"Homosexuality in the Ancient Near East, beyond Egypt" .

The Epistle . Retrieved 29 December 2024 .

^ Honeycutt, Kevin S. (1 June 2022).

"Bertrand de Jouvenel's Philosophy of Individual Liberty" .

Journal des Économistes et des Études Humaines .

28 (1): 167– 182.

doi : 10.1515/jeeh-2022-0016 .

ISSN 2153-1552 .

^ Casey (7 June 2016).

"Queer in the Age of the Queen: Gender and Sexuality of the Mid Modern Period in Victorian England and North America" .

Molly Brown House Museum . Retrieved 8 May 2025 .

^ a b Herdt, Gilbert H. (1984), Ritualized Homosexuality in Melanesia , University of California Press, pp.

128– 136, ISBN 0-520-08096-3 ^ LeVay, Simon (2017).

Gay, Straight, and the Reason Why: The Science of Sexual Orientation . Oxford University Press. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-19-029737-4 .

OL 26246092M – via Open Library .

^ Bailey J (April 2003).

The Man Who Would Be Queen . Joseph Henry Press. pp.

131– 132.

ISBN 978-0-309-08418-5 .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ "Kinsey's Heterosexual-Homosexual Rating Scale" . The Kinsey Institute .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2016 . Retrieved 8 September 2011 .

^ Mary Zeiss Stange; Carol K. Oyster; Jane E. Sloan (2011).

Encyclopedia of Women in Today's World . Sage Pubns. p. 2016.

ISBN 978-1-4129-7685-5 .

Archived from the original on 14 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2011 .

^ * Bailey, et al. (2016).

"Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science" .

Psychological Science in the Public Interest .

17 (2): 45– 101.

doi : 10.1177/1529100616637616 .

PMID 27113562 .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2020 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

Sexual fluidity is situation-dependent flexibility in a person's sexual responsiveness, which makes it possible for some individuals to experience desires for either men or women under certain circumstances regardless of their overall sexual orientation....We expect that in all cultures the vast majority of individuals are sexually predisposed exclusively to the other sex (i.e., heterosexual) and that only a minority of individuals are sexually predisposed (whether exclusively or non-exclusively) to the same sex.

Dennis Coon; John O. Mitterer (2012).

Introduction to Psychology: Gateways to Mind and Behavior with Concept Maps and Reviews .

Cengage Learning . p. 372.

ISBN 978-1111833633 . Retrieved 18 February 2016 .

Sexual orientation is a deep part of personal identity and is usually quite stable. Starting with their earliest erotic feelings, most people remember being attracted to either the opposite sex or the same sex. ... The fact that sexual orientation is usually quite stable doesn't rule out the possibility that for some people sexual behavior may change during the course of a lifetime.

Eric Anderson; Mark McCormack (2016).

"Measuring and Surveying Bisexuality" .

The Changing Dynamics of Bisexual Men's Lives .

Springer Science & Business Media . p. 47.

ISBN 978-3-319-29412-4 .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

[R]esearch suggests that women's sexual orientation is slightly more likely to change than men's (Baumeister 2000; Kinnish et al. 2005). The notion that sexual orientation can change over time is known as sexual fluidity . Even if sexual fluidity exists for some women, it does not mean that the majority of women will change sexual orientations as they age – rather, sexuality is stable over time for the majority of people.

^ "Appropriate Therapeutic Responses to Sexual Orientation" (PDF) .

American Psychological Association . 2009. pp. 63, 86.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 June 2013 . Retrieved 3 February 2015 .

^ "Relationship Satisfaction and Commitment" . Eurekalert.org. 22 January 2008.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Duffy, S.M/; C.E. Rusbult (1985).

"Satisfaction and commitment in homosexual and heterosexual relationships" .

Journal of Homosexuality .

12 (2): 1– 23.

doi : 10.1300/J082v12n02_01 .

PMID 3835198 . Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 July 2009 .

^ Charlotte, Baccman; Per Folkesson; Torsten Norlander (1999).

"Expectations of romantic relationships: A comparison between homosexual and heterosexual men with regard to Baxter's criteria" .

Social Behavior and Personality .

27 (4): 363– 374.

doi : 10.2224/sbp.1999.27.4.363 .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2019 . Retrieved 4 October 2012 .

^ "Coming Out: A Journey" . Utahpridecenter.org.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2009 . Retrieved 22 July 2012 .

^ In a joint statement with other major American medical organizations, the APA says that "different people realize at different points in their lives that they are heterosexual, gay, lesbian, or bisexual".

"Just the Facts About Sexual Orientation & Youth: A Primer for Principals, Educators and School Personnel" . American Academy of Pediatrics, American Counseling Association, American Association of School Administrators, American Federation of Teachers, American Psychological Association, American School Health Association, The Interfaith Alliance, National Association of School Psychologists, National Association of Social Workers, National Education Association. 1999. Archived from the original on 7 August 2007 . Retrieved 28 August 2007 .

^ "The Coming Out Continuum" , Human Rights Campaign , archived from the original on 2 November 2007 , retrieved 4 May 2007 ^ Neumann, Caryn E (2004), "Outing" , glbtq.com , archived from the original on 9 June 2007 ^ Maggio, Rosalie (1991), The Dictionary of Bias-Free Usage: A Guide to Nondiscriminatory Language , Oryx Press, p.

208 , ISBN 0-89774-653-8 ^ Tatchell, Peter (23 April 2007), "Outing hypocrites is justified" , New Statesman , archived from the original on 14 September 2008 , retrieved 4 May 2007 ^ Caceres, C.; Konda, K.; Pecheny, M.; Chatterjee, A.; Lyerla, R. (2006).

"Estimating the number of men who have sex with men in low and middle income countries" .

Sexually Transmitted Infections .

82 (Suppl. III): iii3 – iii9 .

doi : 10.1136/sti.2005.019489 .

PMC 2576725 .

PMID 16735290 .

^ International HIV/AIDS Alliance (2003).

Between Men: HIV/STI Prevention For Men Who Have Sex With Men (PDF) .

OCLC 896761012 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 June 2021 . Retrieved 5 October 2020 .

^ Billy JO, Tanfer K, Grady WR, Klepinger DH (1993). "The sexual behavior of men in the United States".

Family Planning Perspectives .

25 (2): 52– 60.

doi : 10.2307/2136206 .

JSTOR 2136206 .

PMID 8491287 .

^ Fay RE, Turner CF, Klassen AD, Gagnon JH (January 1989). "Prevalence and patterns of same-gender sexual contact among men".

Science .

243 (4889): 338– 48.

Bibcode : 1989Sci...243..338F .

doi : 10.1126/science.2911744 .

PMID 2911744 .

^ Sell RL, Wells JA, Wypij D (June 1995). "The prevalence of homosexual behavior and attraction in the United States, the United Kingdom and France: results of national population-based samples".

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

24 (3): 235– 48.

doi : 10.1007/BF01541598 .

PMID 7611844 .

S2CID 12929812 .

^ a b Hope, Debra A, ed. (2009).

Contemporary Perspectives on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Identities . Nebraska Symposium on Motivation. Vol. 54.

doi : 10.1007/978-0-387-09556-1 .

ISBN 978-0-387-09555-4 .

^ "Key Demographic and Economic Characteristics of Same-Sex and Opposite-Sex Couples Differed" .

Census.gov . United States Census Bureau. 2022 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

^ Gary Gates (April 2011).

"How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender?" .

The Williams Institute . Archived from the original on 21 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ "Sexual Orientation and Health Among U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2013." Archived 4 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine CDC . 15 July 2014. 15 July 2014. p.3.

^ Gates, Gary J.; Newport, Frank (18 October 2012).

"Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults Identify as LGBT" .

Gallup .

Archived from the original on 2 September 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ "Gallup survey claims 3.4 percent in U.S. are LGBT" .

CBS News .

Associated Press . 18 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2015 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ Jayson, Sharon (19 October 2012).

"New survey: 3.4% of U.S. adults are LGBT" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 13 January 2015 .

^ Newport, Frank (22 May 2018).

"In U.S., Estimate of LGBT Population Rises to 4.5%" .

Gallup .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2018 . Retrieved 17 June 2018 .

^ a b c d Black, Dan; Gates, Gary; Sanders, Seth; Taylor, Lowell (2000).

"Demographics of the Gay and Lesbian Population in the United States: Evidence from Available Systematic Data Sources" .

Demography .

37 (2): 139– 154.

doi : 10.2307/2648117 .

JSTOR 2648117 .

PMID 10836173 .

^ Lamberg, L. (1998).

"Gay Is Okay With APA—Forum Honors Landmark 1973 Events" .

JAMA .

280 (6): 497– 499.

doi : 10.1001/jama.280.6.497 .

PMID 9707127 .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2013 . Retrieved 29 September 2012 .

^ a b American Psychological Association: Appropriate Therapeutic Responses to Sexual Orientation Archived 15 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Stop discrimination against homosexual men and women" . World Health Organisation – Europe. 17 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2012 . Retrieved 8 March 2012 .

^ "The decision of the World Health Organisation 15 years ago constitutes a historic date and powerful symbol for members of the LGBT community" . ILGA. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Shoffman, Marc (17 May 2006), "Homophobic stigma – A community cause" , PinkNews.co.uk , archived from the original on 19 April 2007 , retrieved 4 May 2007 ^ The New York Times : Homosexuality Not an Illness, Chinese Say Archived 22 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cabaj, R; Stein, T. eds.

Textbook of Homosexuality and Mental Health , p.421 ^ Sandfort, T; et al. (eds.). "Chapter 2".

Lesbian and Gay Studies: An Introductory, Interdisciplinary Approach .

^ "Answers to Your Questions: For a Better Understanding of Sexual Orientation & Homosexuality" (PDF) . American Psychological Association.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2014 . Retrieved 20 December 2010 .

^ "Expert affidavit of Gregory M. Herek, PhD" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2010 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ a b Royal College of Psychiatrists: Statement from the Royal College of Psychiatrists' Gay and Lesbian Mental Health Special Interest Group Archived 27 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Australian Psychological Society: Sexual orientation and homosexuality Archived 17 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Statement of the American Psychological Association" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ "LGBT-Sexual Orientation: What is Sexual Orientation?" Archived 28 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine , the official web pages of APA. Accessed 9 April 2015 ^ "Resolution on Appropriate Affirmative Responses to Sexual Orientation Distress and Change Efforts" .

apa.org .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2018 . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Tasos, Emmanouil (19 September 2022).

"To What Extent are Prenatal Androgens Involved in the Development of Male Homosexuality in Humans?" .

Journal of Homosexuality .

69 (11): 1928– 1963.

doi : 10.1080/00918369.2021.1933792 .

ISSN 0091-8369 .

PMID 34080960 .

^ Ngun, TC; Vilain, E (2014). "The Biological Basis of Human Sexual Orientation".

Epigenetic Shaping of Sociosexual Interactions - from Plants to Humans . Adv Genet. Vol. 86. pp.

167– 84.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-800222-3.00008-5 .

ISBN 978-0-12-800222-3 .

PMID 25172350 .

^ Balter, Michael (9 October 2015).

"BEHAVIORAL GENETICS. Can epigenetics explain homosexuality puzzle?" .

Science .

350 (6257): 148.

doi : 10.1126/science.350.6257.148 .

ISSN 1095-9203 .

PMID 26450189 .

^ "Epigenetic Algorithm Accurately Predicts Male Sexual Orientation | ASHG" .

ashg.org . 8 October 2015.

Archived from the original on 20 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2019 .

^ Zietsch, B; Morley, K; Shekar, S; Verweij, K; Keller, M; Macgregor, S; Wright, M; Bailey, J; Martin, N (2008). "Genetic factors predisposing to homosexuality may increase mating success in heterosexuals".

Evolution and Human Behavior .

29 (6). Elsevier BV: 424– 433.

Bibcode : 2008EHumB..29..424Z .

doi : 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2008.07.002 .

ISSN 1090-5138 .

^ David P. Barash (19 November 2012).

"The Evolutionary Mystery of Homosexuality" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ Wrangham, Richard W. (2019).

The goodness paradox: the strange relationship between virtue and violence in human evolution (1 ed.). New York: Vintage Books, a division of Penguin Random House LLC.

ISBN 978-1-101-97019-5 .

^ "Marriage of Same-Sex Couples – 2006 Position Statement Canadian Psychological Association" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 April 2009 . Retrieved 2 September 2012 .

^ "Elizabeth Short, Damien W. Riggs, Amaryll Perlesz, Rhonda Brown, Graeme Kane: Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender (LGBT) Parented Families – A Literature Review prepared for The Australian Psychological Society" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2011 . Retrieved 5 November 2010 .

^ "Brief of the American Psychological Association, The California Psychological Association, The American Psychiatric Association, and the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy as Amici Curiae in support of plaintiff-appellees" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 April 2015 . Retrieved 21 December 2010 .

^ Pawelski JG, Perrin EC, Foy JM, et al. (July 2006).

"The effects of marriage, civil union, and domestic partnership laws on the health and well-being of children" .

Pediatrics .

118 (1): 349– 64.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2006-1279 .

PMID 16818585 .

^ Herek GM (September 2006).

"Legal recognition of same-sex relationships in the United States: a social science perspective" (PDF) .

The American Psychologist .

61 (6): 607– 21.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.61.6.607 .

PMID 16953748 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2010.

^ "Brief presented to the Legislative House of Commons Committee on Bill C38 by the Canadian Psychological Association" (PDF) . 2 June 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 September 2012 .

^ American Psychological Association Lesbian & Gay Parenting Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Bailey et al. 2016 , p. 84.

^ DONALDSON JAMES, SUSAN (23 June 2011).

"Census 2010: One-Quarter of Gay Couples Raising Children" . United States: ABC News.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2019 . Retrieved 11 July 2013 .

Still, more than 80 percent of the children being raised by gay couples are not adopted, according to Gates.

^ a b Bailey et al. 2016 , p. 87.

^ Wilson, Glen; Rahman, Qazi (2008).

Born Gay? The Psychobiology of Sex Orientation . Internet Archive. London : Peter Owen. p. 36.

ISBN 978-0-7206-1309-4 .

OL 32175341M .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "MSM in Africa: highly stigmatized, vulnerable and in need of urgent HIV prevention" . Aidsportal.org. Archived from the original on 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ "UNAIDS: Men who have sex with men" . UNAIDS. Archived from the original (asp) on 18 June 2008 . Retrieved 24 July 2008 .

^ Greenwood, Cseneca; Mario Ruberte (9 April 2004).

"African American Community and HIV (Slide 14 mentions TG women)" . East Bay AIDS Education and Training Center. Archived from the original (ppt) on 10 September 2008 . Retrieved 24 July 2008 .

^ Operario D, Burton J, Underhill K, Sevelius J (January 2008). "Men who have sex with transgender women: challenges to category-based HIV prevention".

AIDS Behav .

12 (1): 18– 26.

doi : 10.1007/s10461-007-9303-y .

PMID 17705095 .

S2CID 31831055 .

^ Operario D, Burton J (April 2000).

"HIV-related tuberculosis in a transgender network—Baltimore, Maryland, and New York City area, 1998–2000" .

MMWR Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep .

49 (15): 317– 20.

PMID 10858008 .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 9 September 2017 .

^ Young RM, Meyer IH (July 2005).

"The trouble with "MSM" and "WSW": erasure of the sexual-minority person in public health discourse" .

Am J Public Health .

95 (7): 1144– 9.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2004.046714 .

PMC 1449332 .

PMID 15961753 .

^ "STI Epi Update: Oral Contraceptive and Condom Use" .

Public Health Agency of Canada . 23 April 1998. Archived from the original on 27 September 2006 . Retrieved 11 July 2007 .

^ Cber / Fda.

"FDA Policy on Blood Donations from Men Who Have Sex with Other Men" .

Food and Drug Administration . Archived from the original on 11 October 2007 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Schlager, Neil, ed. (1998).

Gay & Lesbian Almanac . St. James Press.

ISBN 1-55862-358-2 , p.152.

^ Meyer, Ilan H.

(September 2003).

"Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: conceptual issues and research evidence" .

Psychological Bulletin .

129 (5): 674– 97.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.129.5.674 .

PMC 2072932 .

PMID 12956539 .

^ "Black gay men, lesbians, have fewer mental disorders than whites, says Mailman School of PH study" . Eurekalert.org.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Gibson, P. (1989), "Gay and Lesbian Youth Suicide", in Fenleib, Marcia R. (ed.), Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Youth Suicide , United States Government Printing Office, ISBN 0-16-002508-7 ^ Balsam, Kimberly F.; Esther D. Rothblum (June 2005).

"Victimization Over the Life Span: A Comparison of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Heterosexual Siblings" (PDF) .

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology .

73 (3): 477– 487.

doi : 10.1037/0022-006x.73.3.477 .

PMID 15982145 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 March 2007.

^ Caruso, Kevin, "Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, and Transgender Suicide" , Suicide.org , archived from the original on 30 April 2007 , retrieved 4 May 2007 ^ Wilson, Jacque (2 July 2008).

"24-hour help for gay youth" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2014 . Retrieved 26 July 2015 .

^ Shyamantha, Asokan (11 December 2013).

"India's Supreme Court turns the clock back with gay sex ban" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 16 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Supreme Court of India scraps ban on homosexuality with its judgment on Section 377" .

NDTV . 9 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 7 September 2018 .

^ Aengus Carroll; Lucas Paoli Itaborahy (May 2015).

"State-Sponsored Homophobia: A World Survey of Laws: criminalisation, protection and recognition of same-sex love" (PDF) .

International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex association .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 April 2019 . Retrieved 5 April 2019 .

^ Ellis-Petersen, Hannah (28 March 2019).

"Brunei introduces death by stoning as punishment for gay sex" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2021 . Retrieved 28 March 2019 .

^ "Brunei says it won't enforce gay death penalty after backlash" .

Reuters . 6 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ Mendos, Lucas Ramón (2019).

State-Sponsored Homophobia 2019 (PDF) . Geneva: ILGA. p. 359.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 February 2021 .

^ "UAE Penal Code" (PDF) .

ADJD.gov.ae .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 April 2020 . Retrieved 1 February 2020 .

^ "Here are the 10 countries where homosexuality may be punished by death" .

The Washington Post . 16 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ a b Donovan, James M; American Association of Law Libraries Standing Committee on Lesbian and Gay Issues (2007), Sexual Orientation and the Law , William S. Hein & Co., ISBN 978-0-8377-0166-0 § 5:17 ^ "Executive Order 13087 of May 28, 1998" (PDF) , Federal Register , vol. 63, no. 105, 2 June 1998, archived from the original (PDF) on 18 November 2004 , retrieved 7 September 2007 ^ Ashton v. Civiletti , 613 F.2d 923, 20 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. ( BNA ) 1601, 21 Empl. Prac. Dec. ( CCH ) paragraph 30297 (D.C. Cir. 1979) ^ Kelly v. City of Oakland , 198 F.3d 779, 81 Fair Empl. Prac. Cas. (BNA) 1455, 77 Empl. Prac. Dec. (CCH) paragraph 46281 (9th Cir. 1999) ^ Oncale v. Sundowner Offshore Services, Inc.

, 523 U.S.

75 (1998).

^ Price Waterhouse v. Hopkins , 490 U.S.

228 (1989).

^ Renter's Rights Against Sexual Orientation Discrimination , archived from the original on 10 December 2007 , retrieved 7 September 2007 ^ "State Hate Crime Laws" (PDF) , Anti-Defamation League , June 2006, archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2007 , retrieved 4 May 2007 ^ "President Barack Obama Signs Hate Crimes Legislation into Law" . HRC. 28 October 2009. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ^ Salt Lake City, UT (20 October 2004).

"First Presidency Message on Same-Gender Marriage" . Newsroom.lds.org. Archived from the original on 3 June 2008 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Brownback, Sam (9 July 2004).

"Defining Marriage Down – We need to protect marriage" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 1 June 2008.

^ " The Family: A Proclamation to the World " . Lds.org. 23 September 1995.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 August 2010 .

^ Gove, Michael (24 December 2002).

"I'd like to say this, but it might land me in prison" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 18 September 2008 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 .

^ "Christian group likens Tory candidate review to witch hunt" .

CBC News . 28 November 2007. Archived from the original on 5 June 2008.

^ Moldover, Judith (31 October 2007).

"Employer's Dilemma: When Religious Expression and Gay Rights Cross" .

New York Law Journal .

Archived from the original on 28 September 2008 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 .

^ Ritter, Bob (January–February 2008).

"Collision of religious and gay rights in the workplace" .

Humanist . Archived from the original on 5 March 2012.

^ "Bishop loses gay employment case" .

BBC News Online . 18 July 2007.

Archived from the original on 30 September 2017 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 .

^ Beckford, Martin (5 June 2008).

"Catholic adoption service stops over gay rights" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022.

^ LeBlanc, Steve (10 March 2006).

"Catholic Charities to halt adoptions over issue involving gays" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2009 .

^ Mercer, Greg (24 April 2008).

"Christian Horizons rebuked: Employer ordered to compensate fired gay worker, abolish code of conduct" .

The Record .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2008 . Retrieved 21 August 2009 .

^ Gallagher, Maggie (15 May 2006).

"Banned in Boston: The coming conflict between same-sex marriage and religious liberty" . Vol. 011, no. 33. Archived from the original on 16 May 2006 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 .

^ Capuzzo, Jill (14 August 2007).

"Church Group Complains of Civil Union Pressure" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 8 February 2017 .

^ Capuzzo, Jill (18 September 2007).

"Group Loses Tax Break Over Gay Union Issue" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2017 . Retrieved 31 March 2010 .

^ Moore, Carrie (15 May 2008).

"LDS Church expresses disappointment in California gay marriage decision" .

Deseret News . Archived from the original on 1 June 2009 . Retrieved 21 August 2009 .

^ "Proceedings of the American Psychological Association, Incorporated, for the legislative year 2004. Minutes of the meeting of the Council of Representatives July 28 & 30, 2004, Honolulu, HI" . American Psychological Association. Archived from the original on 15 February 2010 . Retrieved 18 November 2004 .

^ "Anti-LGBT views still prevail, global survey finds" .

The Guardian . 17 May 2016.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 August 2019 .

^ "Religious Belief and National Belonging in Central and Eastern Europe" .

Pew Research Center . 10 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2019 . Retrieved 4 August 2019 .

^ Adamczyk, Amy (2017).

Cross-National Public Opinion about Homosexuality: Examining Attitudes across the Globe . University of California Press. pp.

3– 7.

ISBN 9780520963597 .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 12 February 2017 .

^ Coleman, Hazir (2019).

"The Impact of Discrimination Against The LGBTQ Community" .

Ramifications .

1 (1).

^ Takács, Judit (April 2006).

"Social exclusion of young lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people in Europe" (PDF) .

^ "A brief history of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender social movements" .

www.apa.org . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ "Love is a human right" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ "Ahmady, Kameel. The Narrative of Lesbian Gays and Bisexual in Iran and the Chronic Closet, Swift Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities, Vol 5(1) pp. 01–022 March 2019" (PDF) .

Swift Journal of Social Sciences and Humanities .

^ a b Ahmady, Kameel Et al 2018: Forbidden Tale (A comprehensive study on lesbian, gay, bisexuals (LGB) in Iran). Mehri Publishing, London-UK .

^ Kameel Ahmady (11 December 2018).

"Migration and Gender for Iranian LGBT" .

The Journal of International Relations, Peace Studies, and Development .

4 (1).

ISSN 2429-2133 .

^ Ahmady, Kameel (3 June 2023).

"CULTURAL PATHOLOGY OF MALE CIRCUMCISION IN IRAN: FOCUSING ON CHILDREN'S RIGHTS AND THE RIGHT TO THE BODY" .

Russian Law Journal .

11 (12s).

ISSN 2313-7851 .

^ Ahmady, Kameel (10 December 2018).

"LGBT in Iran, Citizens with no rights? A Comprehensive Study on LGBT in Iran: Anaiysing current law, discussing legal rights of LGBT's and way forward" .

Political Sociology of Iran (in Persian).

1 (3): 253– 291.

doi : 10.30510/psi.2022.352097.3746 .

ISSN 2676-6663 .

^ " "The situation of gays in Iran" [The situation of LGBTQ in Iran.]" (in Persian).

^ Ahmady, Kameel (11 May 2023).

"Investigating the Dynamics of the Iranian LGBT Community from Legal and Religious Perspectives" .

Lampyrid: The Journal of Bioluminescent Beetle Research .

13 : 846– 869.

ISSN 2041-4900 .

^ Ahmady, Kameel (2021).

"LGBT IN IRAN: THE HOMOPHOBIC LAWS AND SOCIAL SYSTEM IN ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN" .

PalArch's Journal of Archaeology of Egypt / Egyptology .

18 (18): 1446– 1464.

ISSN 1567-214X .

^ "Ahmady, Kameel. Narratives and minority: Stories from lesbian, gay and bisexual individuals in Iran: And an overview on the prevalence of LGB groups, Paper presented at the 2th International Conferences on Economics and Social Sciences Hosted by The Polytechnic of Guarda PORTUGAL, pp. 543–557, August 27 – 28, 2022".

2th International Conferences on Economics and Social Sciences .

^ Tausch, Arno (2025), Tausch, Arno (ed.), "The Potential for Violence Against Homosexuals and Strategies of Advancing Tolerant Gender Social Norms and Democracy" , Homonegativity and Religiously Motivated Political Extremism: A Study Based on World Values Survey Data from 88 Countries and Territories , SpringerBriefs in Political Science, Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, pp.

93– 107, doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-66202-7_6 , ISBN 978-3-031-66202-7 , retrieved 20 April 2025 ^ "Charge #1 and specifications preferred by the Presbytery of Southern California against The Rev. C. Lee Irons" (PDF) . Presbytery of Southern California of the Orthodox Presbyterian Church . Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 July 2008 . Retrieved 27 June 2008 .

claiming that homosexuality is an unchosen "condition," rather than a sin of the heart, ... contradicts the teaching of Scripture that both the desire and the act are sin.

^ Sex and Society – Volume 3 – Page 824 ^ The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Religion and Social Justice – Page 543, Michael D. Palmer, Stanley M. Burgess – 2012 ^ Cabezón 1992 , p. vii.

^ "Mental Health American, Bullying and Gay Youth" . "Mental Health America" formerly National Mental Health Association. Archived from the original on 14 April 2012 . Retrieved 27 June 2012 .

^ "Half of young Dutch people reject homosexuality" . Expatica/COC. Archived from the original on 1 December 2011 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 .

^ "Riddle Homophobia Scale" .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ Michael Lamb, PhD: Affidavit – United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts (2009) Archived 25 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Gregory M. Herek, PhD: Facts About Homosexuality and Child Molestation Archived 19 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ American Psychological Association: Lesbian & Gay Parenting Archived 23 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Victims" , FBI , archived from the original on 8 July 2016 , retrieved 26 July 2013 ^ " 'Honor killings' target Turkey's LGBT community" . CBS News. 12 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ Di Piero Russo (5 August 2011).

"Sei il disonore della famiglia" e accoltella il fratello gay" . bari.repubblica.it.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Father confesses to killing his own son in landmark homosexual murder case" . hurriyetdailynews.com. 25 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ "Morocco Situation of LGBT Persons" (PDF) . Danish Immigration Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 August 2019 . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ Smith, Dinitia (7 February 2004).

"Love That Dare Not Squeak Its Name" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2010 . Retrieved 10 September 2007 .

^ Gordon, Dennis (10 April 2007).

" 'Catalogue of Life' reaches one million species" .

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research . Archived from the original on 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 10 September 2007 .

^ "Gay Lib for the Animals: A New Look At Homosexuality in Nature – 2/1/1999 – Publishers Weekly" . Publishersweekly.com. Archived from the original on 29 July 2012 . Retrieved 2 September 2012 .

^ Bailey, N. W.; Zuk, M. (2009).

"Same-sex sexual behavior and evolution" (PDF) .

Trends in Ecology & Evolution .

24 (8): 439– 446.

Bibcode : 2009TEcoE..24..439B .

doi : 10.1016/j.tree.2009.03.014 .

PMID 19539396 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 May 2013 . Retrieved 21 April 2013 .

^ Gómez, José M.; et al. (3 October 2023).

"The evolution of same-sex sexual behaviour in mammals" .

Nature .

14 (5719) 5719.

Bibcode : 2023NatCo..14.5719G .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-023-41290-x .

PMC 10547684 .

PMID 37788987 .

^ Zimmer, Carl (3 October 2023).

"Same-Sex Behavior Evolved in Many Mammals to Reduce Conflict, Study Suggests" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2023 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) References Books 1980s Adam, Barry (1987).

The Rise of a Gay and Lesbian Movement , G. K. Hall & Co.

ISBN 0-8057-9714-9 Boswell, John (1980), Christianity, Social Tolerance, and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe from the Beginning of the Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century , University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-06711-7 Dover, Kenneth J., Greek Homosexuality , Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd. 1979, ISBN 0-674-36261-6 (hardcover), ISBN 0-674-36270-5 (paperback) d'Emilio, John Sexual Politics, Sexual Communities: The Making of a Homosexual Minority in the United States, 1940–1970 , University of Chicago Press 1983, ISBN 0-226-14265-5 Foucault, Michel (1986), The History of Sexuality , Pantheon Books, ISBN 0-394-41775-5 Roth, Norman.

The care and feeding of gazelles: Medieval Arabic and Hebrew love poetry.

IN: Lazar & Lacy.

Poetics of Love in the Middle Ages , George Mason University Press 1989, ISBN 0-913969-25-7 1990s Bagemihl, Bruce (1999), Biological Exuberance: Animal Homosexuality and Natural Diversity , St. Martin's Press, ISBN 0-312-19239-8 , archived from the original on 13 February 2021 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Bérubé, Allan, Coming out under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two , New York: MacMillan 1990, ISBN 0-02-903100-1 Brown, Lester B. (1997), Lester B. Brown (ed.), Two spirit people: American Indian, lesbian women and gay men , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-7890-0003-3 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Bullough, Vern L.; Brundage, James A. (2000), Handbook of medieval sexuality , Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-8153-3662-4 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Chauncey, George (1995), Gay New York: Gender, Urban Culture, and the Making of the Gay Male World, 1890–1940 (reprint, illustrated ed.), Basic Books , ISBN 978-0-465-02621-0 Cabezón, José Ignacio (1992).

Buddhism, sexuality, and gender . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-0758-5 .

Dynes, Wayne R.; Johansson, Warren; Percy, William A.; Donaldson, Stephen (1990), Encyclopedia of homosexuality (2 Volumes) , Garland Pub., ISBN 978-0-8240-6544-7 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Faderman, Lillian (1993), Odd girls and twilight lovers: a history of lesbian life in twentieth-century America (4 ed.), Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-07488-9 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Hinsch, Bret, Passions of the Cut Sleeve: The Male Homosexual Tradition in China , The University of California Press, 1990, ISBN 0-520-06720-7 Johansson, Warren; William A. Percy (1994), Outing: shattering the conspiracy of silence , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-56024-419-6 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Michael, Robert T. (1994), Sex in America: a definitive survey , Little, Brown, ISBN 978-0-316-91191-7 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Percy, William Armstrong (1998), Pederasty and Pedagogy in Archaic Greece , University of Illinois Press, ISBN 978-0-252-06740-2 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Ramos, Juanita (1987), Compañeras: Latina lesbians (an anthology) , Latina Lesbian History Project, archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Rousseau, George, Perilous Enlightenment: Pre- and Post-Modern Discourses—Sexual, Historical , Manchester University Press 1991, ISBN 0-7190-3301-2 Schmitt, Arno; Jehoeda Sofer (1992), Arno Schmitt; Jehoeda Sofer (eds.), Sexuality and eroticism among males in Moslem societies , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-56024-047-1 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Terry, Jennifer (1999), An American obsession: science, medicine, and homosexuality in modern society , University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-79367-2 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 2000s Bernstein, Elizabeth; Schaffner, Laurie (2005), Regulating sex: the politics of intimacy and identity , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-94869-2 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Bullough, Vern L. (2002), Before Stonewall: activists for gay and lesbian rights in historical context , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-56023-193-6 , archived from the original on 30 November 2016 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Davidson, James (2007).

The Greeks And Greek Love: A Radical Reappraisal of Homosexuality in Ancient Greece . Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0-297-81997-4 .

Gunther, Scott Eric (2009).

The Elastic Closet, A History of Homosexuality in France, 1942-present . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-230-59510-1 .

Johnson, David K. (2004), The lavender scare: the Cold War persecution of gays and lesbians in the federal government , University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-40481-3 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Myers, JoAnne (2003), Historical dictionary of the lesbian liberation movement: still the rage , Scarecrow Press, ISBN 978-0-8108-4506-0 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Vanita, Ruth (2002), Queering India: same-sex love and eroticism in Indian culture and society , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-92950-9 , archived from the original on 6 September 2015 , retrieved 16 June 2015 Journal articles Bagley, Christopher; Tremblay, Pierre (1998), "On the Prevalence of Homosexuality and Bisexuality, in a Random Community Survey of 750 Men Aged 18 to 27", Journal of Homosexuality , 36 (2), New York: Haworth Press: 1– 18, doi : 10.1300/j082v36n02_01 , ISSN 0091-8369 , OCLC 91129391 , PMID 9736328 Crew, Louie; Norton, Rictor (November 1974), "The Homophobic Imagination", College English , 36 (3): 272– 290, doi : 10.2307/374839 , ISSN 0010-0994 , JSTOR 374839 , OCLC 427092211 Iemmola, Francesca; Ciani, Andrea Camperio (2009), "New Evidence of Genetic Factors Influencing Sexual Orientation in Men: Female Fecundity Increase in the Maternal Line" (Article) , Archives of Sexual Behavior , 38 (3), Springer: 393– 399, doi : 10.1007/s10508-008-9381-6 , ISSN 0004-0002 , OCLC 360232526 , PMID 18561014 , S2CID 508800 LeVay, Simon (1991), "A difference in hypothalamic structure between heterosexual and homosexual men." , Science , 253 (5023): 1034– 1037, Bibcode : 1991Sci...253.1034L , doi : 10.1126/science.1887219 , ISSN 0036-8075 , OCLC 121655996 , PMID 1887219 , S2CID 1674111 , archived from the original on 10 February 2009 , retrieved 26 September 2009 McConaghy, N; Hadzi-Pavlovic, D; Stevens, C; Manicavasagar, V; Keller, M; MacGregor, S; Wright, M; Bailey, J; et al. (2006), "Fraternal Birth Order and Ratio of Heterosexual/Homosexual Feelings in Women and Men", Journal of Homosexuality , 51 (4): 161– 174, doi : 10.1300/J082v51n04_09 , ISSN 0091-8369 , OCLC 202629885 , PMID 17135133 , S2CID 24828176 Online articles Burr, Chandler.

Homosexuality and biology Archived 16 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

The Atlantic , June 1997, ISSN 1072-7825 . An overview of recent research in layman's language.

BBC News (Feb 1998) Archived 19 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine : Fingerprints Study BBC News (Apr 1999) Archived 7 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine : Doubt cast on 'gay gene' "Pointing the Finger at Androgen as a Cause of Homosexuality" .

WebMD . March 2000.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2017 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 .

BBC News (Oct 2004) Archived 4 July 2006 at the Wayback Machine : Genetics of homosexuality James Davidson, London Review of Books , 2 June 2005, "Mr and Mr and Mrs and Mrs" Archived 12 October 2005 at the Wayback Machine —detailed review of The Friend , by Alan Bray, a history of same-sex marriage and other same-sex formal bonds External links Homosexuality at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy – Homosexuality Sexual Orientation, Controversy and Science v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category v t e Gender and sexual identities Gender identities Genders Man Woman Male Female Androgyne Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Femboy Gender bender Gender fluidity Gender neutrality Gender variance Masculine of center Non-binary / genderqueer Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transsexual Third genders and sexes Androgynos Apwint Bakla Binabinaaine Bugis genders Bissu Calabai Calalai Chibados Enaree Eunuch Galli Fa'afafine Fakafifine Femminiello Güevedoce Hijra Kathoey Köçek Koekchuch Lhamana Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Nádleehi Nullo Palopa Sipiniq Sworn virgin Travesti Tumtum Two-spirit Vakasalewalewa Winkte X-gender Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Alternative labels Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Down-low Fictosexual Gay Gay men Gray asexual Demisexual Aegosexual Heteroflexible Khanith Lesbian women Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polysexual Queer Questioning Same gender loving Takatāpui Social aspects Sociosexuality Antisexuality Asociality Homosociality Heterosociality Other Achillean Allosexuality Analloeroticism Androphilia and gynephilia Aromanticism Attraction to transgender people Kinsey scale Monosexuality Plurisexuality Postgenderism Romantic orientation Sapphism See also Aphobia Acephobia Arophobia Anti-gender movement Discrimination against non-binary people Discrimination against transgender men Discrimination against transgender women Gender assignment Gender modality Gender roles Gender self-identification Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people Mental health of LGBTQ people Queer heterosexuality Right to personal identity Sex as a biological variable Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Split attraction model Suicide among LGBTQ people Transgender archaeology Transgender inequality Transmisogyny Transphobia Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Argentina Poland Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Homosexuality&oldid=1306214464 " Categories : Homosexuality LGBTQ studies Love Psychiatric false diagnosis 1860s neologisms Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from November 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from June 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Wikipedia references cleanup from April 2025 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2025 Articles needing additional references from January 2018 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Homosexuality 155 languages Add topic

