Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career as author 3 De iure naturae et gentium 4 De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem 5 Legacy and reputation 6 Works 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Samuel von Pufendorf 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German jurist and philosopher (1632–1694) "Puffendorf" redirects here. For the town, see Puffendorf (town) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Samuel von Pufendorf" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Samuel von Pufendorf 1706 engraving Born Samuel Pufendorf ( 1632-01-08 ) 8 January 1632 Dorfchemnitz , Electorate of Saxony, Holy Roman Empire Died 26 October 1694 (1694-10-26) (aged 62) Berlin , Margraviate of Brandenburg, Holy Roman Empire Education Education University of Leipzig University of Jena Philosophical work Region Western philosophy School Natural law Institutions University of Heidelberg University of Lund Main interests Jurisprudence , political philosophy , economics and history Signature Samuel von Pufendorf ( / ˈ p uː f ən d ɔːr f / ; [ 1 ] German: [ˈpuːfəndɔʁf] ; 8 January 1632 – 26 October 1694) was a German jurist , political philosopher , economist and historian . He was born Samuel Pufendorf and ennobled in 1694; he was made a baron by Charles XI of Sweden a few months before his death at age 62. Among his achievements are his commentaries and revisions of the natural law theories of Thomas Hobbes and Hugo Grotius .

His political concepts are part of the cultural background of the American Revolution . Pufendorf is seen as an important precursor of Enlightenment in Germany . He was involved in constant quarrels with clerical circles and frequently had to defend himself against accusations of heresy , despite holding largely traditional Christian views on matters of dogma and doctrine.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] Pufendorf was born at Dorfchemnitz in the Electorate of Saxony . His father Esaias Elias Pufendorf from Glauchau was a Lutheran pastor, and Samuel Pufendorf himself was destined for the ministry.

Educated at the Fürstenschule at Grimma , he was sent to study theology at the University of Leipzig . The narrow and dogmatic teaching was repugnant to Pufendorf, and he soon abandoned it for the study of public law .

Leaving Leipzig altogether, Pufendorf relocated to University of Jena , where he formed an intimate friendship with Erhard Weigel , the mathematician , whose influence helped to develop his remarkable independence of character. Under the influence of Weigel, he started to read Hugo Grotius , Thomas Hobbes and René Descartes .

Pufendorf left Jena in 1658 as Magister and became a tutor in the family of Peter Julius Coyet , one of the resident ministers of King Charles X Gustav of Sweden , at Copenhagen with the help of his brother Esaias [ de ] , a diplomat in the Swedish service.

At this time, Charles was endeavoring to impose an unwanted alliance on Denmark. In the middle of the negotiations he opened hostilities and the Danes turned with anger against his envoys. Coyet succeeded in escaping, but the second minister, Steno Bielke , and the rest of the staff were arrested and thrown into prison. Pufendorf was held in captivity for eight months. He occupied himself in meditating upon what he had read in the works of Hugo Grotius and Thomas Hobbes, and mentally constructed a system of universal law. At the end of his captivity, he accompanied his pupils, the sons of Coyet, to the University of Leiden .

Career as author [ edit ] De jure naturae et gentium , 1744 At Leiden, he was permitted to publish, in 1660, the fruits of his reflections under the title of Elementa jurisprudentiae universalis libri duo ("Elements of Universal Jurisprudence: Two Books"). The work was dedicated to Charles Louis, elector palatine , who created for Pufendorf a new chair at the University of Heidelberg , that of the law of nature and nations. This professorship was first of its kind in the world. Pufendorf married Katharina Elisabeth von Palthen, the widow of a colleague, in 1665.

[ citation needed ] In 1667 he wrote, with the assent of the elector palatine, a tract De statu imperii germanici liber unus ("On the Present State of the German Empire: One Book"). Published under the cover of a pseudonym at Geneva in 1667, it was supposed to be addressed by a gentleman of Verona , Severinus de Monzambano, to his brother Laelius. The pamphlet caused a sensation. Its author directly challenged the organization of the Holy Roman Empire , denounced in the strongest terms the faults of the house of Austria, and attacked with vigour the politics of the ecclesiastical princes. Before Pufendorf, Bogislaw Philipp von Chemnitz [ de ] , publicist and soldier, had written, under the pseudonym of "Hippolytus a Lapide", De ratione status in imperio nostro romano-germanico ("On The Reason of the Present State in Our Holy Roman Empire"). Inimical, like Pufendorf, to the Austrian House of Habsburg , Chemnitz had gone so far as to make an appeal to France and Sweden . Pufendorf, on the contrary, rejected all idea of foreign intervention, and advocated that of national initiative.

[ citation needed ] When Pufendorf went on to criticise a new tax on official documents, he did not get the chair of law and had to leave Heidelberg in 1668. Chances for advancement were few in a Germany that still suffered from the ravages of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648), so Pufendorf went to Sweden where that year he was called to the University of Lund . His sojourn there was fruitful.

[ citation needed ] In 1672 appeared De jure naturae et gentium libri octo ("On The Law of Nature and of Nations: Eight Books") and of, and in 1673 a résumé of it under the title De officio hominis et civis iuxta legem naturalem ("On the Duty of Man and Citizen, according to Natural Law"), which, among other topics, gave his analysis of just war theory.
In De jure naturae et gentium Pufendorf took up in great measure the theories of Grotius and sought to complete them by means of the doctrines of Hobbes and of his own ideas on jus gentium ("Law of Man"). His first important point was that natural law does not extend beyond the limits of this life and that it confines itself to regulating external acts. He disputed Hobbes's conception of the state of nature and concluded that the state of nature is not one of war but of peace. But this peace is feeble and insecure, and if something else does not come to its aid it can do very little for the preservation of mankind.

[ citation needed ] As regards public law Pufendorf, while recognizing in the state ( civitas ) a moral person ( persona moralis ), teaches that the will of the state is but the sum of the individual wills that constitute it, and that this association explains the state. In this a priori conception, in which he scarcely gives proof of historical insight, he shows himself as one of the precursors of Rousseau and of the Contrat social . Pufendorf powerfully defends the idea that international law is not restricted to Christendom, but constitutes a common bond between all nations because all nations form part of humanity.

[ citation needed ] In 1677 Pufendorf was called to Stockholm as Historiographer Royal . To this new period belong Einleitung zur Historie der vornehmsten Reiche und Staaten ("Introduction to the History of the Most Distinguished Kingdoms and States" as well as Commentarium de rebus suecicis libri XXVI., ab expeditione Gustavi Adolphi regis in Germaniam ad abdicationem usque Christinae and De rebus a Carolo Gustavo gestis . In his historical works, Pufendorf wrote in a very dry style, but he professed a great respect for truth and generally drew from archival sources. However, his historical works were heavily pro-Swedish and he supported the claim that eastern Denmark was originally Swedish. In 1658 Denmark was forced to cede the eastern provinces of Skåne (Scania), Halland, and Blekinge (plus some Norwegian territories) to Sweden. Pufendorf defended this move and insisted that these provinces were "reunited" with Sweden and that the Scanian provinces had always belonged to "Götaland". He wrote that "Sweden’s old borders have been healed again".

[ 3 ] In De habitu religionis christianae ad vitam civilem he traces the limits between ecclesiastical and civil power. This work propounded for the first time the so-called "collegial" theory of church government ( Kollegialsystem ), which, developed later by the learned Lutheran theologian Christoph Matthäus Pfaff [ de ] , formed the basis of the relations of church and state in Germany and more especially in Prussia .

[ citation needed ] This theory makes a fundamental distinction between the supreme jurisdiction in ecclesiastical matters ( Kirchenhoheit or jus circa sacra ), which it conceives as inherent in the power of the state in respect of every religious communion, and the ecclesiastical power ( Kirchengewalt or jus in sacra ) inherent in the church, but in some cases vested in the state by tacit or expressed consent of the ecclesiastical body. The theory was of importance because, by distinguishing church from state while preserving the essential supremacy of the latter, it prepared the way for the principle of toleration. It was put into practice to a certain extent in Prussia in the 18th century; but it was not till the political changes of the 19th century led to a great mixture of confessions under the various state governments that it found universal acceptance in Germany. The theory initially found no acceptance in the Roman Catholic Episcopate, but it nonetheless made it possible for the Protestant governments to make a working compromise with Rome in respect of the Roman Catholic Church established in their states.

[ citation needed ] In 1688 Pufendorf was called into the service of Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg . He accepted the call, but he had no sooner arrived than the elector died. His son Frederick III fulfilled the promises of his father; and Pufendorf, historiographer and privy councillor, was instructed to write a history of the Elector Frederick William ( De rebus gestis Frederici Wilhelmi Magni ).

The King of Sweden continued to testify his goodwill towards Pufendorf, and in 1694 created him a baron. In the same year while still in Sweden, Pufendorf suffered a stroke, and died on 26 October 1694 [ 4 ] in Berlin . He was buried in the church of St Nicholas , where an inscription to his memory is still to be seen. He was succeeded as historiographer in Berlin by Charles Ancillon .

[ citation needed ] De iure naturae et gentium [ edit ] In 1672 appeared De iure naturae et gentium . This work took largely the theories of Grotius and many ideas from Hobbes, adding to them Pufendorf's own ideas to develop the law of nations. Pufendorf argues that natural law does not extend beyond the limits of this life and merely regulates only external acts. He also challenges the Hobbesian thesis of a state of nature which is a state of war or conflict. For Pufendorf too there is a state of nature, but it is a state of peace. This natural peace, however, is weak and uncertain. In terms of public law, which recognizes the state ( civitas ) as a moral person ( persona moralis ), Pufendorf argues that the will of the state is nevertheless nothing more than the sum of the individual wills that are associated within it; hence the state needs to submit to a discipline essential for human safety. This 'submission', in the sense of obedience and mutual respect, is for Pufendorf the fundamental law of reason, which is the basis of natural law. He adds that international law should not be limited or restricted only to the Christian nations, but must create a common link between all peoples, since all nations are part of humanity.

[ citation needed ] De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem [ edit ] In De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem ("On the Duty of Man and Citizen"), Pufendorf divides duties into several categories: duties towards God, duties towards oneself, and various forms of duty towards others. Duties towards oneself were classified as "duties of the soul", such as developing skills and talents, and "duties of the body", which involve not doing harm to oneself .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Legacy and reputation [ edit ] Statue of Pufendorf on the Palais Universitaire, Strasbourg , France.

John Locke , David Hume , Edward Gibbon , Voltaire , Jean-Jacques Rousseau , and Denis Diderot all recommended Pufendorf's inclusion in law curricula , and he greatly influenced Blackstone and Montesquieu .

[ citation needed ] Pufendorf's feuds with Leibniz diminished his reputation. Pufendorf and Leibniz shared many theological views, but differed in their philosophical foundation, with Pufendorf leaning toward Biblical fundamentalism .

[ 2 ] It was on the subject of the pamphlet of Severinus de Monzambano that their quarrel began. Leibniz once dismissed him as "Vir parum jurisconsultus, minime philosophus " ("A man barely a jurist, let alone a philosopher ").

[ 2 ] Works [ edit ] De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem , 1758 Craig L. Carr (ed.), The Political Writings of Samuel Pufendorf (Oxford 1994) Elementorum iurisprudentiae universalis (1660) von Pufendorf, Samuel (1660).

Elementorum Iurisprudentiae Universalis libri duo [ Elements of Universal Jurisprudence ] (in Latin).

Haga Comitum : Adriani Vlacq.

von Pufendorf, Samuel (1663).

De Obligatione Adversus Patriam (in Latin).

Heidelbergae : Wyngaerden.

De rebus gestis Philippi Augustae (1663) von Pufendorf (alias de Monzambano), Samuel (alias Severinus) (1667).

De statu imperii Germanici ad Laelium fratrem, Dominum Trezolani, liber unus (in Latin).

Geneva : Petrum Columesium.

De statu imperii Germanici (Amsterdam 1669) von Pufendorf, Samuel (1672).

De Jure Naturae Et Gentium Libri Octo [ On the Law of Nature and of Nations ] (in Latin).

Londini Scanorum : Junghans.

von Pufendorf, Samuel (1673).

De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem [ On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural Law ] (in Latin).

Londini Scanorum : Junghans.

OCLC 759611925 .

English translation: von Pufendorf, Samuel (1927).

De Officio Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem Libri Duo [ On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural Law ]. Translated by Moore, Frank Gardner . New York: Oxford University Press.

OCLC 1110799161 .

von Pufendorf, Samuel (1683).

Einleitung zu der Historie der Vornehmsten Reiche und Staaten, so itziger Zeit in Europa sich befinden (in German).

Franckfurt am Mayn : Knoch.

Commentarium de rebus suecicis libri XXVI., ab expeditione Gustavi Adolphi regis in Germaniam ad abdicationem usque Christinae De rebus a Carolo Gustavo Sueciae rege gestis commentariorum (Stockholm 1679) von Pufendorf, Samuel (1695).

De Rebus Gestis Friderici Wilhelmi Magni, Electoris Brandenburgici, Commentariorum Libri Novendecim (in Latin). Vol. I. Berolini: Schrey.

von Pufendorf, Samuel (1695).

De Rebus Gestis Friderici Wilhelmi Magni, Electoris Brandenburgici, Commentariorum Libri Novendecim (in Latin). Vol. II. Berolini: Schrey.

References [ edit ] ^ "Pufendorf" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ a b c Döring, Detlef (2010). Dascal, Marcelo (ed.).

The Practice of Reason: Leibniz and his Controversies . John Benjamins Publishing Company. p.

250 .

ISBN 9789027218872 .

^ Innledning Till Swänska Historien, (An Introduction to Swedish History), Ståkkholm 1688, page 912 ^ Luig, Klaus (2003).

"Pufendorf, Samuel Freiherr von" .

Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 21. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

3– 5 . ( full text online ).

^ Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Ethics , accessed 28 April 2021 ^ Pufendorf, S., On The Duty of Man and Citizen According to the Natural Law (1673) , Lonang Institute, accessed 28 April 2021 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Pufendorf, Samuel ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Sæther, Arild (February 2017).

Samuel Pufendorf The Grandfather of Modern Political Economy?

(PhD).

Norwegian School of Economics .

hdl : 11250/2647039 .

ISBN 978-82-405-0363-5 .

Clark, Christopher (2019).

Time and Power: Visions of History in German Politics, from the Thirty Years' War to the Third Reich . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-18165-3 .

Döring, Detlef (2010). "Leibniz's critique of Pufendorf: A dispute in the eve of the Enlightenment". In Dascal, Marcelo (ed.).

The Practice of Reason: Leibniz and his Controversies . Vol. 7. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.

doi : 10.1075/cvs.7 .

ISBN 9789027218872 .

Gángó, Gábor (2023). " Johann Christian von Boineburg, Samuel Pufendorf, and the foundation myth of modern natural law ".

History of European Ideas .

Haara, Heikki (2017).

Sociability in Samuel Pufendorf's Natural Law Theory (PhD thesis). Helsinki: University of Helsinki.

hdl : 10138/174950 .

ISBN 978-951-51-2904-8 .

Krieger, Leonard (1960). "History and Law in the Seventeenth Century: Pufendorf".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

21 (2): 198– 210.

doi : 10.2307/2708194 .

JSTOR 2708194 .

Olmstead, Clifton E. (1960).

History of Religion in the United States . Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall.

OCLC 382571 – via Internet Archive .

Phillipson, Coleman (1913).

"Samuel Pufendorf" . In Macdonell, John ; Manson, Edward (eds.).

Great Jurists of the World . London: John Murray. pp.

305– 344.

Seidler, Michael (3 November 2015).

"Pufendorf's Moral and Political Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Welzel, Hans (1958).

Die Naturrechtslehre Samuel Pufendorfs (in German). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.

doi : 10.1515/9783110902730.fm .

Wolf, Erik (1927).

Grotius, Pufendorf, Thomasius (PDF) (in German).

Tübingen : J. C. B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck) .

OCLC 492155099 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Samuel von Pufendorf .

Works by or about Samuel von Pufendorf at the Internet Archive Works by Samuel von Pufendorf at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Pufendorf, Samuel, Baron" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists ULAN KulturNav People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samuel_von_Pufendorf&oldid=1305570791 " Categories : 1632 births 1694 deaths 17th-century writers in Latin 17th-century German male writers 17th-century German philosophers Age of Enlightenment German barons Enlightenment philosophers German expatriates in the Dutch Republic German Lutherans German male non-fiction writers Academic staff of Heidelberg University Jurists from Saxony Leipzig University alumni Academic staff of Lund University People from the Electorate of Saxony People from Erzgebirgskreis German philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics German philosophers of education German philosophers of history German philosophers of law Philosophers of literature German philosophers of religion German political philosophers University of Jena alumni Cameralists Natural law ethicists 17th-century German historians Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons link is on Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Samuel von Pufendorf 33 languages Add topic

