Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Racial bias against African Americans Toggle Racial bias against African Americans subsection 1.1 African American suspects presentation in news 1.2 Journalistic practices 1.3 Media outlets and racial bias against African Americans 1.3.1 Fox News 1.3.2 ABC News 1.3.3 Search engines and racial bias against African Americans 1.4 Police bias 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Racial bias in criminal news in the United States 2 languages العربية 한국어 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Racial bias in criminal news occurs when a journalist's racial biases affect their reporting. Racial biases are a form of implicit bias , which refers to the attitudes or stereotypes that affect an individual's understanding, actions, and decisions in an unconscious manner.

[ 1 ] These biases, which encompass unfavorable assessments, are often activated involuntarily and without the awareness or intentional control of the individual. Residing deep in the subconscious , these biases are different from known biases that individuals may choose to conceal for the purposes of social and/or political correctness .

[ 2 ] [ note 1 ] Police officers have implicit bias, regardless of their ethnicity.

[ 3 ] Racial bias in criminal news reporting in the United States is a manifestation of this bias.

Racial bias against African Americans [ edit ] Further information: Criminal stereotype of African Americans and Representation of African Americans in media Racial bias has been recorded in criminal news reporting from the United States, particularly with regard to African American individuals, and a perceived fear of African Americans among European and White Americans .

[ 4 ] Historically, racism against African Americans has consisted of beliefs about African American intelligence, ambition, honesty, and other stereotypes , as well as support for segregation and support for acts of open discrimination .

[ 5 ] Dana Mastro's research on racial bias in the United States reveals persistent racial prejudice among whites, characterizing African Americans as violent and aggressive. These beliefs have been found to manifest in a heightened fear among whites of victimization at the hands of racial minorities, specifically African American males. Both theory and empirical evidence indicate that media exposure contributes to the construction and perpetuation of these perceptions by disproportionately depicting racial/ethnic minorities as criminal suspects and whites as victims in television news. Further consuming these messages has been shown to provoke prejudicial responses among white viewers.

[ 6 ] Robert Entman suggests that today's media environment suggests that old-fashioned racial images are socially undesirable and stereotyping is now subtler and stereotyped thinking is reinforced at levels likely to remain below conscious awareness. Rather than grossly demeaning distortions of yesterday's stereotyping now there is a grey area allowing for denial of the racial component. The phrase "threatening black male" allows for a negative attribute rather than an attack on racial identity.

[ 7 ] Twitter, one of the more widely used forms of social media, with over 271 million active users, is the choice of the Millennial generation to get breaking news. Using hashtags, such as #michaelbrown, when they post allows for individuals to find information in a simpler manner.

[ 8 ] The study conducted in the article Race and Punishment states that current crime coverage strategies aim to increase in the importance of a crime, thus distorting the public sense of who commits crimes, and leads to biased reactions. By over-representing whites as victims of crimes perpetrated by people of color it exaggerates crimes committed by African Americans and downplays the victimization of African Americans. For example, the majority of US homicides are intra-racial, but media accounts often portray a world in which African American male offenders are overrepresented.

[ 9 ] African American suspects presentation in news [ edit ] A study by the Sentencing Project reports that African American crime suspects were presented in more threatening contexts than whites; to specify, African American suspects were more often left unnamed and were more likely to be shown as threatening by being depicted in the physical custody of the police.

[ 9 ] Analyses of television news consistently indicate that African American males are overrepresented as perpetrators and underrepresented as victims, compared to both their white male counterparts on TV as well as real-world Department of Justice arrest reports. In these news stories, African American suspects are more likely than whites to be portrayed as nameless, menacing, and in the grasp of the police.

[ 9 ] Some evidence also suggests that audiences know the news they watch misrepresents the reality of race and crime in the United States, and those news executives know their broadcasts scare their audiences.

[ 10 ] Dana Mastro reports that African Americans are nearly four times more likely to be represented as criminals than police officers on television news—a proportion inconsistent with U.S. Department of Labor statistics. Alongside their overrepresentation as criminals in the news, African Americans also are underrepresented as victims compared with their on-air counterparts. Another study by Dixon and Williams had also concluded that is still the case in cable news channels with one difference. African American homicide victims being may be more likely shown on cable networks than on television networks when national stories like the Trayvon Martin Fatal Shooting receive constant coverage on news cycles, thus receiving more airtime on cable owned twenty four hour runs programing. This particular study also came to the conclusion that when studying this bias they would need to include a larger population of programs with more "polarizing on-air" personality, and across different parts of the country with different age groups.

[ 11 ] Further, the text of crime-related news stories also has been found to vary depending on the race of the perpetrator. For example, Dixon and Linz's research reveals that statements containing prejudicial information about criminal suspects, such as prior arrests, were significantly more likely to be associated with African Americans as opposed to white defendants, particularly in cases involving white victims. Exposure to biased messages has consequences. When the public consistently consumes the persistent overrepresentation of African American males in crime-related news stories it strengthens their cognitive association between Blacks and criminality in their mind such as the connection "Blacks and crime" and thus becomes chronically accessible for use in race-related evaluations such as: higher support for the death penalty because crime is more associated as a black problem that people need protection from and; that laziness is the only roadblock to success for people of color.

[ 12 ] Notably, as the research on media priming illustrates, even a single exposure to these unfavorable characterizations can produce stereotype-based responses.

[ 6 ] Accused of Crimes in Selected Visual Depictions for all Crimes [ citation needed ] Black White Accused named in still photo 48.9% 65.3% Accused not named in still photo 51.1% 34.7% Accused shown in motion 52.3% 66.3% Accused not shown in motion 47.7% 33.7% Accused well dressed 45.6% 69.4% Accused poorly dressed 54.4% 30.6% Accused physically held 37.6% 17.6% Accused not physically held 62.2% 82.4% Journalistic practices [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Racial bias in criminal news in the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A report published by The Sentencing Project cited studies finding that journalists gravitated towards cases where whites were the victims and cases where the assailant was African American. It quoted a 2003 paper which suggested that newsworthiness was less determined by a crime's novelty or typicality than by whether it could be "scripted using stereotypes grounded in White racism and White fear of Black crime." [ 9 ] Robert Entman studied how television news impacted white views of blacks in his article Blacks in the News: Television, Modern Racism and Cultural Change , which examined television news stories from four Chicago stations during a 6-month period in 1989–90. He found that crime reporting depicted blacks as more dangerous—at the same time that the employment of black journalists may have led viewers to believe racism was no longer significant. He believed these two factors contributed to "modern" or "symbolic racism"—which he defined as resistance to affirmative action, welfare benefits, and a sense of blacks "pushing too hard", coupled with the belief that racial discrimination was no longer an issue. According to Entman, "modern racist" whites didn't necessarily support discrimination or believe blacks inferior, but rather felt a general "negative effect" toward blacks and much of their political agenda.

[ 7 ] Number of pro-defense sound bites African American Accused of Crime White Accused of Crime None 88.8% 70.6% One 9.0% 18.6% Two or more 2.2% 10.8% Race of Police Speaking On Screen African American Accused of Crime White Accused of Crime Black Police Official 32.3% 4.0% White Police Official 48.4% 94.7% Both Black & White Police Official 19.4% 1.3% A smaller study delved a bit deeper into the tendency of journalistic racial bias by moving from data, to analyzing reporters.  An article written by Emily Drew In Critical Studies in Media Communication journal published in 2011 reviewed data from the interviews of 31 reporters from 28 major newspapers across the U.S.

[ 13 ] Each major newspaper had at one time published a series of articles covering race relations lasting from one month to a year. Throughout the different series a common theme kept emerging, they questioned why “race relations appeared to be worsening – and racial disparities increasing”.

During the interviews, the journalists analyze why the media did not help in race relations when they held the power to do so “ just by choosing which stories to cover”.  They started to investigate their own bias. They realized that two of the reasons bias most often happens in journalism is because privilege is not recognized and is due to a lack of diversity either on staff or in the city that they live and work. The journalists interviewed also recognized that this bias does not end with white reporters. One journalist was quoted, “Black folks are not immune to it either. If you get writing for a white newspaper for long enough, you start to write and even think in a white voice.”. Some short lived efforts of this study included programs aimed at hiring more people of color to staff these papers and for reporters to start becoming a part of the actual communities they were coving.

Media outlets and racial bias against African Americans [ edit ] Fox News [ edit ] Media Matters for America , a " progressive research and information center dedicated to comprehensively monitoring, analyzing, and correcting conservative misinformation in the U.S. media" [ 14 ] is an outspoken critic of Fox News , frequently accusing the channel of including racial overtones in news coverage. Furthermore, an MMFA article claims that a shooting of an Australian teen was labelled a racial hate crime by Fox News. MMFA was particularly outraged over an incident where Fox News' show On The Record With Greta Van Susteren , guest Pat Buchanan claimed that "racial hate crimes [are] 40 times more prevalent in the black community than the white community." [ 15 ] Media Matters for America also asserted that in the March 12, 2015 edition of Fox & Friends , regarding the case of the Ferguson shootings, reporter Peter Doocy described the DOJ's finding of racial bias, emphasizing that Attorney General Eric Holder "floated the possibility" of dissolving the Ferguson police department as a result, while co-host Steve Doocy linked the DOJ report and Holder's response to the shooting of two police officers in Ferguson. Holder, at a press conference stated it was revenue rather than law enforcement that drove officers to target African-Americans in the community.

[ 16 ] Doocy described the shooting, saying, "a new wave of violence comes one week after Attorney General Eric Holder vowed to dismantle that city's police department", and questioned whether it was "what he wanted." [ 17 ] ABC News [ edit ] ABC News has been seen to falter within the topic of journalism and to have a certain bias that has been painted by third parties that swayed their viewpoint. In the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal , a Philadelphia journalist and activist who was convicted and sentenced to death in 1981 for the murder of a police officer, ABC News formed a specific argument for their audience to see.

[ 18 ] Tom Gardner, a professor at Westfield State University , decided to look deeper into this case and saw many valuations within the trial that needed to be reassessed. The Media Education Foundation took this case under their wings and decided to tell the story of this controversial case with Gardner and asked "important questions about the responsibility that journalists have when it comes to issues of life and death." [ 19 ] The documentary Framing an Execution: The Media & Mumia Abu-Jamal looks at the way Sam Donaldson from the ABC program 20/20 covered the case. Many scholars believe that Abu-Jamal is a political prisoner and is only in jail because of his specific views and criticisms of how police have dealt with the black community. This case only got recognition after people continued to dispute that Abu-Jamal's trial was fair or lawful, to the extent that it reached national and international attention.

[ 19 ] 20/20 told this case as an emotional story, minimalizing its importance. Sam Donaldson began his interviews with the widow, Maureen Faulkner. She was portrayed as a damsel in distress, making her a more sympathetic figure. From the beginning the specific angle of ABC News and the direction of Sam Donaldson's bias could be seen.

[ 18 ] ABC stated in their letter sent to the Pennsylvania prison authorities when trying to get an interview with Abu-Jamal that they were "currently working in conjunction with Maureen Faulkner and the Philadelphia Fraternal Order of the Police." [ 19 ] Framing has a couple of meanings; to the filmmakers, the one that best described the behavior of 20/20 is "to falsely set someone up to look as though they are guilty." Because of the unfairness of the trial proceedings, many have argued that it is impossible for anyone to know if Abu-Jamal is guilty or not, but the way the media has framed his trial says otherwise. Mike Farrell believes that it is important to look at "the political context, the tone of the time in Philadelphia, at that period before and after to understand the context of this trial." [ 19 ] When Mike Farrell and Ed Asner were interviewed on 20/20 by Donaldson, he had to portray them as "know-nothing dupe celebrities" once they started to sound knowledgeable. Donaldson believed that the trial wasn't unfair but that Mumia was unfair to the trial. He continues to put down Abu-Jamal and those standing up for him by negatively accusing them of taking on the behavior of a religious cult .

[ 19 ] Thomas Gardner opined that the 20/20 program "was never really journalism to start with. It was an exercise in persuasion, in rhetoric, really unadulterated propaganda masquerading as journalism." [ 18 ] Amnesty International stated that "numerous aspects of this case clearly failed to meet minimum international standards safeguarding the fairness of legal proceedings", and "believes that the interest of the justice would best be served by the granting of a new trial of Mumia Abu Jamal." [ 20 ] Angela Davis, an activist, scholar, and author believes that the media purposely prevented people from understanding the case of Abu-Jamal, and that they wanted to keep the public unaware to make sure there would not be large numbers of people supporting his campaign.

[ 19 ] Search engines and racial bias against African Americans [ edit ] Professor Latanya Sweeney from Harvard University identified "significant discrimination" in Google search terms that included names typically associated with black people, and were more likely to yield results relating to criminal activities, which according to Prof. Sweeney, may expose "racial bias in society".

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Police bias [ edit ] See also: Institutional racism The United States Department of Justice concluded that the police department of Ferguson, Missouri has been racially biased against African Americans by removing all variables other than race and that the police have routinely violated the constitutional rights of African Americans in Ferguson due to the out of control violent crime problems that the community protects from policing, [ 23 ] following a civil rights investigation investigating the shooting of Michael Brown by the department, which sparked protests and riots in the area .

[ 24 ] Other reports indicate protests were held all around the United States as a result of Michael Brown's death in Ferguson, Missouri.

[ 25 ] Police shooting have been studied by researchers in regards to whether ethnicity plays a role in an officer's decision to use excessive force. The Department of Justice has determined black suspects are more often killed by police officers than other races.

[ 26 ] Although three-quarters of the city's population is African American, the police department is almost entirely white. This city, like many other major cities has begun making changes in the past year to try to better its racial fairness.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] United States incarceration rate § Editorial policies of major media Media bias in the United States Race and crime in the United States Notes [ edit ] ^ See racism (synonym for "racial bias") for more information.

References [ edit ] ^ SpearIt, Implicit Bias in Criminal Justice: Growing Influence as an Insight to Systemic Oppression (July 7, 2020). The State of Criminal Justice 2020 (American Bar Association 2020)., Available at SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3645536 ^ Staats, Cheryl.

"State of the Science: Implicit Bias Review 2014" (PDF) .

Kirwan Institute for the Study of Race and Ethnicity . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-04-23 . Retrieved 2015-04-13 .

^ Payton, Erica; Price, James H. (2017-12-01). "Implicit Racial Bias and Police Use of Lethal Force: Justifiable Homicide or Potential Discrimination?".

Journal of African American Studies .

21 (4): 674– 683.

doi : 10.1007/s12111-017-9383-3 .

ISSN 1936-4741 .

S2CID 148704764 .

^ Martin, Michel (30 March 2015).

"Fear Of The Black Man: How Racial Bias Could Affect Crime, Labor Rates" .

NPR.org . National Public Radio . Retrieved 9 April 2015 .

^ Blacks in the News: Television, Modern Racism, and Cultural Change ^ a b Mastro, Dana (December 2009). "The Influence of Exposure to Depictions of Race and Crime in TV News on Viewer's Social Judgements".

Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media .

53 (4): 615– 635.

doi : 10.1080/08838150903310534 .

S2CID 43919279 .

^ a b Blacks in the News: Television, Modern Racism and Cultural Change ^ Blackstone, Ginger (September 2017). "TweetStorm in #ferguson: How News Organizations Framed Dominant Authority, Anti-Authority, and Political Figures in a Restive Community".

Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media .

61 (3): 597– 614.

doi : 10.1080/08838151.2017.1344670 .

S2CID 149426541 .

^ a b c d Ghandnoosh, Nasgol.

"Race and Punishment: Racial Perceptions of Crime and Support for Punitive Policies" (PDF) .

The Sentencing Project . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-04-10 . Retrieved 2015-03-20 .

^ KLEIN, ROGER D.; NACCARATO, STACY (1 August 2003). "Broadcast News Portrayal of Minorities: Accuracy in Reporting".

American Behavioral Scientist .

46 (12): 1611– 1616.

doi : 10.1177/0002764203254617 .

S2CID 144740541 .

^ Dixon, Travis; Williams, Charlotte (February 2015). "The Changing Misrepresentation of Race and Crime on Network and Cable News".

Journal of Communication .

65 (1): 24– 39.

doi : 10.1111/jcom.12133 .

^ Dixon, Travis (June 2007). "Priming Crime and Activating Blackness: Understanding the Psychological Impact of the Overrepresentation of Blacks as Lawbreakers on Television News".

Journal of Communication .

57 (2): 229– 253.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2007.00341.x .

^ Drew, Emily M. (October 2011). "Coming to Terms with our Own Racism': Journalists Grapple with the Racialization of their News".

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

28 (4): 353– 373.

doi : 10.1080/15295036.2010.514936 .

S2CID 145545904 .

^ "About" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved 2019-02-16 .

^ Powell, Brian (2013-08-23).

"Fox News' Racial Crime Coverage is Hurting People" .

Media Matters For America . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ Munsey, C. (2007). "Training helps police officers overcome racial bias".

doi : 10.1037/e665602007-009 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Power, Lis (2015-03-12).

"Fox & Friends Only Acknowledges Racial Bias In Ferguson Police Department To Blame Holder For Police Shooting" .

Media Matters For America . Retrieved 7 April 2015 .

^ a b c Gardner, Thomas N. (November 5, 2009).

The Media Rhetoric of Law and Order: How ABC Framed the Mumia Abu-Jamal Story . Edwin Mellen Press.

^ a b c d e f Jhally, Sut (Director) (2001).

Framing An Execution: The Media & Mumia Abu-Jamal . Northampton, Massachusetts: Media Education Foundation.

^ Amnesty International (2011).

The Case of Mumia Abu-Jamal: A Life in the Balance . Seven Stories Press.

^ "Google searches expose racial bias, says study of names" .

BBC News . 4 February 2013 . Retrieved 9 April 2015 .

^ Sweeney, Latanya (28 January 2013). "Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery".

arXiv : 1301.6822 [ cs.IR ].

^ a b Apuzzo, Matt (2015-03-04).

"Ferguson Police Tainted by Bias" .

The New York Times .

^ "Ferguson police racially biased says US Justice Department" .

BBC News . 3 March 2015 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ The Ferguson report: Department of Justice investigation of the Ferguson Police Department . 2015-12-17.

^ Correll, Joshua (June 2007). "Across the thin blue line: Police officers and racial bias in the decision to shoot".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

92 (6): 1006– 1023.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.92.6.1006 .

PMID 17547485 .

v t e Black Lives Matter People Melina Abdullah Tay Anderson Cicely Belle Blain Cat Brooks Cori Bush Gwen Carr Benjamin Crump Patrisse Cullors Aalayah Eastmond Johnetta Elzie Bruce Franks Jr.

Darnella Frazier Erica Garner Alicia Garza Ja'Mal Green Tsion Gurmu Demetria Hester Sandy Hudson Blair Imani Natalie Aleta Jackson Marissa Johnson Sasha Johnson Jari Jones Tishaura Jones Mariame Kaba Colin Kaepernick Brittany Kamai Mwende Katwiwa Janaya Khan Nupol Kiazolu Shaun King Nekima Levy Armstrong Eva Lewis Tamika Mallory Philip McHarris DeRay Mckesson Elle Moxley Muhiyidin Moye Bree Newsome Nikkita Oliver Ijeoma Oluo Chi Ossé Brittany Packnett Cunningham Eugene Puryear Teressa Raiford Jen Reid Linda Sarsour Al Sharpton Samuel Sinyangwe Nova Stevens Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor John Thompson Ayọ Tometi Assa Traoré Syrus Marcus Ware Events 2010s Ferguson unrest 2015 Baltimore protests 2015–2016 University of Missouri protests Dismissal of Robert Rialmo 2016 Donald Trump Chicago rally protest 2017 St. Louis protests 2020s Breonna Taylor protests George Floyd protests changes made name changes removal of monuments and memorials reactions trial of Derek Chauvin violence and controversies Donald Trump photo op at St. John's Church police violence incidents Buffalo police shoving incident St. Louis gun-toting incident vehicle-ramming incidents Black Birders Week Blackout Tuesday Capitol Hill Occupied Protest Academic strike General strike Kenosha unrest shooting Athlete strikes 2020 Minneapolis false rumors riot 2020–2023 Minneapolis–Saint Paul racial unrest Red House eviction defense Orisha Land Daunte Wright protests 2021 Uptown Minneapolis unrest vehicle-ramming attack Tyre Nichols protests Locations Protests in New York City List of George Floyd protests United States outside the United States List of Daunte Wright protests Deaths protested 2009–2011 Oscar Grant Aiyana Jones James Anderson Mark Duggan Kenneth Chamberlain Sr.

Anthony Lamar Smith 2012–2013 Ramarley Graham Trayvon Martin Rekia Boyd Jordan Davis Timothy Russell and Malissa Williams Tyrone West Larry Jackson Jr.

Jonathan Ferrell Miriam Carey Renisha McBride 2014 Dontre Hamilton Eric Garner Julieka Dhu John Crawford III Michael Brown Ezell Ford Laquan McDonald Akai Gurley Tamir Rice Antonio Martin Jerame Reid 2015 Natasha McKenna Charley Leundeu Keunang Tony Robinson Anthony Hill Meagan Hockaday Eric Harris Walter Scott Freddie Gray William Chapman Charleston church shooting Jonathan Sanders Sandra Bland Samuel DuBose Mansur Ball-Bey Jeremy McDole Corey Jones Jamar Clark Mario Woods 2016 Greg Gunn Alton Sterling Philando Castile Joseph Mann Adama Traoré Abdirahman Abdi Paul O'Neal Korryn Gaines Jamarion Robinson Sylville Smith Elijah Doughty Terence Crutcher Keith Lamont Scott Alfred Olango Deborah Danner 2017 Jocques Clemmons Jordan Edwards Edson Da Costa Rashan Charles Patrick Harmon 2018 Anthony Weber Stephon Clark Marcus-David Peters Antwon Rose Jr.

Markeis McGlockton Daniel Hambrick Botham Jean Tamla Horsford Jemel Roberson EJ Bradford Jr.

2019 George Robinson Willie McCoy Danquirs Franklin Javier Ambler Lassana Cisse Ronald Greene Pamela Turner Layleen Polanco Shukri Abdi Christopher Kapessa Elijah McClain Atatiana Jefferson 2020 Alvin Cole Ahmaud Arbery Manuel Ellis Breonna Taylor Daniel Prude Belly Mujinga Nina Pop George Floyd Dion Johnson Tony McDade Regis Korchinski-Paquet James Scurlock David McAtee Oluwatoyin Salau Carlos Carson Rayshard Brooks Julian Lewis Dijon Kizzee Marcellis Stinnette Chaniece Wallace Walter Wallace João Alberto Freitas Andre Hill Dolal Idd 2021 Marvin Scott Adam Toledo Daunte Wright Lindani Myeni Ma'Khia Bryant Andrew Brown Jr.

Winston Boogie Smith Leneal Frazier 2022 Amir Locke Patrick Lyoya Jayland Walker Donovan Lewis 2023 Keenan Anderson Tyre Nichols Irvo Otieno Jordan Neely Ricky Cobb II Johnny Hollman Ta'Kiya Young Leonard Cure 2024 Dexter Reed Roger Fortson Sonya Massey Robert Brooks 2025 Messiah Nantwi Other cases protested Kalief Browder 2015 Texas pool party incident Charles Kinsey Jacob Blake Ralph Yarl Rankin County torture incident In popular culture Art New York City Bust of George Floyd Portland, Oregon George Floyd mural We Stand with You Say Their Names Statue of George Floyd Street murals Cincinnati Indianapolis Portland, Oregon Salt Lake City Santa Cruz, California Seattle Capitol Hill City Hall Springfield, Massachusetts Books All American Boys Black Software Blackout Brit(ish) Dear Martin The Hate U Give His Name Is George Floyd I Can't Breathe: A Killing on Bay Street Rest in Power: The Enduring Life of Trayvon Martin Why We Kneel, How We Rise Film 16 Shots 3 1/2 Minutes, 10 Bullets American Son Baltimore Rising Bars4Justice The Force Fruitvale Station Generation Revolution The Hate U Give Night Call Rest in Power: The Trayvon Martin Story Stay Woke: The Black Lives Matter Movement Stranger Fruit Two Distant Strangers Whose Streets?

Music " Alright " " Angel Down " " The Bigger Picture " " Black Parade " " Can't Put It in the Hands of Fate " " Chains " " Cop vs. Phone Girl " " Don't Shoot " " Formation " " Freedom " " Hell You Talmbout " " I Can't Breathe " " I Cry " " Lavender (Nightfall Remix) " " Loyal Like Sid & Nancy " " Otherside of America " " Riot " " Rockstar (BLM Remix) " The Seven Last Words of the Unarmed " Snow on tha Bluff " " This Is America " " What They'll Say About Us " " White Privilege II " Other Colin in Black & White 8:46 " Holding a Black Lives Matter Sign in America's Most Racist Town " Our Lady of Ferguson Taking a Stand in Baton Rouge Time: The Kalief Browder Story Woke (TV series) Activist groups 8 to Abolition Assata's Daughters BAMN Bird Names for Birds Black Feminist Future Black Justice League Black Lives Matter Global Network Foundation Black Visions Collective BlackinChem Black In Neuro BYP100 Campaign Zero Don't Shoot Portland Hands Up United Millennial Activists United Moms United for Black Lives Mothers of Gynecology Movement Mothers of the Movement Movement for Black Lives Peoples Power Assemblies Project South #SayHerName Stop Cop City Street Riders NYC Taking the Initiative Party Wall of Moms White Coats for Black Lives Proposed legislation BREATHE Act Commission for Diversity in the Public Realm Ending Qualified Immunity Act George Floyd Justice in Policing Act George Floyd Law Enforcement Trust and Integrity Act Safety, Accountability, Fairness and Equity-Today Act List of police reforms related to the George Floyd protests Groups associated with opposition All Lives Matter Alt-right Black Guns Matter Blue Lives Matter Oath Keepers Patriot Front Patriotic Alternative Proud Boys Russian disinformation campaigns Trump administration United Citizens' Alarm White Lives Matter Related 2020 deployment of federal forces in the United States 2020–2023 United States racial unrest list of incidents ACAB Black Lives Matter Memorial Fence Black Lives Matter Plaza Black maternal mortality in the United States Criminal stereotype of African Americans Defund the police Driving while black Running while Black shopping while black Ferguson effect George Floyd Square Hands up, don't shoot I can't breathe National anthem protests Native Lives Matter No justice, no peace Oklahoma House Bill 1674 Police abolition movement 2021 Minneapolis Question 2 Police accountability blue wall of silence gypsy cops police perjury qualified immunity Police brutality militarization pain compliance use of deadly force use of torture Police misconduct false arrest racial profiling ticket quota Racial bias in criminal news Rest in power Save the Boards Taking the knee Terry stop The talk Woke Category v t e Journalism Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Meteorologist News bureau News director Pundit Stringer Profession News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Fact-checking ) Fake news Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Spiking Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Blogging Citizen Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Non-profit Opinion Peace Photojournalism Public service Sensor Underground Video Visual Watchdog Social impact Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press conference · Press release ) Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online ) Magazines Broadcast journalism ( TV and radio ) Digital journalism Multimedia Documentary film News agencies Alternative media List of journalism articles – Outline v t e Race and crime By country Homicide rate by country Brazil United Kingdom United States Criminal justice Race and capital punishment Race and the war on drugs Racial bias in criminal news By race Black male incarceration and mortality Criminal stereotype of African Americans Indigenous Australians Native Americans Concepts Statistical correlations of criminal behaviour Immigration and crime Racial hoax Blood libel Hate crime Crime of Apartheid Institutional racism Death row Legal Innocence Protection Act Racial profiling People Katheryn Russell-Brown Organizations American Civil Liberties Union British Columbia Civil Liberties Association Canadian Civil Liberties Association National Council for Civil Liberties Sentencing Project Coalition for Public Safety Southern Poverty Law Center v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racial_bias_in_criminal_news_in_the_United_States&oldid=1301667638 " Categories : African-American-related controversies Anti-black racism in the United States Framing (social sciences) Race and crime Race-related controversies in the United States Media bias Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from April 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 02:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Racial bias in criminal news in the United States 2 languages Add topic

