Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Early history Toggle Early history subsection 2.1 China 2.2 City pharmacopoeias 2.2.1 London, Edinburgh, Dublin 3 National pharmacopoeiae Toggle National pharmacopoeiae subsection 3.1 Emergence in Britain and Ireland 3.2 United States 4 Supranational and international harmonization Toggle Supranational and international harmonization subsection 4.1 Internationalization attempts 4.2 International pharmaceutical congresses (1864–1902) 4.3 Brussels Agreements (1902–1951) 4.4 WHO International Pharmacopoeia (1951–present) 4.5 The European Pharmacopoeia (1964–present) 4.6 Soviet Union 5 Medical preparations, uses, and dosages 6 List of national and supranational pharmacopoeias 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Pharmacopoeia 44 languages العربية Arpetan Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Standard reference work on pharmaceutial drugs and compound medicines It has been suggested that section "Medical preparations, uses, and dosages" be split out and merged into the article titled British Pharmacopoeia , which already exists. ( Discuss ) (August 2025) The 1699 Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia A pharmacopoeia , pharmacopeia , or pharmacopoea (or the typographically obsolete rendering, pharmacopœia ), meaning "drug-making", in its modern technical sense, is a reference work containing directions for the identification of compound medicines . These are published or sanctioned by a government or a medical or pharmaceutical society, [ 1 ] giving the work legal authority within a specified jurisdiction. In a broader sense it is a collection of pharmaceutical drug specifications . Descriptions of the individual preparations are called monographs .

[ 2 ] There are national, supranational, and international pharmacopoeias.

Etymology [ edit ] The term derives from Ancient Greek : φαρμακοποιία , romanized : pharmakopoiia "making of (healing) medicine, drug-making", a compound of "medicine, drug, poison" ( Ancient Greek : φάρμακον , romanized : pharmakon ), with the verb "to make" ( Ancient Greek : ποιεῖν , romanized : poiein ), and the abstract noun suffix -ία -ia .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In early modern editions of Latin texts, the Greek diphthong οι ( oi ) is latinized to its Latin equivalent oe which is in turn written with the ligature œ , giving the spelling pharmacopœia ; in modern British English , œ is written as oe , giving  the spelling pharmacopoeia , while in American English oe becomes e , resulting in pharmacopeia . The plural form is pharmacopoeiae , pharmacopoeias , or pharmacopeias .

Early history [ edit ] Although older writings exist which deal with herbal medicine , the major initial work in the field is considered to be the Edwin Smith Papyrus in Egypt , Pliny 's pharmacopoeia.

[ 5 ] A number of early pharmacopoeia books were written by Persian and Arab physicians .

[ 6 ] These included The Canon of Medicine of Avicenna in 1025 AD, and works by Ibn Zuhr (Avenzoar) in the 12th century (and printed in 1491), [ 7 ] and Ibn Baytar in the 14th century.

[ citation needed ] The Shen-nung pen ts'ao ching (Divine Husbandman's Materia Medica) is the earliest known Chinese pharmacopoeia. The text describes 365 medicines derived from plants, animals, and minerals; according to legend it was written by the Chinese god Shennong .

[ 8 ] One of the earliest surviving pharmacopoeias from medieval Europe is the Lorsch Pharmacopoeia , which dates to around 800, and draws on classical and post-classical sources.

Pharmacopeial synopsis were recorded in the Timbuktu manuscripts of Mali .

[ 9 ] China [ edit ] The earliest extant Chinese pharmacopoeia, the Shennong Ben Cao Jing was compiled between 200–250 AD.

[ 10 ] It contains descriptions of 365 medications.

[ 11 ] The earliest known officially sponsored pharmacopoeia was compiled in 659 AD by a team of 23 pharmaceutical scientists led by Su jing during the Tang dynasty (618–907 AD) and was called the Xinxiu bencao (Newly Revised Canon of Material Medical). The work consists of 20 volumes with one dedicated to the table of contents, and 25 volumes of pictures with one volume dedicated to the table of contents. A third part consisting of seven volumes contained illustrated descriptions. The text contains descriptions of 850 medicines with 114 new ones. The work was used throughout China for the next 400 years.

[ 12 ] City pharmacopoeias [ edit ] A dated work appeared in Nuremberg in 1542; a passing student Valerius Cordus showed a collection of medical prescriptions, which he had selected from the writings of the most eminent medical authorities, to the physicians of the town, who urged him to print it for the benefit of the apothecaries , and obtained the sanction of the senatus for his work. A work known as the Antidotarium Florentinum , was published under the authority of the college of medicine of Florence [ 1 ] in the 16th century. In 1511, the Concordie Apothecariorum Barchinone was published by the Society of Apothecaries of Barcelona and kept in the School of Pharmacy of the University of Barcelona .

[ 13 ] Engraved frontispiece of the 1703 Pharmacopoeia Bateana The term Pharmacopoeia first appears as a distinct title in a work [ 14 ] published at Basel , Switzerland, in 1561 by A. Foes, but does not appear to have come into general use until the beginning of the 17th century.

[ 1 ] Before 1542, the works principally used by apothecaries were the treatises on simples (basic medicinal ingredients) by Avicenna and Serapion ; the De synonymis and Quid pro quo of Simon Januensis ; the Liber servitoris of Bulchasim Ben Aberazerim , which described preparations made from plants, animals, and minerals, and was the type of the chemical portion of modern pharmacopoeias; and the Antidotarium of Nicolaus de Salerno , containing Galenic formulations arranged alphabetically. Of this last work, there were two editions in use — Nicolaus magnus and Nicolaus parvus: in the latter, several of the compounds described in the large edition were omitted and the formulae given on a smaller scale.

[ 1 ] Also Vesalius claimed he had written some " dispensariums " and " manuals " on the works of Galenus . Apparently he burnt them. According to  recent research communicated at the congresses of the International Society for the History of Medicine by the scholar Francisco Javier González Echeverría, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Michel De Villeneuve ( Michael Servetus ) also published a pharmacopoeia. De Villeneuve, fellow student of Vesalius and the best galenist of Paris according to Johann Winter von Andernach , [ 18 ] published the anonymous " Dispensarium or Enquiridion " in 1543, at Lyon , France, with Jean Frellon as editor. This work contains 224 original recipes by De Villeneuve and others by Lespleigney and Chappuis. As usual when it comes to pharmacopoeias, this work was complementary to a previous Materia Medica [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] that De Villeneuve published that same year. This finding was communicated by the same scholar in the International Society for the History of Medicine , [ 17 ] [ 23 ] with agreement of John M. Riddle , one of the foremost experts on Materia Medica - Dioscorides works.

Nicolaes Tulp , mayor of Amsterdam and respected surgeon general, gathered all of his doctor and chemist friends together and they wrote the first pharmacopoeia of Amsterdam named Pharmacopoea Amstelredamensis in 1636. This was a combined effort to improve public health after an outbreak of the bubonic plague , and also to limit the number of quack apothecary shops in Amsterdam.

London, Edinburgh, Dublin [ edit ] Until 1617, such drugs and medicines as were in common use were sold in England by the apothecaries and grocers. In that year the apothecaries obtained a separate charter, and it was enacted that no grocer should keep an apothecary's shop. The preparation of physicians' prescriptions was thus confined to the apothecaries, upon whom pressure was brought to bear to make them dispense accurately, by the issue of a pharmacopoeia in May 1618 by the College of Physicians , and by the power which the wardens of the apothecaries received in common with the censors of the College of Physicians of examining the shops of apothecaries within 7 miles (11 km) of London and destroying all the compounds which they found unfaithfully prepared. This, the first authorized London Pharmacopoeia, was selected chiefly from the works of Mezue and Nicolaus de Salerno, but it was found to be so full of errors that the whole edition was cancelled, and a fresh edition was published in the following December.

[ 1 ] At this period the compounds employed in medicine were often heterogeneous mixtures, some of which contained from 20 to 70, or more, ingredients, while a large number of simples were used in consequence of the same substance being supposed to possess different qualities according to the source from which it was derived. Thus crabs' eyes (i.e., gastroliths ), pearls, oyster shells, and coral were supposed to have different properties. Among other ingredients entering into some of these formulae were the excrements of human beings, dogs, mice, geese, and other animals, calculi , human skull, and moss growing on it, blind puppies, earthworms , etc.

[ 1 ] Although other editions of the London Pharmacopoeia were issued in 1621, 1632, 1639, and 1677, it was not until the edition of 1721, published under the auspices of Sir Hans Sloane , that any important alterations were made. In this issue many of the remedies previously in use were omitted, although a good number were still retained, such as dogs' excrement, earthworms, and moss from the human skull; the botanical names of herbal remedies were for the first time added to the official ones; the simple distilled waters were ordered of a uniform strength; sweetened spirits, cordials and ratafias were omitted as well as several compounds no longer used in London, although still in vogue elsewhere. A great improvement was effected in the edition published in 1746, in which only those preparations were retained which had received the approval of the majority of the pharmacopoeia committee; to these was added a list of those drugs only which were supposed to be the most efficacious. An attempt was made to simplify further the older formulae by the rejection of superfluous ingredients.

[ 1 ] In the edition published in 1788 the tendency to simplify was carried out to a much greater extent, and the extremely compound medicines which had formed the principal remedies of physicians for 2,000 years were discarded, while a few powerful drugs which had been considered too dangerous to be included in the Pharmacopoeia of 1765 were restored to their previous position. In 1809 the French chemical nomenclature was adopted, and in 1815 a corrected impression of the same was issued. Subsequent editions were published in 1824, 1836, and 1851.

[ 1 ] The first Edinburgh Pharmacopoeia was published in 1699 and the last in 1841; the first Dublin Pharmacopoeia in 1807 and the last in 1850.

[ 1 ] National pharmacopoeiae [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( August 2025 ) The first national pharmacopoeia published was the Spanish Pharmacopoeia Matritensi Regii in 1739.

[ 2 ] It applied to the entire country and all of its foreign possessions, including in America.

[ 24 ] Emergence in Britain and Ireland [ edit ] Further information: British Pharmacopoeia The preparations contained in the three city pharmacopoeias of Britain and Ireland – published by the Colleges of Physicians of Edinburgh , London, and Dublin – in use from the 17th to the mid-19th century, were not all uniform in strength. This was a source of much inconvenience and danger to the public, when powerful preparations such as dilute hydrocyanic acid were ordered in the one country and dispensed according to the national pharmacopoeia in another. As a result, the Medical Act 1858 ordained that the General Medical Council should publish a book containing a list of medicines and compounds, to be called the British Pharmacopoeia , which would be a substitute throughout Great Britain and Ireland for the separate pharmacopoeias. Hitherto these had been published in Latin. The first British Pharmacopoeia was published in the English language in 1864, but gave such general dissatisfaction both to the medical profession and to chemists and druggists that the General Medical Council brought out a new and amended edition in 1867. This dissatisfaction was probably owing partly to the fact that the majority of the compilers of the work were not engaged in the practice of pharmacy, and therefore not competent to decide upon the kind of preparations required for the method of their manufacture. The necessity for this element in the construction of a pharmacopoeia is now fully recognized in other countries, in most of which pharmaceutical chemists are represented on the committee for the preparation of the legally recognized manuals.

[ 1 ] United States [ edit ] In the U.S., the USP-NF (United States Pharmacopeia – National Formulary) has been issued by a private non-profit organization since 1820 under the authority of a convention that meets periodically that is largely constituted by physicians, pharmacists, and other public health professionals, setting standards published in the compendia through various expert committees.

[ 25 ] In the U.S. when there is an applicable USP-NF quality monograph, drugs and drug ingredients must conform to the compendial requirements (such as for strength, quality or purity) or be deemed adulterated or misbranded under the Federal food and drug laws.

[ 26 ] Supranational and international harmonization [ edit ] Internationalization attempts [ edit ] Attempts have been made by international pharmaceutical and medical conferences to settle a basis on which a globally international pharmacopoeia could be prepared, [ 1 ] but regulatory complexity and regional variation in conditions of pharmacy are hurdles to fully harmonizing across all countries (that is, defining thousands of details that can all be known to work successfully in all places). In addition, some work still continues today, such as under the banner of the International Council on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), [ 27 ] a tri-regional organisation that represents the drug regulatory authorities of the European Union , Japan , and the United States . Representatives from the Pharmacopoeias of these three regions have met twice yearly since 1990 in the Pharmacopoeial Discussion Group to try to work towards "compendial harmonisation". Specific monographs are proposed, and if accepted, proceed through stages of review and consultation leading to adoption of a common monograph that provides a common set of tests and specifications for a specific material.

International pharmaceutical congresses (1864–1902) [ edit ] The first international pharmaceutical congress was held in Strasbourg in 1867, and emitted the wish that an international pharmacopoeia be compiled.

[ 28 ] Brussels Agreements (1902–1951) [ edit ] The Conference for the Unification of the Formulae of Potent Medicaments was held in Brussels in 1902. It was also the 10th pharmacists' congress. It resulted in the 1902 Agreement for the Unification of the Formulae of Potent Medicaments (First pharmacopoeia agreement) [ 29 ] although "it took four years of textual adjustments before the Agreement could enter into force as a multilateral treaty in 19 (mostly European) countries, in December 1906" [ 30 ] A second conference met in Brussels' Academy Palace in 1925, resulting in a revised international agreement, the Second Pharmacopoeia Agreement (1925) .

[ 31 ] WHO International Pharmacopoeia (1951–present) [ edit ] The World Health Organization discontinued and replaced the 1925 Brussels Agreement with the International Pharmacopoeia (Ph.Int.), edited since 1951.

[ 30 ] It does not replace a national pharmacopoeia but rather provides a model or template for one and also can be invoked by legislation within a country to serve as that country's regulation.

The European Pharmacopoeia (1964–present) [ edit ] Countries of the European continent member of the Council of Europe (distinct and broader than the EU ) have a supranational pharmacopoeia, the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph.Eur.); it has not replaced the national pharmacopoeias of European member states but rather helps to harmonize them. However, some smaller European countries have stopped to edit their own pharmacopoeia to rely only on Ph.Eur.

Soviet Union [ edit ] The Soviet Union had a nominally supranational pharmacopoeia, the State Pharmacopoeia of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSRP), although the de facto nature of the nationality of republics within that state differed from the de jure nature.

Medical preparations, uses, and dosages [ edit ] A bottle of glycerin purchased at a pharmacy with the abbreviation I.P.

appearing after the product name.

It has been suggested that this section be split out  into another article titled British Pharmacopoeia . ( Discuss ) (August 2025) The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United Kingdom and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Though formerly printed there has been a transition to a situation where pharmaceutical information is available as printed volumes and on the internet . The rapid increase in knowledge renders necessary frequent new editions, to furnish definite formulae for preparations that have already come into extensive use in medical practice, so as to ensure uniformity of strength, and to give the characters and tests by which their purity and potency may be determined. However each new edition requires several years to carry out numerous experiments for devising suitable formulae, so that current pharmacopoeia are never quite up to date.

[ 1 ] This difficulty has hitherto been met by the publication of such non-official formularies as Squire's Companion to the Pharmacopoeia and Martindale: The complete drug reference (formerly Martindale's: the extra pharmacopoeia ), in which all new remedies and their preparations, uses and doses are recorded, and in the former the varying strengths of the same preparations in the different pharmacopoeias are also compared (Squire's was incorporated into Martindale in 1952). The need of such works to supplement the Pharmacopoeia is shown by the fact that they are even more largely used than the Pharmacopoeia itself, the first issued in 18 editions and the second in 13 editions at comparatively short intervals. In the UK, the task of elaborating a new Pharmacopoeia is entrusted to a body of a purely medical character, and legally the pharmacist does not, contrary to the practice in other countries, have a voice in the matter. This is notwithstanding the fact that, although the medical practitioner is naturally the best judge of the drug or preparations that will afford the best therapeutic result, they are not as competent as the pharmacist to say how that preparation can be produced in the most effective and satisfactory manner, nor how the purity of drugs can be tested.

[ 1 ] The change occurred with the fourth edition of the British Pharmacopoeia in 1898. A committee of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain was appointed at the request of the General Medical Council to advise on pharmaceutical matters. A census of prescriptions was taken to ascertain the relative frequency with which different preparations and drugs were used in prescriptions, and suggestions and criticisms were sought from various medical and pharmaceutical bodies across the British Empire . As regards the purely pharmaceutical part of the work a committee of reference in pharmacy, nominated by the pharmaceutical societies of Great Britain and Ireland (as they were then), was appointed to report to the Pharmacopoeia Committee of the Medical Council.

[ 1 ] Some difficulty has arisen since the passing of the Adulteration of Food and Drugs Act concerning the use of the Pharmacopoeia as a legal standard for the drugs and preparations contained in it. The Pharmacopoeia is defined in the preface as only "intended to afford to the members of the medical profession and those engaged in the preparation of medicines throughout the British Empire one uniform standard and guide whereby the nature and composition of, substances to be used in medicine may be ascertained and determined". It cannot be an encyclopaedia of substances used in medicine, and can be used only as a standard for the substances and preparations contained in it, and for no others. It has been held in the Divisional Courts (Dickins v. Randerson) that the Pharmacopoeia is a standard for official preparations asked for under their pharmacopoeial name. But there are many substances in the Pharmacopoeia which are not only employed in medicine, but have other uses, such as sulfur , gum benzoin , tragacanth , gum arabic , ammonium carbonate , beeswax , oil of turpentine , linseed oil , and for these a commercial standard of purity as distinct from a medicinal one is needed, since the preparations used in medicine should be of the highest possible degree of purity obtainable, and this standard would be too high and too expensive for ordinary purposes. The use of trade synonyms in the Pharmacopoeia, such as saltpetre for purified potassium nitrate , and milk of sulfur for precipitated sulfur, is partly answerable for this difficulty, and has proved to be a mistake, since it affords ground for legal prosecution if a chemist sells a drug of ordinary commercial purity for trade purposes, instead of the purified preparation which is official in the Pharmacopoeia for medicinal use. This would not be the case if the trade synonym were omitted. For many drugs and chemicals not in the Pharmacopoeia there is no standard of purity that can be used under the Adulteration of Food and Drugs Act, and for these, as well as for the commercial quality of those drugs and essential oils which are also in the Pharmacopoeia, a legal standard of commercial purity is much needed. This subject formed the basis of discussion at several meetings of the Pharmaceutical Society, and the results have been embodied in a work called Suggested Standards for Foods and Drugs by C. G. Moor, which indicates the average degree of purity of many drugs and chemicals used in the arts, as well as the highest degree of purity obtainable in commerce of those used in medicine.

[ 1 ] An important step has also been taken in this direction by the publication under the authority of the Council of the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain of the British Pharmaceutical Codex (BPC), in which the characters of and tests for the purity of many unofficial drugs and preparations are given as well as the character of many glandular preparations and antitoxins that have come into use in medicine, but have not yet been introduced into the Pharmacopoeia. This work may also possibly serve as a standard under the Adulteration of Food and Drugs Act for the purity and strength of drugs not included in the Pharmacopoeia and as a standard for the commercial grade of purity of those in the Pharmacopoeia which are used for non-medical purposes.

[ 1 ] Another legal difficulty connected with modern pharmacopoeias is the inclusion in some of them of synthetic chemical remedies, the processes for preparing which have been patented, whilst the substances are sold under trade-mark names. The scientific chemical name is often long and unwieldy, and the physician prefers when writing a prescription to use the shorter name under which it is sold by the patentees . In this case the pharmacist is compelled to use the more expensive patented article, which may lead to complaints from the patient. If the physician were to use the same article under its pharmacopoeial name when the patented article is prescribed, they would become open to prosecution by the patentee for infringement of patent rights. Hence the only solution is for the physician to use the chemical name (which cannot be patented) as given in the Pharmacopoeia, or, for those synthetic remedies not included in the Pharmacopoeia, the scientific and chemical name given in the British Pharmaceutical Codex .

[ 1 ] List of national and supranational pharmacopoeias [ edit ] In most of the Neo-Latin names, Pharmacopoea is the more common spelling, although for several of them, Pharmacopoeia is common.

INN system symbol Other symbols (including older INN system symbol) English-language title Latin-language title Other-language title Active or retired Website Notes — — Brazilian Pharmacopoeia [ pt ] — Farmacopeia Brasileira Active ANVISA BP Ph.B., Ph.Br.

British Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Britannica — Active BP BPC — British Pharmaceutical Codex — — Retired — "BPC" also often stands for "British Pharmacopoeia Commission" ChP PPRC Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China (Chinese Pharmacopoeia) Pharmacopoea Sinensis 中华人民共和国药典 Active PPRC Archived 27 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine CSL CSP, Ph.Bs.

Czechoslovak Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Bohemoslovenica Československý Lékopis Retired Ph.Boh.

Czech Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Bohemica Český Lékopis Active Ph.Boh.

Slovak Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Slovaca Slovenský Liekopis Active Ph.Eur.

EP European Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Europaea — Active Ph.Eur.

Ph.Fr.

— French Pharmacopoeia — Pharmacopée Française Active Ph.Fr.

The name Pharmacopoea Gallica (Ph.Gall.) has not been used since the early 20th century DAB — German Pharmacopoeia — Deutsches Arzneibuch Active The name Pharmacopoea Germanica (Ph.G.) has not been used since the early 20th century Ph.Hg.

— Hungarian Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Hungarica Magyar gyógyszerkönyv Active IP INDP, Ph.Ind.

Indian Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Indica — Active IP FI Indonesian Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Indonesia Farmakope Indonesia Active FI Ph.Int.

IP, Ph.I.

International Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Internationalis — Active Ph.Int.

F.U.

— Official Pharmacopoeia of the Italian Republic — Farmacopea Ufficiale Active F.U.

JP — Japanese Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea 日本薬局方 Active JP JRA — Minimum Requirements for Antibiotic Products of Japan — Active FEUM MXP Pharmacopoeia of the United Mexican States ( Mexican Pharmacopoeia) — Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos Active FEUM FP — Portuguese Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Lusitanica Farmacopeia Portuguesa Active FP Ph.Helv.

— Swiss Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Helvetica Schweizerischen Pharmakopöe, Schweizerischen Arzneibuch Active Ph.Helv.

Archived 9 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine KP Korean Pharmacopeia — 대한민국약전 Active KP / KP KHP Korean Herbal Pharmacopeia — 대한민국약전외한약(생약)규격집 Active KHP USP — United States Pharmacopeia — — Active USP USSRP — State Pharmacopoeia of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics ( Soviet Pharmacopoeia) — Retired SPRF — The State Pharmacopoeia of the Russian Federation — Государственная Фармакопея Российской Федерации Active SPRF YP Ph.Jug.

Yugoslav Pharmacopoeia Pharmacopoea Jugoslavica Retired RFE — Royal Spanish Pharmacopoeia — Real Farmacopea Española Active RFE See also [ edit ] Pharmaceutical formulation Specification Standards organization Compounding Monograph Global health The International Pharmacopoeia World Health Organization International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) International Pharmaceutical Federation International Plant Names Index National pharmacopoeias European Pharmacopoeia United States Pharmacopeia Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China British Pharmacopoeia & National Formulary Japanese Pharmacopoeia Iranian National Formulary Informal / popular pharmacopoeial projects: Erowid Hamilton's Pharmacopeia References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Holmes, Edward Morell (1911). " Pharmacopoeia ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

353– 355.

^ a b Urdang, George (1946).

"Pharmacopoeias as Witnesses of World History" .

Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences .

1 (1): 46– 70.

doi : 10.1093/jhmas/1.1.46 .

ISSN 0022-5045 .

JSTOR 24619535 .

PMID 21022364 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"pharmacopeia" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ φάρμακον , ποιεῖν .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ van Tellingen C (March 2007).

"Pliny's pharmacopoeia or the Roman treat" .

Netherlands Heart Journal .

15 (3): 118– 20.

doi : 10.1007/BF03085966 .

PMC 2442893 .

PMID 18604277 .

^ Philip K. Hitti (cf. Kasem Ajram (1992), Miracle of Islamic Science , Appendix B, Knowledge House Publishers.

ISBN 0-911119-43-4 ).

^ Krek, M. (1979).

"The Enigma of the First Arabic Book Printed from Movable Type" (PDF) .

Journal of Near Eastern Studies .

38 (3): 203– 212.

doi : 10.1086/372742 .

S2CID 162374182 .

^ "Classics of Traditional Medicine" .

^ Djian, Jean-Michel (24 May 2007).

Timbuktu manuscripts: Africa's written history unveiled Archived 11 November 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Unesco, ID 37896.

^ Lu 2015 , p. 63.

^ Lu 2015 , p. 110.

^ "The first pharmacopoeia – Xinxiu Bencao" .

^ "Museu Virtual – Universitat de Barcelona" .

www.ub.edu .

^ Foes, A (1561).

Pharmacopœia medicamentorum omnium, quæ hodie ... officinis extant, etc . Basel.

^ Michael Servetus Research Archived 13 November 2012 at the Wayback Machine Website with graphical study on the pharmacopoeia Dispensarium by Servetus ^ 1998 "The 'Dispensarium' or 'Enquiridion' the complementary work of the Dioscorides, both by Servetus" and "The book of work of Michael Servetus for his Dioscorides and his 'Dispensarium'". González Echeverría, Francisco Javier. Program of the congress and abstracts of the communications, XI National Congress on History of Medicine, Santiago de Compostela, University of Santiago de Compostela, pp. 83–84.

^ a b 1998 "The book of work of Michael Servetus for his Dioscorides and his Dispensarium"(Le livre de travail de Michel Servet pour ses Dioscorides et Dispensarium) and "The Dispensarium or Enquiridion, complementary of the Dioscorides of Michael Servetus" ( The Enquiridion, L’oeuvre Le Dispensarium ou Enquiridion complémentaire sur le Dioscorides de Michel Servet) González Echeverría, in: Book of summaries, 36th International Congress on the History of Medicine, Tunis (Livre des Résumés, 36ème Congrès International d’Histoire de la médicine, Tunis), 6–11 September 1998, (two comunicacions), pp. 199, 210.

^ 2011 "The love for truth. Life and work of Michael Servetus", (El amor a la verdad. Vida y obra de Miguel Servet.), Francisco Javier González Echeverría, Francisco Javier, printed by Navarro y Navarro, Zaragoza, collaboration with the Government of Navarra, Department of Institutional Relations and Education of the Government of Navarra, 607 pp. 64 of them illustrations, pp. 194–204 ^ 1996 " An unpublished work of Michael Servetus : The Dioscorides or Medical Matter from Sesma". González Echeverría, Francisco Javier. Panacea Ed. College of Doctors of Navarra. Castuera Ed, Pamplona p. 44.

^ 1996 "Sesma's Dioscorides or Medical Matter : an unknown work of Michael Servetus (I)" and " Sesma's Dioscorides or Medical Matter: an unknown work of Michael Servetus (II)" González Echeverría, Francisco Javier. In : Book of Abstracts. 35th International Congress on the History of Medicine, 2nd–8th, September, 1996, Kos Island, Greece, communications nº: 6 y 7, p. 4.

^ 1997 "Michael Servetus, editor of the Dioscorides", González Echeverría, Francisco Javier. Institute of Sijenienses Studies "Michael Servetus" ed, Villanueva de Sijena, Larrosa ed and "Ibercaja", Zaragoza.

^ 2001 " An attributable Spanish work to Michael Servetus: 'The Dioscorides of Sesma' ". González Echeverría, Francisco Javier. Varia Histórico –  Médica. Edition coordinated by : Jesús Castellanos Guerrero (coord.), Isabel Jiménez Lucena, María José Ruiz Somavilla y Pilar Gardeta Sabater.  Minutes from the X Congress on History of Medicine, February 1986, Málaga.  Printed by Imagraf, Málaga, pp. 37–55.

^ 2011 September 9, Francisco González Echeverría VI International Meeting for the History of Medicine, (S-11: Biographies in History of Medicine (I)), Barcelona.New Discoveries on the biography of Michael De Villeneuve (Michael Servetus) & New discoverys on the work of Michael De Villeneuve (Michael Servetus) VI Meeting of the International Society for the History of Medicine ^ Crawford, Matthew James (2019). "An Imperial Pharmacopoeia? The Pharmacopoeia Matritensis and Materia Medica in the Eighteenth-Century Spanish Atlantic World". In Crawford, Matthew James; Gabriel, Joseph M (eds.).

Drugs on the Page: Pharmacopoeias and Healing Knowledge in the Early Modern Atlantic World . Pittsburgh University Press.

^ "Our Impact" . Archived from the original on 5 January 2015 . Retrieved 5 January 2015 .

^ "USP in Food and Drug Law – U.S. Pharmacopeial Convention" .

usp.org . Retrieved 18 January 2017 .

^ "ICH Official web site : ICH" .

ich.org . Retrieved 18 January 2017 .

^ Volckringer, Jean (1953).

"Evolution et Unification des Formulaires et des Pharmacopées" .

Imprimeries-Editions Paul Brandouy . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ Power, F.B. (1903).

"The International Conference for the Unification of the Formulae of Potent Medicaments" .

www.proquest.com . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ a b Riboulet-Zemouli, Kenzi (31 December 2025).

"1925–2025: a century of international pharmaceutical law" .

Journal of Pharmaceutical Policy and Practice .

18 (1): 2470840.

doi : 10.1080/20523211.2025.2470840 .

PMC 11892055 .

PMID 40066186 .

^ "Deutsches Arzneibuch : Neudruck in der Fassung der beiden Nachträge und unter Beifügung von zwei Mitteilungen des ehemaligen Reichsgesundheitsamts über kriegsbedingte Änderungen, 6. Ausgabe. ed, 1947, Deutsches Arzneibuch: amtliche Ausgabe" .

leopard.tu-braunschweig.de . Berlin: Arbeitsgemeinschaft Medizinischer Verlage. 1947. pp.

x– xi . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Lu, Yongxiang (2015), A History of Chinese Science and Technology 2 Volckringer, Jean (1953), Évolution et Unification des Formulaires et des Pharmacopées External links [ edit ] Look up pharmacopoeia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pharmacopoeia .

Pharmacopoeial Discussion Group Archived 23 October 2019 at the Wayback Machine Medicines Compendium (archived 3 July 2012) Pharma Knowledge Park Archived 2 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Michael Servetus Research Website with graphical study of the pharmacopoeia Dispensarium by Michael Servetus (archived 13 November 2012) ISHP Working Group History of Pharmacopieas Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xvb7l
Cached time: 20250814215616
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.693 seconds
Real time usage: 0.816 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3754/1000000
Revision size: 41419/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 75112/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4031/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 96710/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.459/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16542362/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  715.088      1 -total
 27.44%  196.247      1 Template:Reflist
 16.77%  119.917      3 Template:Langx
 10.34%   73.919      1 Template:EB1911
 10.16%   72.662      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.43%   60.306      1 Template:Short_description
  6.82%   48.773     10 Template:Cite_web
  5.62%   40.175      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.55%   39.685      2 Template:Sfn
  5.20%   37.217      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:300705:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215616 and revision id 1304041163. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pharmacopoeia&oldid=1304041163 " Categories : Medical manuals Pharmacopoeias Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles to be split from August 2025 All articles to be split All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2011 Articles to be expanded from August 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2012 United Kingdom-centric Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pharmacopoeia 44 languages Add topic

