Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design types and sub-types Toggle Design types and sub-types subsection 1.1 Grouping 2 Confirmatory versus exploratory research 3 State problems versus process problems 4 Examples of fixed designs Toggle Examples of fixed designs subsection 4.1 Experimental research designs 4.2 Non-experimental research designs 5 Examples of flexible research designs Toggle Examples of flexible research designs subsection 5.1 Case study 5.2 Grounded theory study 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Research design 14 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 ಕನ್ನಡ Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली Shqip Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overall strategy utilized to carry out research This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Research design" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Research design refers to the overall strategy utilized to answer research questions. A research design typically outlines the theories and models underlying a project; the research question(s) of a project; a strategy for gathering data and information; and a strategy for producing answers from the data.

[ 1 ] A strong research design yields valid answers to research questions while weak designs yield unreliable, imprecise or irrelevant answers.

[ 1 ] Incorporated in the design of a research study will depend on the standpoint of the researcher over their beliefs in the nature of knowledge (see epistemology ) and reality (see ontology ), often shaped by the disciplinary areas the researcher belongs to.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The design of a study defines the study type (descriptive, correlational, semi-experimental, experimental, review, meta-analytic) and sub-type (e.g., descriptive-longitudinal case study ), research problem , hypotheses , independent and dependent variables , experimental design , and, if applicable, data collection methods and a statistical analysis plan.

[ 4 ] A research design is a framework that has been created to find answers to research questions .

[ citation needed ] Design types and sub-types [ edit ] There are many ways to classify research designs. Nonetheless, the list below offers a number of useful distinctions between possible research designs. A research design is an arrangement or collection of conditions.

[ 5 ] Descriptive (e.g., case-study , naturalistic observation , survey ) Correlational (e.g., case-control study , observational study ) Experimental (e.g., field experiment , controlled experiment , quasi-experiment ) Review ( literature review , systematic review ) Meta-analytic ( meta-analysis ) Sometimes a distinction is made between "fixed" and "flexible" designs. In some cases, these types coincide with quantitative and qualitative research designs respectively, [ 6 ] though this need not be the case. In fixed designs, the design of the study is fixed before the main stage of data collection takes place. Fixed designs are normally theory-driven; otherwise, it is impossible to know in advance which variables need to be controlled and measured. Often, these variables are measured quantitatively. Flexible designs allow for more freedom during the data collection process. One reason for using a flexible research design can be that the variable of interest is not quantitatively measurable, such as culture. In other cases, the theory might not be available before one starts the research.

Grouping [ edit ] The choice of how to group participants depends on the research hypothesis and on how the participants are sampled . In a typical experimental study, there will be at least one "experimental" condition (e.g., "treatment") and one "control" condition ("no treatment"), but the appropriate method of grouping may depend on factors such as the duration of measurement phase and participant characteristics: Cohort study Cross-sectional study Cross-sequential study Longitudinal study Confirmatory versus exploratory research [ edit ] Confirmatory research tests a priori hypotheses — outcome predictions that are made before the measurement phase begins. Such a priori hypotheses are usually derived from a theory or the results of previous studies. The advantage of confirmatory research is that the result is more meaningful, in the sense that it is much harder to claim that a certain result is generalizable beyond the data set. The reason for this is that in confirmatory research, one ideally strives to reduce the probability of falsely reporting a coincidental result as meaningful. This probability is known as α-level or the probability of a type I error .

Exploratory research, on the other hand, seeks to generate a posteriori hypotheses by examining a data-set and looking for potential relations between variables. It is also possible to have an idea about a relation between variables but to lack knowledge of the direction and strength of the relation. If the researcher does not have any specific hypotheses beforehand, the study is exploratory with respect to the variables in question (although it might be confirmatory for others). The advantage of exploratory research is that it is easier to make new discoveries due to the less stringent methodological restrictions. Here, the researcher does not want to miss a potentially interesting relation and therefore aims to minimize the probability of rejecting a real effect or relation; this probability is sometimes referred to as β and the associated error is of type II . In other words, if the researcher simply wants to see whether some measured variables could be related, he would want to increase the chances of finding a significant result by lowering the threshold of what is deemed to be significant .

Sometimes, a researcher may conduct exploratory research but report it as if it had been confirmatory ('Hypothesizing After the Results are Known', HARKing [ 7 ] —see Hypotheses suggested by the data ); this is a questionable research practice bordering on fraud.

State problems versus process problems [ edit ] A distinction can be made between state problems and process problems. State problems aim to answer what the state of a phenomenon is at a given time, while process problems deal with the change of phenomena over time. Examples of state problems are the level of mathematical skills of sixteen-year-old children, the computer skills of the elderly, the depression level of a person, etc. Examples of process problems are the development of mathematical skills from puberty to adulthood, the change in computer skills when people get older, and how depression symptoms change during therapy.

State problems are easier to measure than process problems. State problems just require one measurement of the phenomena of interest, while process problems always require multiple measurements. Research designs such as repeated measurements and longitudinal study are needed to address process problems.

Examples of fixed designs [ edit ] Experimental research designs [ edit ] See also: case study In an experimental design, the researcher actively tries to change the situation, circumstances, or experience of participants (manipulation), which may lead to a change in behavior or outcomes for the participants of the study. The researcher randomly assigns participants to different conditions, measures the variables of interest, and tries to control for confounding variables . Therefore, experiments are often highly fixed even before the data collection starts.

In a good experimental design , a few things are of great importance. First of all, it is necessary to think of the best way to operationalize the variables that will be measured, as well as which statistical methods would be most appropriate to answer the research question . Thus, the researcher should consider what the expectations of the study are as well as how to analyze any potential results. Finally, in an experimental design, the researcher must think of the practical limitations including the availability of participants as well as how representative the participants are to the target population. It is important to consider each of these factors before beginning the experiment.

[ 8 ] Additionally, many researchers employ power analysis before they conduct an experiment, in order to determine how large the sample must be to find an effect of a given size with a given design at the desired probability of making a Type I or Type II error . The researcher has the advantage of minimizing resources in experimental research designs.

Non-experimental research designs [ edit ] Non-experimental research designs do not involve a manipulation of the situation, circumstances or experience of the participants. Non-experimental research designs can be broadly classified into three categories. First, in relational designs, a range of variables are measured. These designs are also called correlation studies because correlation data are most often used in the analysis. Since correlation does not imply causation , such studies simply identify co-movements of variables. Correlational designs are helpful in identifying the relation of one variable to another, and seeing the frequency of co-occurrence in two natural groups (see Correlation and dependence ). The second type is comparative research . These designs compare two or more groups on one or more variable, such as the effect of gender on grades. The third type of non-experimental research is a longitudinal design. A longitudinal design examines variables such as performance exhibited by a group or groups over time (see Longitudinal study ).

Examples of flexible research designs [ edit ] Case study [ edit ] See also: Case study Famous case studies are for example the descriptions about the patients of Freud, who were thoroughly analysed and described.

Bell (1999) states "a case study approach is particularly appropriate for individual researchers because it gives an opportunity for one aspect of a problem to be studied in some depth within a limited time scale".

[ 9 ] Grounded theory study [ edit ] Grounded theory research is a systematic research process that works to develop "a process, and action or an interaction about a substantive topic".

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Bold hypothesis Clinical study design Design of experiments Grey box completion and validation Research proposal Royal Commission on Animal Magnetism References [ edit ] ^ a b Blair, Graeme; Coppock, Alexander; Humphreys, Macartan (2023), Research Design in the Social Sciences: Declaration, Diagnosis, and Redesign , Princeton University Press, doi : 10.1515/9780691199580 , ISBN 978-0-691-19958-0 ^ Wright, Sarah; O'Brien, Bridget C.; Nimmon, Laura; Law, Marcus; Mylopoulos, Maria (2016).

"Research Design Considerations" .

Journal of Graduate Medical Education .

8 (1): 97– 98.

doi : 10.4300/JGME-D-15-00566.1 .

ISSN 1949-8349 .

PMC 4763399 .

PMID 26913111 .

^ Tobi, Hilde; Kampen, Jarl K. (2018).

"Research design: the methodology for interdisciplinary research framework" .

Quality & Quantity .

52 (3): 1209– 1225.

doi : 10.1007/s11135-017-0513-8 .

ISSN 0033-5177 .

PMC 5897493 .

PMID 29674791 .

^ Creswell, John W.

(2014).

Research design : qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches (4th ed.).

Thousand Oaks : SAGE Publications .

ISBN 978-1-4522-2609-5 .

^ Muaz, Jalil Mohammad (2013), Practical Guidelines for conducting research. Summarizing good research practice in line with the DCED Standard ^ Robson, C. (1993). Real-world research: A resource for social scientists and practitioner-researchers. Malden: Blackwell Publishing.

^ Diekmann, Andreas (2011). "Are Most Published Research Findings False?".

Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik .

231 ( 5– 6): 628– 635.

doi : 10.1515/jbnst-2011-5-606 .

ISSN 2366-049X .

S2CID 117338880 .

^ Adèr, H. J.

, Mellenbergh, G. J.

, & Hand, D. J. (2008). Advising on research methods: a consultant's companion. Huizen: Johannes van Kessel Publishing.

ISBN 978-90-79418-01-5 ^ Bell, J. (1999). Doing your research project. Buckingham: OUP.

^ Creswell, J.W. (2012).  Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.

v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qsqt2
Cached time: 20250812023851
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.430 seconds
Real time usage: 0.553 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1288/1000000
Revision size: 12774/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101918/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1203/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48306/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.264/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6677881/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  428.791      1 -total
 30.24%  129.671      1 Template:Reflist
 19.06%   81.745      1 Template:Research
 18.80%   80.618      1 Template:Citation
 18.34%   78.630      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.31%   61.347      1 Template:Short_description
 13.18%   56.498      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 12.72%   54.523      1 Template:Design
 12.25%   52.506      1 Template:Ambox
 12.16%   52.146      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3345681:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023851 and revision id 1292081144. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Research_design&oldid=1292081144 " Category : Research Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 03:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Research design 14 languages Add topic

