Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Purpose of individual structures 3 Other observatories 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jantar Mantar, New Delhi 16 languages অসমীয়া भोजपुरी Cebuano Deutsch Français हिन्दी മലയാളം नेपाली ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 28°37′38″N 77°12′59″E ﻿ / ﻿ 28.6271°N 77.2164°E ﻿ / 28.6271; 77.2164 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical place in New Delhi For other uses, see Jantar Mantar (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jantar Mantar, New Delhi Misra Yantra Misra Yantra at Jantar Mantar Type Observatory Location New Delhi , India Nearest city New Delhi Coordinates 28°37′38″N 77°12′59″E ﻿ / ﻿ 28.6271°N 77.2164°E ﻿ / 28.6271; 77.2164 Height 723 feet (220 m) Founder Maharaja Jai Singh II Built 1724 Website Official website Location of Jantar Mantar, New Delhi in Delhi Show map of Delhi Jantar Mantar, New Delhi (India) Show map of India Jantar Mantar in New Delhi is an observatory , designed to be used with the naked eye. It is one of five Jantar Mantar in India. "Jantar Mantar" means "instruments for measuring the harmony of the heavens".

[ 1 ] It consists of 13 architectural astronomy instruments.

The site is one of five built by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur , from 1723 onwards, revising the calendar and astronomical tables. Jai Singh, born in 1688 into a royal Rajput family that ruled the regional kingdom, was born into an era of education that maintained a keen interest in astronomy. There is a plaque fixed on one of the structures in the Jantar Mantar observatory in New Delhi that was placed there in 1910 mistakenly dating the construction of the complex to the year 1710.  Later research, though, suggests 1724 as the actual year of construction. Its height is 723 feet (220 m).

The primary purpose of the observatory was to compile astronomical tables, and to predict the times and movements of the Sun, Moon and planets. Some of these purposes nowadays would be classified as astronomy .

Completed in 1724, the Delhi Jantar Mantar had decayed considerably by 1857 uprising. The Ram Yantra, the Samrat Yantra, the Jai Prakash Yantra and the Misra Yantra are the distinct instruments of Jantar Mantar. The most famous of these structures, the Jaipur, had also deteriorated by the end of the nineteenth century until in 1901 when Maharaja Ram Singh set out to restore the instrument.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Jantar Mantar is located in New Delhi and built by Maharaja Jai Singh II of Jaipur in the year 1724. The maharaja built five observatories during his rule in the 18th century. Among these five, the one in Delhi was the first to be built. The other four observatories are located in Ujjain, Mathura, Varanasi, and Jaipur.

The objective behind the construction of these observatories was to assemble astronomical data and to accurately predict the movement of the planets, Moon, Sun, etc. in the Solar System . It was a one of a kind in its time when it was built. By the year 1867, when India was under the British Raj, the observatory had undergone considerable decay.

[ 3 ] Purpose of individual structures [ edit ] The 4 distinct instruments within the observatory of Jantar Mantar in New Delhi : the Samrat Yantra, the Jayaprakash, Rama Yantra and the Misra Yantra .

Samrat Yantra: The Samrat Yantra, or Supreme Instrument, is a giant triangle that is basically an equal hour sundial.  It is 70 feet high, 114 feet long at the base, and 10 feet thick. It has a 128-foot ih-long (39 m) hypotenuse that is parallel to the Earth's axis and points toward the North Pole . On either side of the triangle is a quadrant with graduations indicating hours, minutes, and seconds. At the time of the Samrat Yantra's construction, sundials already existed, but the Samrat Yantra turned the basic hug sundial into a precision tool for measuring declination and other related coordinates of various heavenly bodies. The Vrihat Samrat Yantra can calculate the local time at an accuracy of up to two seconds and is considered the world's largest sundial.

[ 1 ] Jaya Prakash Yantra: The Jaya Prakash consists of hollowed out hemispheres with markings on their concave surfaces. Crosswires were stretched between points on their rim.  From inside the Ram , an observer could align the position of a star with various markings or a window's edge. This is one of the most versatile and complex instruments that can give the coordinates of celestial objects in multiple systems- the Azimuthal-altitude system and the Equatorial coordinate system. This allowed for the easy conversation of the popular celestial system.

[ 4 ] Rama Yantra: Two large cylindrical structures with open top, used to measure the altitude of stars based on the latitude and the longitude on the Earth.

Misra Yantra: The Misra Yantra (Literally mixed instrument) is a composition of 5 instruments designed as a tool to determine the shortest and longest days of the year. It could also be used to indicate the exact moment of noon in various cities and locations regardless of their distance from Delhi. The Misra yantra was able to indicate when it was noon in various cities all over the world and was the only structure in the observatory not invented by Jai Singh II .

Shasthansa Yantra: Using a pinhole camera mechanism, it has been built within the towers that support the quadrant scales. It is used to measure specific measurements of the Sun such as the zenith distance, declination, and diameter of the Sun.

[ 4 ] Kapala Yantra: Built on the same principle as the jai Prakash, the instrument is used more as a demonstration to indicate the transformation of one coordinate system to another. Not used for active celestial observation.

[ 4 ] Rasivalya Yantra: Twelve of these structures were built, each referring to the zodiacal constellations by measuring the latitude and longitude of a celestial object at the very moment the celestial object crosses the meridian.

[ 4 ] Other observatories [ edit ] Between 1727 and 1734 Jai Singh II built five similar observatories in west-central India, all known by the name Jantar Mantar. They are located at Jaipur , Ujjain , Mathura , and Varanasi .

While the purpose of the Jantar Mantar was astronomy and astrology ( Jyotish ), they are also a major tourist attraction and a significant monument of the history of astronomy.

Gallery [ edit ] The Jantar Mantar, ca. 1790 by Thomas Daniell Another view by Thomas Daniell The Jantar Mantar in 1858, damaged by fighting during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 Jantar Mantar, New Delhi West tower of Samrat Yantra Centre tower of Samrat Yantra East tower of Samrat Yantra Rama Yantra (north of the two Rama Yantra) Inside view of Rama Yantra 2 of Jantar Mantar Inside view of Rama Yantra of Jantar Mantar closeup Inside view of Rama Yantra of Jantar Mantar details Shastansh Yantra - east side Shastansh Yantra - west side See also [ edit ] List of astronomical observatories Mantras Rajput architecture Tantra Yantra References [ edit ] ^ a b GURJAR, ROHIT (10 February 2017). [rhttps://medium.com/@rohitgurjar009/jaipur-jantar-mantar-worlds-largest-sundial-743afe26d0eb "JAIPUR JANTAR MANTAR :WORLDS LARGEST SUNDIAL"].

Medium . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ "Jantar Mantar" .

World Monuments Fund . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ "Jantar Mantar in Delhi: Information, Facts, History, Timings, Entry Fee" .

FabHotels Travel Blog . 28 May 2019 . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

^ a b c d "Jaipur's Jantar Mantar: Legacy of an Astronomer-King" .

livehistoryindia.com . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

Introduction www.jantarmantar.org.

Awake (2005). Jantar Mantar An Observatory Without Telescopes.

Awake,86 (13),18-20.

Jantar Mantar British Library Further reading [ edit ] Comprehensive report on history and instrument design at Jantar Mantar Sharma, Virendra Nath (1995).

Sawai Jai Singh and his astronomy . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Pvt. Ltd.

ISBN 81-208-1256-5 .

Articles on Jantar Mantar External links [ edit ] Jantar Mantar – The Astronomical Observatories of Jai Singh II Observations on Jantar Mantar in New Delhi Step Inside Jantar Mantar in New Delhi Archived 11 March 2014 at archive.today Architectural Astronomy Instruments Archived 9 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine (video in English) Jantar Mantar—An Observatory Without Telescopes (in English) जंतर मंतर—बगैर टेलिस्कोप की वेधशाला (in Hindi) Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jantar Mantar (Delhi) .

v t e Landmarks of Delhi Buildings and structures Agrasen Ki Baoli Barakhamba Hauz Khas Jahaz Mahal Jantar Mantar Kartavya Bhavan Kashmiri Gate Khirki Mosque Purana Qila Qutb Minar Rashtrapati Bhavan Red Fort Sansad Bhavan Secretariat Building Tomb of Adham Khan Tomb of Humayun Tomb of Safdar Jang Tughlaqabad Fort Zafar Mahal Religious sites Ahinsa Sthal Akshardham Cathedral Church of the Redemption Chhatarpur Temple Fatehpuri Mosque Gurdwara Bangla Sahib Gurdwara Sis Ganj Sahib Hanuman Temple ISKCON Temple Jama Masjid Laxminarayan Temple Lotus Temple Nizamuddin Dargah Sacred Heart Cathedral Sri Digambar Jain Lal Mandir Yogmaya Temple Memorials India Gate National Police Memorial Raj Ghat Shaheedi Park Wall of Truth National War Memorial Streets and plazas Chandni Chowk Connaught Place Dilli Haat Khari Baoli Rajpath Parks and gardens Central Park (Sunder Nursery) Coronation Park Delhi Ridge Garden of Five Senses Lodi Gardens Mehrauli Archaeological Park ( Jamali Kamali Mosque and Tomb , Tomb of Balban ) National Zoological Park Topics Hindu temples Museums Neighborhoods Power stations Universities v t e National Capital Territory of Delhi Topics Architecture Climate Economy Education Government History Sport Tourism Transport History Timeline Indraprastha Hastinapur Tomaras Chauhan Prithviraj Raso Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent Delhi Sultanate Mamluk dynasty Khalji dynasty Tughlaq dynasty Sayyid dynasty Lodi dynasty Sher Shah Suri Mughal Empire Old Delhi Maratha Empire British East India Company Bahadur Shah Zafar Indian Rebellion of 1857 British Raj Viceroy of India Indian independence movement Partition of India New Delhi Government and administration Legislatures Government of India Parliament of India Government of Delhi Delhi Legislative Assembly Delhi Cantonment Board New Delhi Municipal Council Municipal Corporation of Delhi Heads Prime Minister of India President of India Chief Minister of Delhi Lieutenant Governor of Delhi President of Delhi Cantonment Board Chairman of New Delhi Municipal Council Mayors of Municipal Corporations Appellate courts Supreme Court of India Delhi High Court GoI agencies Delhi Police Delhi Development Authority GNCTD agencies Delhi Commission for Women Delhi Directorate of Education Delhi Fire Service Delhi Jal Board Delhi Tourism and Transportation Development Corporation Delhi Transport Corporation Delhi Urban Shelter Improvement Board Delhi Vidyut Board Autonomous bodies Delhi State Election Commission Places of interest Government buildings Bharat Mandapam Parliament House Old Parliament House Rail Bhawan Rashtrapati Bhavan Secretariat Building State Trading Corporation building Historic sites Agrasen Ki Baoli Ashokan Edicts Bara Gumbad Barakhamba Central Park (Sunder Nursery) Chausath Khamba Chor Minar Coronation Park Feroz Shah Kotla Gates of Delhi Hauz-i-Shamsi Hauz Khas Complex Hijron Ka Khanqah Humayun's Tomb Jahanpanah Jahaz Mahal Jamali Kamali Mosque and Tomb Jantar Mantar Khirki Mosque Lotus Temple Mehrauli Metcalfe House Moth ki Masjid Purana Qila Qila Rai Pithora Qutb Minar complex Red Fort Salimgarh Fort Shish Gumbad Siri Fort Sultan Ghari Teen Murti Bhavan Tomb of Isa Khan Tomb of Safdar Jang Tughlaqabad Fort Memorials and museums Amar Jawan Jyoti Indian Air Force Museum India Gate National Museum National Museum of Natural History National Police Memorial National Rail Museum National War Memorial Prime Ministers' Museum and Library Society Raj Ghat Rashtrapati Bhavan Museum Shaheedi Park Wall of Truth Neighbourhoods Chanakyapuri Civil Lines Hauz Khas Karol Bagh Lajpat Nagar Religious sites Ahinsa Sthal Akshardham Chhatarpur Temple Fatehpuri Mosque Gurudwara Bangla Sahib Gurudwara Sis Ganj Sahib Hanuman Temple ISKCON Temple Jama Masjid Kalkaji Mandir Laxminarayan Temple Lotus Temple Nizamuddin Dargah Sacred Heart Cathedral Shri Atma Vallabh Jain Smarak Sri Digambar Jain Lal Mandir Viceroy Church Yogmaya Temple Streets and plazas Chandni Chowk Connaught Place Dilli Haat G. B. Road Janpath Khari Baoli Palika Bazaar Ramlila Maidan Rajpath Geography and divisions Districts Central Delhi East Delhi New Delhi North Delhi North East Delhi North West Delhi Shahdara South Delhi South East Delhi South West Delhi West Delhi National Capital Region Faridabad Ghaziabad Greater Noida Gurgaon Noida Satellite cities Gurgaon Faridabad Jhajjar Bahadurgarh Noida Greater Noida Dadri Ghaziabad Baghpat Transport Air Indira Gandhi International Airport Safdarjung Airport Rail Railway stations Anand Vihar Terminal Delhi Junction Sarai Rohilla Hazrat Nizamuddin New Delhi Urban and suburban rail Delhi Metro Delhi Suburban Railway Delhi Ring Railway RapidX Road Bus terminals Anand Vihar ISBT Kashmere Gate ISBT Sarai Kale Khan ISBT Highways / expressways Inner Ring Road Outer Ring Road DND Flyway Delhi–Gurgaon Expressway Delhi–Meerut Expressway Delhi–Faridabad Skyway Sports Teams Current Dabang Delhi Delhi Capitals Delhi cricket team Delhi FC Delhi football team Delhi Waveriders Sudeva Delhi FC Defunct Delhi Capitals Delhi Defenders Delhi Dynamos FC Delhi Smashers Delhi United FC Delhi Wizards Garhwal FC Hindustan FC New Delhi Heroes FC Simla Youngs FC Stadiums Arun Jaitley Stadium Chhatrasal Stadium Delhi University Stadium Dr. Ambedkar Stadium Dr. Karni Singh Shooting Range Indira Gandhi Arena Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Major Dhyan Chand National Stadium Siri Fort Sports Complex SPM Swimming Pool Complex Talkatora Stadium Thyagaraj Sports Complex Yamuna Sports Complex Games 1951 Asian Games 1982 Asian Games 1987 Cricket World Cup 1989 Asian Athletics Championships 1996 Cricket World Cup 2010 Commonwealth Games 2010 Men's Hockey World Cup 2011 Cricket World Cup 2017 FIFA U-17 World Cup Delhi Half Marathon Culture Independence Day Republic Day Cinema Shopping Delhi Pride Qutub Festival Punjabi cuisine Other templates Hindu temples Landmarks Museums Neighbourhoods Power plants Schools Universities and colleges Related Buildings and structures Neighbourhoods Tourist attractions Parks Notable people from Delhi List of cities in India by population India portal v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna v t e Telescopes and Observatories in India Observatories Allahabad Observatory Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences Colaba Observatory Devasthal Observatory Gauribidanur Radio Observatory Girawali Observatory Gyarah Sidi India-based Neutrino Observatory Indian Astronomical Observatory Indian Initiative in Gravitational-wave Observations Indian Institute of Astrophysics Kodaikanal Solar Observatory Madhava Observatory Madras Observatory Mount Abu InfraRed Observatory National Centre for Radio Astrophysics Tara Wali Kothi Trivandrum Observatory Udaipur Solar Observatory Vainu Bappu Observatory Telescopes 3.6m Devasthal Optical Telescope Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope Jantar Mantar Jantar Mantar, Jaipur Jantar Mantar, New Delhi Jantar Mantar, Varanasi Major Atmospheric Cerenkov Experiment Telescope National Large Solar Telescope Ooty Radio Telescope Pachmarhi Telescope Array Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Portals : India Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Education Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jantar_Mantar,_New_Delhi&oldid=1283070171 " Categories : 1724 establishments in India Archaeoastronomy Archaeological monuments in Delhi Astronomical observatories in India Buildings and structures completed in 1724 Monuments of National Importance in Delhi New Delhi Rajput architecture Tourist attractions in Delhi Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from June 2023 Use Indian English from June 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Coordinates on Wikidata Webarchive template archiveis links Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 07:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jantar Mantar, New Delhi 16 languages Add topic

