Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sensors 2 Data-logger 3 Enclosures 4 Power supply 5 Mast 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Automatic weather station 11 languages Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski ಕನ್ನಡ Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Meteorological instrument An Antarctic Automatic Weather Stations Project AWS in Antarctica An automatic weather station ( AWS ) is an automated version of the traditional weather station , either to save human labor or to enable measurements from remote areas.

[ 1 ] An AWS will typically consist of a weather-proof enclosure containing the data logger , rechargeable battery , telemetry (optional) and the meteorological sensors with an attached solar panel or wind turbine and mounted upon a mast. The specific configuration may vary due to the purpose of the system.

[ 1 ] The system may report in near real time via the Argos System , LoRa and the Global Telecommunications System , [ 2 ] or save the data for later recovery.

[ 3 ] In the past, automatic weather stations were often placed where electricity and communication lines were available. Nowadays, the solar panel , wind turbine and mobile phone technology have made it possible to have wireless stations that are not connected to the electrical grid or hardline telecommunications network.

[ 4 ] One of the main advantages of an automatic weather station is that it can provide accurate and reliable weather data in remote, inaccessible or hazardous locations. The AWS can be programmed to alert authorities in case of severe weather events.

Sensors [ edit ] An RWIS station Most automatic weather stations have [ 1 ] [ 5 ] Thermometer for measuring temperature Anemometer for measuring wind speed Wind vane for measuring wind direction Hygrometer for measuring humidity Barometer for measuring atmospheric pressure Some stations can also have [ 4 ] Ceilometer for measuring cloud height Present weather sensor and/or visibility sensor Rain gauge for measuring liquid-equivalent precipitation Ultrasonic snow depth sensor for measuring depth of snow Pyranometer for measuring solar radiation Unlike manual weather stations, automated airport weather stations cannot report the class and amount of clouds . Also, precipitation measurements are difficult, especially for snow , as the gauge must empty itself between observations. For present weather, all phenomena that do not touch the sensor, such as fog patches, remain unobserved.

[ 1 ] The change from manual observations to automatic weather stations is a major non-climatic change in the climate record.

[ 6 ] The change in instrumentation, enclosure and location can lead to a jump in, for example, the measured temperature or precipitation values, which can lead to erroneous estimates of climate trends. This change, and related non-climatic changes, have to be removed by homogenization .

Data-logger [ edit ] Data-logger for automatic weather station The data-logger is the heart of the Automatic Weather Station.

In high quality weather stations, the data-logger may be designed by the supplier to be the perfect solution for a particular meteorological client.
Indeed, usually data-loggers found in the market don't fit the requirement in terms of power consumption, inputs, communication, protection against animals (ants, rats, etc.),  humidity, salty air, sand, etc.

The main functions of a data-logger are: Measurement: the data-logger collects the information from every sensor and archives it.

Calculation: the data-logger processes most of the meteorological data for the users (avg, min, max...).

Data storage: the data-logger saves all the data either on its own memory or on uSD memory card.

Power supply: the data-logger manages the power supply of the Automatic Weather Station, using a solar panel for instance.

Communication: the data-logger manages the communication protocols with the remote server. The different communication protocols are usually GSM , GPRS , RTC , WiFi , uSD , and RS-232 .

Enclosures [ edit ] Enclosure with solar panel for data-logger of weather station Enclosures used with automatic weather stations are typically weather proof fiberglass , ABS or stainless steel , With ABS being the cheapest, cast aluminium paint [ 7 ] or stainless steel the most durable and fiberglass being a compromise.

[ 1 ] Power supply [ edit ] The main power source for an automatic weather station depends on its usage.  Many stations with lower power equipment usually use one or more solar panels connected in parallel with a regulator and one or more rechargeable batteries. As a rule of thumb, solar output is at its optimum for only 5 hours each day. As such, mounting angle and position are vital. In the Northern Hemisphere, the solar panel would be mounted facing south and vice versa for the Southern Hemisphere. The output from the solar panels may be supplemented by a wind turbine to provide power during periods of poor sunlight, or by direct connection to the local electrical grid.  Most automated airport weather stations are connected to the commercial power grid due to the higher power needs of the ceilometer and present weather sensors, which are active sensors and emit energy directly into the environment.

[ 4 ] Mast [ edit ] Main article: Meteorological mast The standard mast heights used with automatic weather stations are 2, 3, 10 and 30 meters. Other sizes are available, but typically these sizes have been used as standards for differing applications.

[ 1 ] The 2-meter (6.6 ft) mast is used for the measurement of parameters that affect a human subject. The mast height is referenced to head height.

The 3-meter (9.8 ft) mast is used for the measurement of parameters that affect crops (such as wheat, sugar cane etc.) The mast height is referenced to crop top.

The 10-meter (33 ft) mast is used for the measurement of parameters without interference from objects such as trees, buildings or other obstructions. Typically the most important weather parameter measured at this height is wind speed and direction.

The 30-meter (98 ft) mast is used for the measurement of parameters over stratified distances for the purposes of data modelling. A common application is to take measurements of wind , humidity and temperature at 30, 10, and 2 meters. Other sensors are mounted around the 2 meter or lower height.

See also [ edit ] Remote Automated Weather Station Automated airport weather station Personal weather station Mesonet Cooperative Observer References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f King, Jeremy.

"Automatic Weather Stations" .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2009 . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

^ "About the Automatic Weather Station project" .

Automatic Weather Station project . The National Science Foundation Office of Polar Programs. Archived from the original on February 4, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

^ "ADDI Automatic weather stations" . ADDI. Archived from the original on 2009-03-26 . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

^ a b c "Automatic Weather Stations for Agricultural" . Australian Bureau of Meteorology.

Archived from the original on May 31, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

^ "North Hants Weather - AWS" . Archived from the original on 2009-01-07 . Retrieved 2009-04-15 .

^ Begert, M., Schlegel, T., and Kirchhofer, W.: Homogeneous temperature and precipitation series of Switzerland from 1864 to 2000. Int. J. Climatol., 25, 65–80, 2005.

^ "AWS with cast aluminium enclosure" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2013-12-16 .

v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Automatic_weather_station&oldid=1300635888 " Category : Meteorological instrumentation and equipment Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Automatic weather station 11 languages Add topic

