Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Historical and modern definitions and perspectives Toggle Historical and modern definitions and perspectives subsection 2.1 Lust 2.2 Gluttony 2.3 Greed 2.4 Sloth 2.5 Wrath 2.6 Envy 2.7 Pride 3 Historical definitions and perspectives Toggle Historical definitions and perspectives subsection 3.1 Acedia 3.2 Vainglory 4 Patterns of confession 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Seven deadly sins 72 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of vices in Christian theology For other uses, see Seven deadly sins (disambiguation) and Deadly Sins (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Mortal sin .

Hieronymus Bosch 's The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things The Holy Spirit and the Seven Deadly Sins . Folio from Walters manuscript W.171 (15th century) Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e The seven deadly sins (also known as the capital vices or cardinal sins ) function as a grouping of major vices within the teachings of Christianity .

[ 1 ] In the standard list, the seven deadly sins according to the Catholic Church are pride , greed , wrath , envy , lust , gluttony , and sloth .

In Catholicism, the classification of deadly sins into a group of seven originated with Tertullian and continued with Evagrius Ponticus .

[ 2 ] The concepts were partly based on Greco-Roman and Biblical antecedents [ 3 ] . Later, the concept of seven deadly sins evolved further, as shown by historical context based on the Latin language of the Roman Catholic Church, though with significant influence from the Greek language and associated religious traditions. Knowledge of this concept is evident in various treatises; in paintings and sculpture (for example, architectural decorations on churches in some Catholic parishes ); and in some older textbooks.

[ 1 ] Further knowledge has been derived from patterns of confession .

During later centuries and in modern times, the idea of sins (especially seven in number) has influenced or inspired various streams of religious and philosophical thought, fine art painting, and modern popular media such as literature , film , and television .

History [ edit ] An allegorical image depicting the human heart subject to the seven deadly sins, each represented by an animal (clockwise: toad = avarice; snake = envy; lion = wrath; snail = sloth; pig = gluttony; goat = lust; peacock = pride) With reference to the seven deadly sins, "evil thoughts" can be categorized as follows: [ 4 ] physical (thoughts produced by the nutritive, sexual, and acquisitive appetites) emotional (thoughts produced by depressive, irascible, or dismissive moods) mental (thoughts produced by jealous, boastful, or hubristic states of mind) The fourth-century monk Evagrius Ponticus reduced the [ which?

] logismoi (or forms of temptation) from nine to eight in number, as follows: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Γαστριμαργία ( gastrimargia ) gluttony Πορνεία ( porneia ) prostitution , fornication Φιλαργυρία ( philargyria ) greed Λύπη ( lypē ) sadness , rendered in the Philokalia as envy , sadness at another's good fortune Ὀργή ( orgē ) wrath Ἀκηδία ( akēdia ) acedia (apathy, neglect, or indifference), rendered in the Philokalia as de jection Κενοδοξία ( kenodoxia ) boasting Ὑπερηφανία ( hyperēphania ) pride , sometimes rendered as self-overestimation , arrogance , or grandiosity [ 7 ] Evagrius's list was translated into the Latin of Western Christianity in many writings of John Cassian , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] one of Evagrius’s students; the list thus become part of the Western tradition's spiritual pietas or Catholic devotions as follows: [ 4 ] Gula ( gluttony ) Luxuria/Fornicatio ( lust , fornication ) Avaritia ( greed ) Tristitia ( sorrow , despair , despondency) Ira ( wrath ) Acedia ( sloth ) Vanagloria ( vanity , vainglory) Superbia ( pride ) In AD 590, Pope Gregory I revised this list into the form that has become common.

[ 10 ] He combined tristitia with acedia ; combined vanagloria with superbia ; and added envy , which is invidia in Latin.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] (Pope Gregory's list corresponds to the traits described in Pirkei Avot as "removing one from the world.") [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Thomas Aquinas uses and defends Gregory's list in his Summa Theologica , although he calls them the "capital sins", because they are the head and form of all the other sins.

[ 15 ] Christian denominations, such as the Anglican Communion , [ 16 ] Lutheran Church , [ 17 ] and Methodist Church , [ 18 ] still retain this list; modern evangelists such as Billy Graham have explicated it.

[ 19 ] Historical and modern definitions and perspectives [ edit ] According to Catholic prelate Henry Edward Manning , the seven deadly sins are seven ways to eternal death (or Hell).

[ 20 ] The Lutheran divine Martin Chemnitz , who contributed to the development of Lutheran systematic theology, implored clergy to remind faithful congregations about the seven deadly sins.

[ 21 ] In order of increasing severity according to Pope Gregory I, the seven deadly sins are as follows: Lust [ edit ] Main article: Lust Lust or lechery is intense longing. It is usually viewed as intense or unbridled sexual desire , [ 22 ] which may lead to fornication (including adultery , rape , or bestiality ), and other sinful and sexual acts; however, lust can also denote other forms of unbridled desire, such as for money or power.

Henry Edward Manning explains that the impurity of lust transforms one into "a slave of the devil ".

[ 20 ] Lust is generally thought to be the mildest capital sin.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Thomas Aquinas considers it an abuse of a faculty that humans share with animals, and sins of the flesh are less grievous than spiritual sins.

[ 25 ] Gluttony [ edit ] Main article: Gluttony Still life: Excess ( Albert Anker , 1896) Gluttony is the overindulgence and overconsumption of anything to the point of excess. The word derives from the Latin gluttire , meaning 'to gulp down' or 'to swallow'.

[ 26 ] One reason for condemning gluttony is that gorging by prosperous people may leave needy people hungry.

[ 27 ] Medieval church leaders such as Thomas Aquinas took a more expansive view of gluttony, [ 27 ] arguing that it could also include an obsessive anticipation of meals, as well as overindulgence in delicacies and costly foods. Aquinas listed five forms of gluttony: [ 28 ] Laute – eating too expensively Studiose – eating too daintily Nimis – eating too much Praepropere – eating too soon Ardenter – eating too eagerly Greed [ edit ] Main article: Greed The Worship of Mammon (1909) by Evelyn De Morgan In the words of Henry Edward Manning, avarice "plunges a man deep into the mire of this world, so that he makes it to be his god".

[ 20 ] Avarice, or greed as it came to be known, has many forms. When Pope Gregory I revised the sins, he defined greed as "treachery, fraud, deceit, perjury, restlessness, violence and hardnesses of heart against compassion." This definition would evolve into the modern interpretation: outside Christian writings, greed is an inordinate desire to acquire or possess more than one needs, especially with respect to material wealth .

[ 29 ] Aquinas believed that greed, like pride, can lead to evil.

[ 30 ] Sloth [ edit ] Main article: Sloth (deadly sin) Parable of the Wheat and the Tares (1624) by Abraham Bloemaert , Walters Art Museum Sloth refers to many related ideas, dating from antiquity, and includes spiritual, mental, and physical states.

[ 31 ] The definition has changed considerably since it was first recognized as a sin. Today it can be defined as the absence of interest in or habitual disinclination to exertion.

[ 32 ] Originally, however, Christian theologians believed it to be a lack of care for performing spiritual duties.

In his Summa Theologica , Saint Thomas Aquinas defined sloth as "sorrow about spiritual good".

[ 30 ] The scope of sloth is wide.

[ 31 ] In a spiritual sense, acedia first referred to an affliction attending religious persons, especially monks, wherein they became indifferent to their duties and obligations to God . In a mental sense, acedia has a number of distinctive components: the most important of these is affectlessness—a lack of any feeling about self or other; a mind-state that gives rise to boredom, rancor, apathy; and a passive inert or sluggish mentation. In a physical sense, acedia is fundamentally associated with a cessation of motion and an indifference to work; the sin finds expression in laziness, idleness, and indolence.

[ 31 ] Sloth includes ceasing to use the seven gifts of grace given by the Holy Spirit ; these gifts are Wisdom , Understanding , Counsel, Knowledge , Piety , Fortitude , and Fear of the Lord . Such disregard may lead to slower spiritual progress towards eternal life, neglect of multiple duties of charity towards a neighbor , and animosity towards those who love God.

[ 20 ] The other deadly sins are sins of committing immorality; by contrast, sloth is a sin of avoiding responsibilities. The sin may arise from any of the other capital vices: for example, a son may avoid his duty to his father because of anger. The state and habit of sloth is a mortal sin; but the habit of the soul tending towards the last mortal state of sloth is not mortal in and of itself, except under certain circumstances.

[ 20 ] Emotionally, and cognitively, the evil of acedia (or sloth) finds expression in a lack of feeling for the world, the people in it, or the self.

Acedia takes form as an alienation of the sentient self first from the world and then from itself. The most profound versions of this condition are found in a withdrawal from all forms of participation in, or care for, others or oneself. Nevertheless, a lesser yet more harmful element was also noted by theologians: Gregory the Great asserted that, "from tristitia , there arise malice, rancour, cowardice, [and] despair".

Chaucer also dealt with this attribute of acedia , reckoning the characteristics of the sin to include despair, somnolence, idleness, tardiness, negligence, laziness, and wrawnesse , the last variously translated as 'anger' or better as 'peevishness'. For Chaucer, human sin consists in languishing and holding back, refusing to undertake works of goodness because (people tell themselves) the circumstances surrounding the establishment of good are too grievous and too difficult to suffer.

Acedia in Chaucer's view is thus the enemy of every source and motive for work.

[ 33 ] According to Stanford Lyman, sloth subverts the maintenance of the body, taking no care for its daily needs; sloth also slows down the mind, diverting its attention away from important matters. Sloth hinders a person in moral undertakings, and it thus becomes a significant source of a person's ruin.

[ 33 ] Wrath [ edit ] Main article: Wrath Wrath , by Jacques de l'Ange Wrath can be defined as uncontrolled feelings of anger, rage, and even hatred. Wrath often reveals itself in the wish to seek vengeance.

[ 34 ] According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church , the neutral act of anger becomes the sin of wrath when it is directed against an innocent person; when it is unduly strong or long-lasting; or when it desires excessive punishment. "If anger reaches the point of a deliberate desire to kill or seriously wound a neighbor, it is gravely against charity; it is a mortal sin". Hatred is the sin of desiring that someone else may suffer misfortune or evil, and it is a mortal sin when one desires grave harm.

[ 35 ] People feel angry when they sense that they or someone they care about has been offended; when they are certain about the nature and cause of the angering event; when they are certain someone else is responsible; and when they feel that they can still influence the situation or cope with it.

[ 36 ] Henry Edward Manning considers that "angry people are slaves to themselves".

[ 20 ] Envy [ edit ] Main article: Envy Envy is characterized by an insatiable desire such as greed and lust. It can be described as a sad or resentful covetousness towards the traits or possessions of another person. Envy stems from vainglory [ 37 ] and cuts a person off from their neighbor.

[ 20 ] According to St. Thomas Aquinas, the struggle aroused by envy has three stages: During the first stage, the envious person attempts to lower another person's reputation In the middle stage, the envious person receives either "joy at another's misfortune" (if he succeeds in defaming the other person) or "grief at another's prosperity" (if he fails) the third stage is hatred because "sorrow causes hatred" [ 38 ] Bertrand Russell said that envy was one of the most potent causes of unhappiness, bringing sorrow to committers of envy, while giving them the urge to inflict pain upon others.

[ 39 ] Pride [ edit ] Main article: Pride Detail of Pride from The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things by Hieronymus Bosch, c. 1500 Pride is known as hubris (from the Ancient Greek ὕβρις ) or futility; it is considered the original and worst of the seven deadly sins—the most demonic—on almost every list, .

[ 40 ] Pride is also thought to be the source of the other capital sins. Pride is viewed as the opposite of humility .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] C. S. Lewis writes in Mere Christianity that pride is the "anti-God" state, the position in which the ego and the self are directly opposed to God: "Unchastity, anger, greed, drunkenness and all that, are mere fleabites in comparison: it was through Pride that Lucifer became wicked: Pride leads to every other vice: it is the complete anti-God state of mind." [ 43 ] Pride is understood to sever the human spirit from God, as well as from the life and grace given by God's presence.

[ 20 ] A person can be prideful for different reasons. Author Ichabod Spencer states that "spiritual pride is the worst kind of pride, if not worst snare of the devil. The heart is particularly deceitful on this one thing." [ 44 ] Jonathan Edwards wrote: "remember that pride is the worst viper that is in the heart, the greatest disturber of the soul's peace and sweet communion with Christ; it was the first sin that ever was and lies lowest in the foundation of Lucifer's whole building and is the most difficultly rooted out and is the most hidden, secret and deceitful of all lusts and often creeps in, insensibly, into the midst of religion and sometimes under the disguise of humility." [ 45 ] Modern use of the term pride may be captured in the biblical proverb , "Pride goeth before destruction, a haughty spirit before a fall" (which is abbreviated as "Pride goeth before a fall" in Proverbs 16:18). The "pride that blinds" causes foolish actions against common sense.

[ 46 ] In political analysis, hubris is often used to describe how powerful leaders become irrationally self-confident and contemptuous of advice over time, leading them to act impulsively.

[ 46 ] Historical definitions and perspectives [ edit ] Acedia [ edit ] Main article: Acedia Acedia mosaic , Basilica of Notre-Dame de Fourvière Acedia is neglecting to take care of something that one should do. The term can be translated as ' apathetic listlessness' or depression . It is related to melancholy ; acedia describes the behaviour, and melancholy suggests the emotion producing it. In early Christian thought, the lack of joy was regarded as a willful refusal to enjoy the goodness of God. By contrast, apathy was considered a refusal to help others in times of need.

Acēdia is the negative form of the Greek term κηδεία ( Kēdeia ), which has a more restricted usage.

Kēdeia refers specifically to spousal love and respect for the dead.

[ 47 ] Pope Gregory combined acedia with tristitia to form sloth in his list. When Thomas Aquinas considered acedia in his interpretation of this list, he described it as an "uneasiness of the mind", which was a progenitor for lesser sins such as restlessness and instability.

[ 48 ] Acedia is currently defined in the Catechism of the Catholic Church as spiritual sloth—believing spiritual tasks to be too difficult.

[ 49 ] In the fourth century, Christian monks believed that acedia was primarily caused by a state of melancholia that caused spiritual detachment rather than laziness.

[ 50 ] Vainglory [ edit ] Main article: Vanity Vainglory is unjustified boasting. Pope Gregory viewed it as a form of pride, so he merged vainglory into pride in his list of sins.

[ 11 ] Vainglory is the progenitor of envy .

[ 37 ] Professor Kevin M. Clarke observes that vainglory is technically different from pride: vainglory is “when we seek human acclaim”, while pride is “taking spiritual credit for what I’ve done, instead of ascribing one’s good deeds to God.” [ 51 ] The Latin term gloria roughly means 'boasting', although its English cognate glory has come to have an exclusively positive meaning. Historically, the term vain meant roughly 'futile' (a meaning retained in the modern expression in vain ); but by the fourteenth century, vain had come to have the strong narcissistic undertones that it retains today.

[ 52 ] Patterns of confession [ edit ] Further information: Confession (religion) According to a 2009 study by the Jesuit scholar Fr. Roberto Busa , the most common deadly sin confessed by men is lust, and the most common deadly sin confessed by women is pride.

[ 53 ] It is unclear whether these differences were due to the actual number of transgressions committed by each sex, or whether the observed pattern was caused by differing views on what matters or should be confessed.

[ 54 ] See also [ edit ] Seven virtues Arishadvargas in Hinduism Cardinal virtues Christian ethics Eight Dusts in Tenrikyo Enneagram of Personality Eternal sin The Fable of The Bees: or, Private Vices, Public Benefits Five thieves in Sikhism Five poisons in Buddhism Chivalry Nafs and Tazkiah in Islam Prajnaparamita Seven Social Sins The Seven Sins of Memory The Seven Deadly Sins of Modern Times Ten Commandments Theological virtues Three poisons in Buddhism Tree of virtues and tree of vices Dante's seven deadly vices [ 55 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Tucker, Shawn (2015).

The Virtues and Vices in the Arts: A Sourcebook . Cascade.

ISBN 978-1625647184 .

^ "The Seven Deadly Sins" .

Catholic Answers .

Archived from the original on 2024-08-08 . Retrieved 2023-09-30 .

^ [ citation needed ] ^ a b Refoule, F. (1967) "Evagrius Ponticus," In New Catholic Encyclopaedia, Vol. 5, pp. 644f, Staff of Catholic University of America, Eds., New York: McGraw-Hill.

^ Evagrio Pontico, Gli Otto Spiriti Malvagi , trans., Felice Comello, Pratiche Editrice, Parma, 1990, p.11-12.

^ Evagrius (22 June 2006).

The Greek Ascetic Corpus . Translated by Sinkewicz., Robert E. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0199297088 .

^ In the translation of the Philokalia by Palmer, Ware and Sherrard.

^ "NPNF-211. Sulpitius Severus, Vincent of Lerins, John Cassian – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-15 . Retrieved 2012-05-19 .

^ Cassian, John (3 January 2000).

The Institutes (First ed.). New York: Newman Press of the Paulist Press.

ISBN 9780809105229 .

^ "For pride is the root of all evil, of which it is said, as Scripture bears witness; Pride is the beginning of all sin. [Ecclus. 10, 1] But seven principal vices, as its first progeny, spring doubtless from this poisonous root, namely, vain glory, envy, anger, melancholy, avarice, gluttony, lust." Gregory the Great, Moralia in Iob, book XXXI Archived 2021-06-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b DelCogliano, Mark (18 November 2014).

Gregory the Great: Moral Reflections on the Book of Job, Volume 1 . Cistercian Publications.

ISBN 9780879071493 .

^ Tucker, Shawn R. (24 February 2015).

The Virtues and Vices in the Arts: A Sourcebook . Cascade Books, an Imprint of Wipf and Stock Publishers.

^ Pirkei Avot 2:11, 3:10, and 4:21. Also the Vilna Gaon 's commentary to Aggadot Berakhot 4b.

^ "Traditional Jewish source for the "Seven Deadly Sins" - the Seforim Blog" .

^ "SUMMA THEOLOGICA: The cause of sin, in respect of one sin being the cause of another Prima Secundae Partis, Q. 84; I-II,84,3)" .

www.newadvent.org .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ Armentrout, Don S. (1 January 2000).

An Episcopal Dictionary of the Church: A User-Friendly Reference for Episcopalians . Church Publishing, Inc. p. 479.

ISBN 9780898697018 .

^ Lessing, Reed (25 August 2002).

"Mighty Menacin' Midianites" . The Lutheran Hour.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2021 . Retrieved 26 March 2017 .

^ Speidel, Royal.

"What Would a United Methodist Jesus Do?" . UCM. Archived from the original on 25 April 2016 . Retrieved 26 March 2017 .

Thirdly, the United Methodist Jesus reminds us to confess our sins. How long has it been since you have heard reference to the seven deadly sins: pride, gluttony, sloth, lust, greed, envy and anger?

^ The American Lutheran, Volumes 39–40 . American Lutheran Publicity Bureau. 1956. p. 332.

The world-renowned Evangelist, Billy Graham, presents in this volume an excellent analysis of the seven deadly sins which he enumerates as pride, anger, envy, impurity, gluttony, avarice and slothfulness.

^ a b c d e f g h Manning, Henry Edward.

Sin and Its consequences .

^ Martin Chemnitz (2007).

Ministry, Word, and Sacraments: An Enchiridion; The Lord's Supper; The Lord's Prayer . Concordia Publishing House.

ISBN 978-0-7586-1544-2 .

^ "Definition of LUST" .

www.merriam-webster.com .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2021 . Retrieved 4 May 2016 .

^ Dorothy L. Sayers , Purgatory , Introduction, pp. 65–67 (Penguin, 1955).

^ Pyle, Eric (31 December 2014).

William Blake's Illustrations for Dante's Divine Comedy: A Study of the Engravings, Pencil Sketches and Watercolors . McFarland.

ISBN 9781476617022 .

^ Aquinas, St Thomas (1 January 2013).

Summa Theologica, Volume 4 (Part III, First Section) . Cosimo.

ISBN 9781602065604 .

^ "Latin Definition for: gluttio, gluttire, -, – (ID: 21567) – Latin Dictionary and Grammar Resources – Latdict" .

latin-dictionary.net . Retrieved 2022-10-10 .

^ a b Okholm, Dennis.

"Rx for Gluttony" Archived 2016-03-24 at the Wayback Machine .

Christianity Today , Vol. 44, No. 10, 11 September 2000, p.62 ^ "Gluttony" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 2010-06-13 . Retrieved 2007-09-18 .

^ "greed" .

American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. 2016 . Retrieved 4 February 2019 – via The Free Dictionary.

^ a b Aquinas, Thomas (20 August 2013).

Summa Theologica (All Complete & Unabridged 3 Parts + Supplement & Appendix + interactive links and annotations) . e-artnow.

ISBN 9788074842924 .

^ a b c Lyman, Stanford (1989).

The Seven Deadly Sins: Society and Evil . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 5.

ISBN 0-930390-81-4 .

^ "the definition of sloth" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 17 June 2021 . Retrieved 3 May 2016 .

^ a b Lyman, Stanford.

The Seven Deadly Sins: Society and Evil . pp.

6– 7.

^ Landau, Ronnie (30 October 2010).

The Seven deadly Sins: A companion . Lulu.com.

ISBN 978-1-4457-3227-5 .

^ " CCC , 2302-3" . Vatican.va.

^ International Handbook of Anger. p. 290 ^ a b Aquinas, Thomas (1 January 2013).

Summa Theologica, Volume 3 (Part II, Second Section) . Cosimo, Inc.

ISBN 9781602065581 .

^ "Summa Theologica: Treatise on The Theological Virtues (QQ[1] – 46): Question. 36 – Of Envy (four articles)" . Sacred-texts.com.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2010 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1930).

The Conquest of Happiness .

New York : H. Liverwright . p. 86.

^ Climacus, John .

The Ladder of Divine Ascent, Translation by Colm Luibheid and Norman Russell . pp.

62– 63.

^ "Humility vs Pride And Why The Difference Should Matter To You | Jeremie Kubicek" .

jeremiekubicek.com . Archived from the original on 18 June 2018 . Retrieved 2 March 2018 .

^ Acquaviva, Gary J. (2000).

Values, Violence and Our Future . Rodopi.

ISBN 9042005599 .

^ Mere Christianity, C. S. Lewis, ISBN 978-0-06-065292-0 ^ Dictionary of Burning Words of Brilliant Writers . 1895. p. 485.

^ Claghorn, George.

To Deborah Hatheway, Letters and Personal Writings (Works of Jonathan Edwards Online Vol. 16) .

^ a b Hollow, Matthew (2014).

"The 1920 Farrow's Bank Failure: A Case of Managerial Hubris" .

Journal of Management History .

20 (2).

Durham University : 164– 178.

doi : 10.1108/JMH-11-2012-0071 .

ISSN 1751-1348 .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2021 . Retrieved 1 October 2014 .

^ Henry George Liddell and Robert Scott. A Greek-English Lexicon. Revised by Sir Henry Stuart Jones and Roderick McKenzie. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940.

^ McCarron, Bill; Knoke, Paul (2002), "From Gent to Gentil: Jed Tewksbury and the Function of Literary Allusion in A Place to Come To" , Robert Penn Warren Studies , 2 (1) ^ " CCC , 2733" . Vatican.va.

^ "Before Sloth Meant Laziness, It Was the Spiritual Sin of Acedia" .

Atlas Obscura . 14 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2017 .

^ Clarke 2018 , p. 163.

^ Oxford English dictionary ^ "Two sexes 'sin in different ways' " .

BBC News . 18 February 2009.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2009 . Retrieved 24 July 2010 .

^ Morning Edition (20 February 2009).

"True Confessions: Men And Women Sin Differently" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 14 July 2021 . Retrieved 24 July 2010 .

^ Little, Becky.

"Eight thoughts to seven Sins" . History . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Further reading [ edit ] Alighieri, Dante , Divine Comedy Cassian, John (1885).

"The Remedies for the Eight Principal Faults." .

Ante-Nicene Christian Library, Volume XI . Translated by Schaff, Philip. T. & T. Clark in Edinburgh.

de la Puente, Lius (1852).

"On Pride and Vainglory" .

Meditations On The Mysteries Of Our Holy Faith . Richarson and Son.

Schumacher, Meinolf [ de ] (2005): "Catalogues of Demons as Catalogues of Vices in Medieval German Literature: 'Des Teufels Netz' and the Alexander Romance by Ulrich von Etzenbach." In In the Garden of Evil: The Vices and Culture in the Middle Ages . Edited by Richard Newhauser, pp. 277–290. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies.

The Concept of Sin , by Josef Pieper The Traveller's Guide to Hell , by Michael Pauls & Dana Facaros Sacred Origins of Profound Things , by Charles Panati The Faerie Queene , by Edmund Spenser The Seven Deadly Sins Series , Oxford University Press (7 vols.) Rebecca Konyndyk DeYoung , Glittering Vices: A New Look at the Seven Deadly Sins and Their Remedies, (Grand Rapids: BrazosPress, 2009) Solomon Schimmel , The Seven Deadly Sins: Jewish, Christian and Classical Reflections on Human Psychology, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997) Slater S.J., Thomas (1925).

"Book 4: On Sin (Pride)" .

A manual of moral theology for English-speaking countries . Burns Oates & Washbourne Ltd.

Tucker, Shawn.

The Virtues and Vices in the Arts: A Sourcebook , (Eugene, OR: Cascade Press, 2015) Clarke, Kevin M. (May 18, 2018).

The Seven Deadly Sins: Sayings of the Fathers of the Church . CUA Press.

ISBN 978-0-8132-3021-4 . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Se7en (Film) – Paradise Lost on YouTube Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Seven Deadly Sins .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Seven deadly sins .

v t e Seven deadly sins The sins Lust Gluttony Envy Greed Sloth Pride Wrath Describing the sins Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld In art and culture Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio The Keys to the Kingdom (book series) The Seven Deadly Sins (1585 play) The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things (painting) The Seven Deadly Sins (1933 ballet) The Seven Deadly Sins (1952 film) The Seven Deadly Sins (1962 film) The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence (1975) Seven (1995 film) Fullmetal Alchemist (manga series) Fullmetal Alchemist (2003 anime) Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood (2009 anime) The Seven Deadly Sins (manga series) The Seven Deadly Sins of Modern Times (painting) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (light novel series) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (2016 anime) Four Last Things (video game) Graveyard Keeper (2018 video game) Shazam!

(comic book) Seven Deadly Enemies of Man Shazam!

(2019 film) Helluva Boss (2020 animated series) Limbus Company (2023 video game) Hazbin Hotel (2024 animated series) Related Seven Heavenly Virtues Seven Social Sins Sin Christian views on sin Christian views on the Old Covenant Hamartiology Peter Binsfeld Catholicism portal v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e Christianity Index Outline Glossary Prophets People Lists of Christians By country Bible (Scriptures) Canon Old Testament New Testament Foundations Church Creed Gospel New Covenant Christian tradition Worship History ( timeline ) ( spread ) Early Christianity Jesus in Christianity Chronology Nativity Baptism Ministry Sermon on the Mount Parables Miracles Great Commandment Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Ascension Apostles Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Great Church Ante-Nicene period Late antiquity Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Ephesus Chalcedon State church of the Roman Empire Christian biblical canon Middle Ages Monasticism Papal States East–West Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Age of Discovery Modern era Auto-da-fé Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Relations with Islam Influences Denominations ( list , members ) Western Catholic Old Catholic Independent Catholic ( Palmarian ) Protestant Adventist Anabaptist Anglican Baptist Charismatic Evangelical Holiness Lutheran Methodist Pentecostal Quakers Reformed Western Rite Orthodoxy Eastern Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodox (Miaphysite) Church of the East (Nestorian) Eastern Catholic Restorationist Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Iglesia ni Cristo Theology Ablution Angel Born again Christology Divine apathy Ecclesiology Four marks Body of Christ One true church People of God Canon law Faith Fall of man Forbidden fruit Garden of Eden Final Judgement God Trinity Father Son Holy Spirit Good works Heaven Hell Holy water Hygiene Kingdom of God Liturgy Catholic Eastern Catholic Eastern Orthodox Protestant Love of Christ of God Mariology Theotokos Mission Monasticism Mortification Catholic Of the flesh New Covenant Nicene Creed Old Covenant Views Original sin Penance Prayer Repentance Sacraments Baptism Eucharist Marriage Confirmation Penance Anointing of the Sick Holy orders Saints Salvation Satan Sin Eternal sin Mortal sin Sins that cry to Heaven for Vengeance Seven deadly sins Venial sin Tradition Values Vice Works of mercy Worship Philosophy Natural law Ethics Science Evolution Politics Social mortgage Universal destination of goods Views on poverty and wealth Option for the poor Worldview Other features Culture Alcohol Architecture Architecture of cathedrals and great churches Art Jesus Mary Trinity God the Father Holy Spirit Atonement Christmas Church buildings Lists of cathedrals Crucifix Cupio dissolvi Evangelism Catechesis Catechism Catholic priest Folk Christianity Open-air Pastor Fallen woman Magdalene asylum Flag Flagellant Forgiveness Literature Marriage Catholic Music Chant Choir Gospel Hymn Introit Pop Psalm Requiem Mythology Pilgrimage Popular piety Redemptive suffering Role in civilization Self-flagellation Sign of the cross Symbolism Movements Crusading movement Anarchism Charismatic Democracy Evangelism Mission Environmentalism Existentialism Fundamentalism Liberation Left / Right Mysticism Pacifism Prosperity Supremacy Terrorism Traditionalist Catholicism Cooperation Christendom Ecumenism Charta Oecumenica World Council of Churches World Evangelical Alliance Nondenominationalism Related ... and Islam ... and other religions ... and violence ... as an ethnicity Anti-Christian sentiment Christian universalism Criticism Jesus Cultural Christians Good and evil Great Apostasy Martyrs Miracle Nominal Christian Persecution Religious views on love Role of Christianity in civilization Christianization Cultural Christians Spread Unlimited atonement Views on homosexuality Christianity portal Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX ^ Collaert, Hans; Snellinck, Jan.

"Harrowing of Hell and the Seven Deadly Sins" . Retrieved April 13, 2025 .

^ Taras, Zach; Ross, Dave.

"7 Deadly Sins: List of the Biblical Violations and Their Origins" .

^ Le, Kathy; Writer, Staff.

"Sinful History: The Strange and Unknown Origins of the Seven Deadly Sins" .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seven_deadly_sins&oldid=1305462995 " Categories : Seven deadly sins Catholic theology and doctrine Christian terminology Cultural lists Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from September 2024 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Tagalog-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seven deadly sins 72 languages Add topic

