Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Electron acceptors 2 Atom-transfer reagents Toggle Atom-transfer reagents subsection 2.1 Common oxidizing agents 3 Dangerous materials definition 4 Common oxidizing agents and their products 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Oxidizing agent 59 languages العربية Asturianu Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Oxidiser ) Chemical compound used to oxidize another substance in a chemical reaction The international pictogram for oxidizing chemicals.

Dangerous goods label for oxidizing agents An oxidizing agent (also known as an oxidant , oxidizer , electron recipient , or electron acceptor ) is a substance in a redox chemical reaction that gains or " accepts "/"receives" an electron from a reducing agent (called the reductant , reducer , or electron donor ). In other words, an oxidizer is any substance that oxidizes another substance. The oxidation state , which describes the degree of loss of electrons , of the oxidizer decreases while that of the reductant increases; this is expressed by saying that oxidizers "undergo reduction" and "are reduced" while reducers "undergo oxidation" and "are oxidized".
Common oxidizing agents are oxygen , hydrogen peroxide , and the halogens .

In one sense, an oxidizing agent is a chemical species that undergoes a chemical reaction in which it gains one or more electrons. In that sense, it is one component in an oxidation–reduction (redox) reaction. In the second sense, an oxidizing agent is a chemical species that transfers electronegative atoms, usually oxygen, to a substrate.

Combustion , many explosives, and organic redox reactions involve atom-transfer reactions.

Electron acceptors [ edit ] Example of a reduction–oxidation reaction between sodium and chlorine, with the OIL RIG mnemonic [ 1 ] Tetracyanoquinodimethane is an organic electron-acceptor.

Electron acceptors participate in electron-transfer reactions . In this context, the oxidizing agent is called an electron acceptor and the reducing agent is called an electron donor . A classic oxidizing agent is the ferrocenium ion Fe(C 5 H 5 ) + 2 , which accepts an electron to form Fe(C 5 H 5 ) 2 .  One of the strongest acceptors commercially available is " Magic blue ", the radical cation derived from N(C 6 H 4 -4-Br) 3 .

[ 2 ] Extensive tabulations of ranking the electron accepting properties of various reagents (redox potentials) are available, see Standard electrode potential (data page) .

Atom-transfer reagents [ edit ] In more common usage, an oxidizing agent transfers oxygen atoms to a substrate. In this context, the oxidizing agent can be called an oxygenation reagent or oxygen-atom transfer (OAT) agent.

[ 3 ] Examples include MnO − 4 ( permanganate ), CrO 2− 4 ( chromate ), OsO 4 ( osmium tetroxide ), and especially ClO − 4 ( perchlorate ). Notice that these species are all oxides .

In some cases, these oxides can also serve as electron acceptors, as illustrated by the conversion of MnO − 4 to MnO 2− 4 , ie permanganate to manganate .

Common oxidizing agents [ edit ] Oxygen (O 2 ) Ozone (O 3 ) Hydrogen peroxide (H 2 O 2 ) and other inorganic peroxides , Fenton's reagent Fluorine (F 2 ), chlorine (Cl 2 ), and other halogens Nitric acid (HNO 3 ) and nitrate compounds such as potassium nitrate (KNO 3 ), the oxidizer in black powder Potassium chlorate (KClO 3 ) Xenon difluoride (XeF 2 ) Xenon tetrafluoride (XeF 4 ) Xenon hexafluoride (XeF 6 ) Krypton difluoride (KrF 2 ) Sulfur (S 8 ) Peroxydisulfuric acid (H 2 S 2 O 8 ) Peroxymonosulfuric acid (H 2 SO 5 ) Hypochlorite , chlorite , chlorate , perchlorate , and other analogous halogen oxyanions Fluorides of chlorine , bromine , and iodine Hexavalent chromium compounds such as chromic and dichromic acids and chromium trioxide , pyridinium chlorochromate (PCC), and chromate/dichromate compounds such as Sodium dichromate (Na 2 Cr 2 O 7 ) Permanganate compounds such as potassium permanganate (KMnO 4 ) Sodium perborate ( [Na + ] 2 · [B 2 O 4 (OH) 4 ] 2− ) Nitrous oxide (N 2 O), Nitrogen dioxide / Dinitrogen tetroxide (NO 2 / N 2 O 4 ) Sodium bismuthate (NaBiO 3 ) Cerium (IV) compounds such as ceric ammonium nitrate and ceric sulfate Lead dioxide (PbO 2 ) Dangerous materials definition [ edit ] See also: HAZMAT Class 5 Oxidizing agents and organic peroxides The dangerous goods definition of an oxidizing agent is a substance that can cause or contribute to the combustion of other material.

[ 4 ] By this definition some materials that are classified as oxidizing agents by analytical chemists are not classified as oxidizing agents in a dangerous materials sense. An example is potassium dichromate , which does not pass the dangerous goods test of an oxidizing agent.

The U.S. Department of Transportation defines oxidizing agents specifically. There are two definitions for oxidizing agents governed under DOT regulations. These two are Class 5 ; Division 5.1(a)1 and Class 5; Division 5.1(a)2. Division 5.1 "means a material that may, generally by yielding oxygen, cause or enhance the combustion of other materials." Division 5.(a)1 of the DOT code applies to solid oxidizers "if, when tested in accordance with the UN Manual of Tests and Criteria (IBR, see § 171.7 of this subchapter), its mean burning time is less than or equal to the burning time of a 3:7 potassium bromate/cellulose mixture." 5.1(a)2 of the DOT code applies to liquid oxidizers "if, when tested in accordance with the UN Manual of Tests and Criteria, it spontaneously ignites or its mean time for a pressure rise from 690 kPa to 2070 kPa gauge is less than the time of a 1:1 nitric acid (65 percent)/cellulose mixture." [ 5 ] Common oxidizing agents and their products [ edit ] Agent Product(s) O 2 oxygen Various, including the oxides H 2 O and CO 2 O 3 ozone Various, including ketones, aldehydes, and H 2 O; see ozonolysis F 2 fluorine F − Cl 2 chlorine Cl − Br 2 bromine Br − I 2 iodine I − , I − 3 ClO − hypochlorite Cl − , H 2 O ClO − 3 chlorate Cl − , H 2 O HNO 3 nitric acid NO nitric oxide (Dilute nitric acid) NO 2 nitrogen dioxide (Concentrated nitric acid) H 2 SO 4 ( l ) Concentrated sulphuric acid SO 3 Sulphur trioxide SO 2 Sulphur dioxide (non-aqueous) H 2 SO 3 Sulphurous acid (In aqueous solution) SO 2 sulfur dioxide S sulfur ( Claus process , ultramarine production, more commonly reducing agent) Hexavalent chromium CrO 3 chromium trioxide CrO 2− 4 chromate Cr 2 O 2− 7 dichromate Cr 3+ , H 2 O MnO − 4 permanganate MnO 2− 4 manganate Mn 2+ (acidic) or MnO 2 (basic) Ag + ion Silver ion Ag (Metal) SbF 5 antimony pentafluoride SbF 6 − hexafluoroantimonate or SbF 3 antimony trifluoride PtF 6 platinum hexafluoride PtF 6 − hexafluoroplatinate RuO 4 ruthenium tetroxide OsO 4 osmium tetroxide in organic lab scale synthesis H 2 O 2 , other peroxides Various, including oxides and H 2 O Tl(III) thallic compounds Tl(I) thallous compounds, in organic lab scale synthesis See also [ edit ] Combustion – Chemical reaction between a fuel and oxygen Electron acceptor – Chemical entity capable of accepting electrons Electron donor – Chemical entity capable of donating electrons to another entity Electrosynthesis – Synthesis of chemical compounds in an electrochemical cell Organic oxidation – Redox reaction that takes place with organic compounds Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Organic redox reaction – Redox reaction that takes place with organic compounds Reducing agent – Chemical species that donates an electron to another species in a redox reaction Solvated electron – Free electron in a solution, often liquid ammonia References [ edit ] ^ "Metals" .

Bitesize . BBC.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2022.

^ N. G. Connelly, W. E. Geiger (1996). "Chemical Redox Agents for Organometallic Chemistry".

Chemical Reviews .

96 (2): 877– 910.

doi : 10.1021/cr940053x .

PMID 11848774 .

^ Smith, Michael B.; March, Jerry (2007), Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, Mechanisms, and Structure (6th ed.), New York: Wiley-Interscience, ISBN 978-0-471-72091-1 ^ Australian Dangerous Goods Code, 6th Edition ^ 49 CFR 172.127 General Requirements for Shipments and Packagings; Subpart D External links [ edit ] Media related to Oxidizing agents at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oxidizing_agent&oldid=1297007966 " Categories : Oxidizing agents Chemical properties Electrochemistry Redox Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2020 Use American English from November 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 16:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oxidizing agent 59 languages Add topic

